Chapter 1: Foundations




When I was in college, I signed up for an internship with Students International, an organization that works among the poor in the Dominican Republic. I was assigned to the construction outreach where Rudy, the Dominican construction leader, taught me a great deal about both construction and life.

One day, after we’d spent hours painstakingly laying a foundation for a house and making sure everything was perfect, he turned to me and said,

“We always spend more time on the foundation because the foundation is everything. If the foundation is solid, the house will be strong. If the foundation is crooked, the house will be flawed. It’s the same thing with your life—if the foundation of your life is in solid things, you will be strong. If you set your foundation in crooked things, you will crumble.”

(He talked like that ALL the TIME. It was like building houses with Yoda.)

I think Rudy was on to something.

If you take the time to lay your foundation right, then you will be successful in whatever you’re building – whether a house, a life, or a set of social skills.

That’s what this “Foundations” section is about. I wrote it to help you think through the way social skills affect your own life. This guide is a very powerful tool, but before you pick up any tool, you need to know what you’re trying to build. I know you are probably eager to get started on the “meat” of the guide, but trust me (or, if you prefer, trust Rudy.)

The foundation must come first.

Foundations contains four lessons:

How to Use the Guide



Here are some guidelines to help you get the most out of the guide

Setting Goals For Your Social Skills Journey



Why are you trying to learn social skills? What are your goals? What has your history with social skills been? Where are you, and where are you going?

Overcoming Fear And Social Anxiety



Social interaction can be scary, and it’s easy for fear to hold us back. But it is possible to overcome your fear, and in this section I show you how.





Manipulation vs. True Intimacy



Some other social skills gurus recommend using social skills to manipulate others into doing what you want. But truly fulfilling relationships are built on trust and respect, not manipulation and deceit.





How to Use the Guide




You may use the guide however you see fit. Read the entire thing in one sitting. Skip around to the sections that interest you most. Read it out loud to your cat. The world is truly your oyster.

But if you want to get the most out of the guide, I have some advice for you.

Read the guide in order. The later chapters reference concepts from earlier chapters and cover more advanced topics. It is particularly important to read in order within chapters, since the sections in each chapter build directly on one another. You are welcome to skip around all you like, but if you find that a certain chapter or section doesn’t make sense, your best bet is to go back and read what you missed.



Practice what you learn. The only way to learn how to apply the principles in the guide to the real world is, well, to get out and apply them to the real world. So take some time every day to practice. Watch TV with the sound low and study the body language of the actors until you can recognize comfort and discomfort. Strike up a conversation with your coworker and practice maintaining conversational flow. Spend a bit of time at the end of the day to think through your social skills goals. Pick a social skill you want to master, and put in some time every day practicing it. You’ll find yourself richly rewarded.



Study slowly but consistently. It’s certainly possible to fly through the entire guide in one sitting, but there’s a lot of content to take in. Give yourself the chance to really absorb everything you can. I recommend a bit each day, reading a subsection of a chapter or two, and then making sure to practice what you read during the day.



Don’t go it alone! Ask friends, family and mentors to help you with your social skills journey. Your support network can be a great source of advice and encouragement.



You should have specific goals in mind as you work through the guide. Improving your social skills just to improve your social skills is good, but it’s hard to stay motivated if you don’t have clear goals. Having clear goals allows you to track your progress towards that goal and stay motivated.



Supplement the guide with other sources. Improve Your Social Skills has a lot of great content, but there are other social skills resources that can build on what you learn in Improve Your Social Skills. Even today, I keep an eye out for great social skills books so that I can continue to learn and grow my skills. I’ve compiled a list of some of the best books on social skills that I’ve found, which is a great place to start.



However you decide to use the guide, remember that practice and persistence are the two biggest keys to your success. Be diligent to practice the things you learn. If you do, you will be well on your way to social success.





Setting Goals for Your Social Skills Journey




A good friend of mine likes to ask me, “Where are you, and where are you going?”

He asks this because he believes that life is a journey. The person you were yesterday is different than the person you will be tomorrow, because the person you were yesterday was not shaped by today’s experiences. You will change as you go through life.

It’s inevitable.

But how you change is up to you.

You will be changed whether you spend your weekend watching TV or helping a family build a home, but it is your choice that determines if you pick up the remote or the hammer. Unfortunately, it’s hard to make the decision to change for the better. It’s easy to put off a beneficial change until later or to give up as soon as the change becomes difficult.

That’s why it’s important to know where you are and where you’re going. When you don’t, it’s like trying to make a long journey without a map. You won’t have the first idea of how to start, and you won’t know if you are drawing closer to your goal or just walking in circles.

But if you understand where you are and where you want to go, then you can draw a map. You can plan for the journey and prepare yourself for the obstacles that you might face along the way. The journey may still be a long one, but you know you will not give up because you are focused on your destination.

In social skills, knowing where you are means that you understand your current social strengths and limitations, and you understand how those strengths and limitations affect your life. And knowing where you’re going means you have a concrete set of social goals, as well as a plan for reaching those goals.

I have some questions to help you find out where you are and where you’re going, and I encourage you to think through them in depth. Let the questions inspire your thinking, and don’t worry too much about how you respond to each question. There are no right or wrong answers; the questions are only there to guide your thinking.

Where are you?

What are your social strengths? Social strengths are the positive elements you bring to relationships and social interactions. They can be social skills, but they don’t have to be. Being loyal to your friends or having a genuine desire to get to know others both count as social strengths, even if they might not be social skills.

Think about the best relationships in your life. These might be current relationships or relationships from your past. What were those relationships like? What made those relationships so good? How did those relationships affect your life?

How have you tried to improve your social skills in the past? Have those methods been successful? If so, what made them successful? If not, what would help you be more successful this time around?

What are the current gaps in your social skills knowledge? What are the elements of social interaction that you don’t understand, or that you struggle to do successfully?

Why did you decide to start reading Improve Your Social Skills?



Where are you going?

What are the practical areas of social skills that you want to improve? Practical skills are the “nuts and bolts” of social interaction. They include stuff like making conversations flow smoothly, understanding how other people are feeling, and avoiding needless conflict.

What are your “short term” goals for social skills? Some examples might be making a new friend, having a fun time at a social event, or deepening your relationship with a specific friend. These are goals that you think could be accomplished in the next few weeks or months.

What are your long term goals for social skills? Some examples might be having someone you consider a close friend or feeling completely comfortable in social situations.

Who are the people who can accompany you on your social skills journey? These might be friends, family members, or mentors who can encourage you, act as a sounding board, or provide a safe place to practice your social skills.

What is your motivation for embarking on this journey of social skills improvement? How can you help yourself stay motivated, even when the journey becomes hard?



I encourage you to write down your answers to these questions and return to them on occasion as you progress through the guide. As your understanding of social skills improves, your understanding of where you are and where you are going will change as well. Take the time to ask yourself “Where am I, and where am I going?” every so often, and you will make sure that you keep growing in the right direction.

Also, remember that slow growth is still growth. It might take you a long time to accomplish your goals, or even to see clear progress. But don’t give up. Every time you try something new or learn a new skill, you are making progress. Learning social skills is a journey, not a race. The speed at which you accomplish your goals is not important; what’s important is that you keep journeying forward.





Overcoming Fear and Social Anxiety




I’ll be honest.

Social interaction can be scary.

What if you don’t know what to say?

What if you do something awkward and people laugh at you?

What if you get rejected?

Social interaction is supposed to be fun. But when you are struggling with anxiety, it’s hard to enjoy spending time with others.

Fortunately, there is a way to overcome your fear. You can’t turn off fear entirely, but you can keep it from controlling you.

To do this, you need to understand the difference between true fear and physical fear.

True Fear vs. Physical Fear

True Fear is a good thing. It’s your body’s way of warning you about danger. If a bear ambles into your campsite, you will feel a jolt of adrenaline, your heart will start pounding, and your brain will start screaming: THAT IS A BEAR. Because of this fear, you will drop everything else that you’re doing and work to protect yourself. Your body uses true fear to keep you safe from real danger.

Physical Fear is when your body activates the fear response even though there is no real danger. When a monster jumps out during a scary movie, you might experience the exact same physical response that the bear in your campsite triggered. The difference is that while a bear can hurt you, special effects cannot.



Your body doesn’t understand the difference. But you do. You can enjoy a scary movie because you know the difference between a harmless movie monster and the real danger of a bear. And you can enjoy social interactions by learning to distinguish between physical fear and true fear.

Think about it for a minute.

Your fear in social interactions is almost purely physical fear, not true fear. You might be afraid that you will do or say something awkward, or that others won’t like you, or that others might judge you. But you know what? Probably none of those things will happen. And even if that does happens, it’s ok.

Say it with me. It’s ok.





Social Anxiety = Physical Fear


If you’re talking with someone and say something incredibly awkward, what will happen? Well, you’ll feel embarrassed. The other person might become upset, or they might laugh at you. But then you’ll recover.

The conversation will move onto a different topic. The other person will forgive your awkwardness and will soon forget it entirely. Worst case, you will try again in a new conversation with someone else.

No real harm is done. Nobody was mauled by a bear.

Social interaction is supposed to be fun, and failure is not a big deal. Read that again. Failure is not a big deal. If you mess up in one social interaction, no permanent harm will be done. Take a deep breath, remind yourself that nobody was mauled by a bear, and go strike up a conversation with someone new.

Now, there is an exception to this rule. If you do something to upset or offend someone with whom you have a long-term relationship (like a longtime friend or a coworker), then there may in fact be real consequences since you might damage the relationship. But you have to seriously upset or offend someone in order to cause lasting damage, and if you are making an effort to be sensitive to their feelings, that is unlikely to happen.

Plus, normally your greatest anxiety is not caused by the people that are close to you; it’s caused by people you don’t know very well. When you don’t know someone well, there is no relationship to damage and therefore no real danger.

Freedom from Fear

So next time you feel your anxiety peaking at the thought of a social interaction, remind yourself that it’s only physical fear. Social interaction can’t really hurt you (even if you make a mistake.)

I know this reminder won’t make the physical fear go away. Your heart might still race and your palms might still sweat. But you will have the courage to face down that fear.

Of course, overcoming fear is a process. Your fear might be extremely powerful, especially if you have social anxiety disorder or if you have experienced painful bullying and rejection. And if that’s the case, it’s ok. I don’t expect anyone to read this lesson and instantly banish fear.

Instead, I hope this lesson encourages you to take small but steady steps away from fear. Find a goal that seems scary but doable, and use your knowledge of true fear and physical fear to help you accomplish that goal.

Don’t worry if the first time you attempt the goal you fail – remember, failure is not a big deal. And don’t feel that you have to accomplish this on your own. If possible, ask family and friends to support you or find a support group to help you on your journey.

(I also recommend that you consider seeing a professional counselor. As I mention elsewhere, counselors can be incredibly helpful, and there is no shame in talking to one. If you’re really hurting and you need to talk to someone right now, just call 1-800-442-HOPE and you will be connected to a volunteer counselor.)

The important thing to remember is that anxiety is something you can overcome. It will take time, and it may take the support of friends, counselors, and loved ones, but you can overcome anxiety. Just take small steady steps towards your goal, and remember that no matter what physical fear might want you to believe, you don’t need to fear failure.

Be courageous.





Manipulation vs. True Intimacy




So, a word on what I’m trying to accomplish here (and what I’m not).

My goal here is to help you have deep, fulfilling, authentic relationships by giving you a solid foundation in social skills. I’m not trying to teach you everything there is to know about social skills or make you into some kind of social superhero. I just want you to have the skills you need to build great relationships.

Thing is, those skills can be used for bad ends. Martin Luther King Jr was a great orator, but so was Hitler. The thought of using social skills to deceive others or to manipulate people into giving you what you want can be very seductive.

And there are lots of social skills “gurus” out there who teach a message of manipulation and deceit. They claim to teach social skills so you can gain power and influence, convince others to do what you want, or seduce women.

These manipulation-based social skills have a lot of practical problems (most of the techniques don’t work, or only work in a few limited instances). What’s more, they’re just plain wrong.

I believe that most people reading this guide are as committed as I am to building relationships on a foundation of trust and respect, not manipulation and deceit. If that’s you, then you can safely ignore this section.

But for those who are tempted by thoughts of manipulation, a word of warning.

The Danger of Manipulation

True fulfilling relationships are ALWAYS built on mutual trust and respect. If you manipulate someone, you are disrespecting them, and you will destroy their trust in you as soon as they find out. You might be able to get what you want in the short term by using manipulation and deceit, but in the long term you will always be found out.

You will never get the true intimacy you’re seeking with deceit.

So if you’re looking to learn how to influence people to do what you want, or to seduce women, or to create a false impression of who you are to fool others, my program has nothing to offer you.

But here’s the thing. You don’t need deceit or manipulation. Improve Your Social Skills is based on the philosophy that you don’t need to change who you are to be liked or accepted. I believe that if you let people get to really know you, incredible friendships are going to happen. You don’t have to twist someone’s arm or fool them about who you are. You just need to give them the chance to really know you.

It’s true that when you don’t have good social skills, it’s hard to have the interactions that allow others to get to know you. But social skills can be learned (that’s what this guide is for!). And when you are no longer held back by a lack of social skills, your true self will shine through.

That’s worth working towards. Don’t give up, and don’t settle.





