Chapter 10: How to be a Good Storyteller




People are wired to respond to stories.

There’s a reason why so many people flock to the movies or spend hours reading novels – it’s because we love to get lost in a good story. And if you ever listen to a good conversation, you’ll notice that a lot of connection happens when people share stories with each other.

Unfortunately, there are good ways and bad ways to tell stories – and if you tell stories poorly, you’ll lose your audience’s interest. So how do you tell a good story during conversations?

Well first we need to define – what makes a story a good story? I’d argue the definition of a good story is very simple: A good story holds the listeners’ interest, builds feelings of connection between narrator and audience, and provides a satisfying conclusion In other words, these are the three ingredients to a good story: 1) Holding Interest 2) Building Connection 3) Providing a Satisfying Conclusion.

I’ve got lots of advice for mastering each of the three ingredients. Let’s dive in!

Hold Their Interest

Start With a Hook

Have a Point to the Story

Choose the Right Time to Tell The Story

Show; Don’t Tell

Use Vivid Details, Not Lots of Facts

Practice Related Skills



Build a Connection

Tell Personal Stories, but Cautiously

Share Firsthand Thoughts & Feelings



Provide a Satisfying Conclusion

When You Get to the End, Stop

Don’t Forget to Pass the Spotlight

Application & Practice





Holding Interest




Start with a Hook

In order to hold your audience’s interest, you have to get their interest in the first place. That’s why you start with the hook.

A hook is a statement that catches your audience’s attention and also clues them in to what’s coming up in the story. Let me illustrate with a story that shows how powerful hooks can be (and yes, I just used a hook on you!)

Years ago, psychologists ran an experiment. They asked people to read the following paragraphs:

“The procedure is actually quite simple. First you arrange things into different groups. Of course, one pile may be sufficient depending on how much there is to do. If you have to go somewhere else due to lack of facilities that is the next step, otherwise you are pretty well set. It is important not to overdo things. That is, it is better to do too few things at once than too many. In the short run this may not seem important but complications can easily arise. A mistake can be expensive as well. At first the whole procedure will seem complicated.

Soon, however, it will become just another facet of life. It is difficult to foresee any end to the necessity for this task in the immediate future, but then one never can tell, After the procedure is completed one arranges the materials into different groups again. Then they can be put into their appropriate places. Eventually they will be used once more and the whole cycle will then have to be repeated. However, that is part of life.”

If you’re scratching your head after reading this paragraph, you’re not alone – the study participants thought it was goobleygook.

Or well, most of them did. One group of participants was told “You’re about to read some instructions for doing laundry.” For those participants, it was a snap to follow along with the paragraphs (and indeed, if you re-read it now, you’ll probably understand what you’re hearing much better.)

What does this have to do with storytelling? Simple. If you launch right into a story without giving some context, then people won’t know what to do with the details you’re giving them. It’s kind of like giving someone driving directions before they know the starting address. But if you help them understand what your story is about before it beings, they will follow along with no problem.

So offer a hook. Begin a story with something like, “That reminds me of my worst date ever,” or “Did I ever tell you about the time I went on a date with a professional wrestler?” Give people a sense of what the story is about so they don’t get lost. This is especially important for longer stories – if your story is only a few sentences long a hook may not be necessary, but if you’re asking people to pay attention to you for 30 seconds or more, you’d better give them a hook.

The other benefit of the hook – if your audience doesn’t “bite”, then you know not to bore them with the story. If you share a hook and nobody seems interested, you may want to consider telling an abbreviated version of the story, or sharing a different story instead.



Have a Point

Before you tell a story, ask yourself “Why would my audience want to hear this story?”

Is it because the story is funny? Exciting? Touching? Interesting? What emotional response is your story likely to elicit from your listeners? (If you can’t come up with an answer to this question, this might be a sign you should find a better topic for your story!)

The reason you ask this question is so that you can choose your details carefully, to make sure they support this goal. If you’re at the grocery store preparing to bake a cake, you don’t load your shopping cart with fish and jalapeños because those ingredients don’t help you bake a cake. Similarly, you want to pack your story with only details that support the goal of the story.

In other words, if you are telling a funny story, get to the funny stuff as soon as possible – don’t waste time giving boring details. If you are telling a touching story, your goal is to tug on your audience’s heartstrings, so be more careful when using humorous details. If you’re trying to make an exciting story, then your goal should be to build momentum and suspense, so you shouldn’t include details that sacrifice momentum.

For example: Let’s say I want to tell a funny story about an experience in Mexico. Here are two versions – see which one you like better.

Version one:

“When I was in Mexico, I decided to go to a club with some friends. We first met up at someone’s house, and we spent some time sitting around and talking. Then, we walked to the club, but decided we were hungry, so we stopped on the way at a Mexico 7-11 and bought some Cheetos. Except in Mexico, they call them “Chetos” for some reason. After we ate our Cheetos, we went into the club. It was really loud, but everyone seemed like they were having fun. We danced for a while, and then I noticed that a guy in a bear costume came onto the dance floor. He started a conga line, and a bunch of people went on the conga line after him. They congaed right off the dance floor and into another room and I never saw any of them again. To this day, I wonder if the bear costume guy was secretly a kidnapper, and he lured the group away to abduct them!”





Version two:

“When I was in Mexico, I decided to go to a club with some friends. I was dancing, and then I looked up and I saw a guy in a bear costume! He started a conga line, and a bunch of people joined up and congaed right off the dance floor with him, into another room. I never saw any of them again, and to this day I wonder if the bear costume guy was secretly a kidnapper who lured the dancers away to abduct them.”

Most likely, you liked version two better. Why? Because it got to the punchline – the dancing kidnapper bear – much faster! All of the details about meeting at the friend’s house, the Cheetos, etc. were all true – but they were irrelevant.

The point was to get to the punchline, so any details that did not support that punchline should be removed. In the first story, by the time I actually got to the punchline, you were probably skimming and wondering “What’s the point?” So when the punchline actually arrived, you were not very invested in my story, and you didn’t find it very funny.

If you do this right, your conclusion will feel very satisfying to your audience because everything in the story was building to that conclusion. Not only do you maintain their interest as you’re telling the story, but you also create the possibility for a really powerful conclusion.



Choose the Right Time

A great story at the wrong time is a terrible story. If you don’t believe me, try telling a funny story in the middle of a funeral.

How do you know that it’s the right time to tell the story? There’s no perfect rule (it’s more of an art than a science), but here are a few things to look for:

Don’t interrupt another person’s story.

People will often introduce their stories with a short statement to get your interest. You are supposed to ask a question in response to this opening statement to launch their story. You are not supposed to tell a story of your own.

For instance, if your friend says, “So the other day I went to the movie theater,” he probably wants you to ask him about his trip to the movie theater. He does not want you to jump in and say, “Oh yeah, I was just there last week! I saw the coolest movie; let me tell you all about it…

Avoid interrupting their story before it reaches the “punchline.”

If it doesn’t seem like the story is finished, wait before you jump in with a story of your own. Instead, ask questions to show interest in the other person’s story.





Make sure your story fits the mood of the conversation.

If people are sharing light, funny stories, and you share a chilling ghost story, you’ll bring down the mood. Conversely, if people are somberly discussing a recent tragedy, it’s not the time to tell the story of your zany Uncle Bob.

Try to make your story relate to something in the conversation.

If everyone is telling travel stories, tell a travel story. If everyone is telling funny stories, share something humorous. The connection doesn’t need to be very strong, but other people should be able to tell how your story is connected to the previous conversation.

Make sure your audience has the necessary context to understand the story.

If I tell a story about my friend Greg to an audience that knows Greg, they will probably appreciate the story. But if the audience has never heard of Greg, then I might want to choose another story to tell (or at least, make sure I begin the story by giving a little background on Greg.)

Observe the rest of the group to see when others share stories.

Observing others is a great option, especially if you feel very uncomfortable about sharing. If you spend a little time noticing when other share stories, you will develop an intuition for when it’s appropriate to share your own story. Don’t stay on the sidelines forever, but it’s okay to wait and observe sometimes if needed.



Show; Don’t Tell

“Show; don’t tell” is the cardinal rule of writing, and it’s true for telling stories too.

Telling is when you say something like, “And then, he did the funniest dance – it was so hilarious.” It’s telling because I can’t imagine what you’re describing, so your words don’t inspire an emotional response in me. You told me the dance was funny, but it doesn’t feel funny to me as the listener.

But if you say something like, “And then he waved his hands above his heads, and gave these short, stiff jumps like he was popcorn being popped,” now you’re showing – and that means that I’m much more likely to be able to tap into the humor of what you’re describing. I can imagine the scene in my head and that imagined scene is almost as funny as being there in person.

In other words, showing is when you give me everything I need to imagine the scene.

Unfortunately, this creates a problem. Showing takes time, and if you show every little thing that happens in your story, the story will quickly get long-winded. So what’s the solution?

Simple. Show only the scenes or details that matter to your story.

If you are telling the story of how you survived a shark attack, you don’t need to “show” how relaxing the water was before the shark attacked – but you had better show how you dramatically fought off the shark!

Also, make sure you don’t repeat details. If you’re telling the story about how you talked with a super cute girl, it’s natural to mention how good she looked over and over – but it’s not interesting for your audience. Your audience will be tempted to tune you out unless you keep serving them interesting new details.

The bottom line: share a detail once (twice, tops) and then move on to something new. If you repeat details, you’ll easily stray from showing into telling.



Use Vivid Details, Not Lots of Facts

If you’re a witness talking to the police, then it’s great for you to offer facts on everything that you remember.

If you’re telling a story, not so much. Adding too many details and descriptions is a surefire way to bore your audience.

However, you still need to add some details (without details Hamlet ends up like this) So how do you add enough details to keep the story interesting, without overloading your audience? The answer is to use vivid details. Vivid details stand out in your listeners’ minds and really help your audience imagine the scene.

What makes a detail vivid? A few things:

Vivid details are surprising.

If I tell you that a lawyer in court is wearing a suit, that’s not surprising – since most people in court wear suits. However, if someone goes to the beach wearing a suit, now that detail becomes vivid and interesting.

Vivid details relate to the story.

If I’m telling you a story about spilling a soda on my date in the movie theater, I don’t really need to give details about the movie itself – since the story is about my embarrassing spill, not the movie.

Vivid details help the reader imagine the scene.

If you tell me the train was “very fast” I can’t really imagine that. If you tell me, “The train was going so fast everything outside was a blur,” now you’ve given me something to imagine.





Vivid details are important.

If I’m telling a story about meeting the president, it doesn’t really matter what color tie the president was wearing – since the important thing is the meeting, not the tie! However, if you met the president and you happened to be wearing the exact same tie as him that would perhaps be an important detail.

Also, remember the earlier rule: make sure everything supports the “point” of the story. If your detail doesn’t support the point of the story, it probably doesn’t need to be included.



Practice Related Skills

Of course, the best way to practice storytelling is to tell stories in conversation.

But there are other great ways that you can build your storytelling skills.

Improv theater is a great option. Improv theater can help you improve all kinds of social skills, but it’s especially great for storytelling because it forces you to trust your instinct, and it gives you a great perception for what makes a good story. If you live in a major city, there is probably an improv theater class near you (and even if you’re in a small town, it’s worth checking.)

Toastmasters is another good option. Although Toastmasters focuses on public speaking, not storytelling, most good speeches have a few stories in them. Do a few months of Toastmasters, and you’ll feel much more comfortable having an audience’s attention, and your storytelling skills will sharpen as well.

Finally, try writing stories! Find some websites that offer writing prompts, and try to write them. A good rule of thumb is to try to write “flash fiction”, which is a story that has 500 words or less.

Writing a story in 500 words or less is great practice for conversational storytelling, since most of your stories that you tell in conversation won’t be longer than 500 words. Although flash fiction has “fiction” in the name, you don’t need to write made-up stories — it’s fine to practice by writing down stories from your life.

Got writer’s block? This is a great list of flash fiction prompts, and you can easily Google for more.

As you write, don’t worry too much about good writing – worry about good storytelling. (You may even want to give yourself a time limit for each story so you practice telling the story, not editing it.) There’s no need to try for symbolism or fancy wordplay – instead, just write a story that people would want to read.





Building Connections




Tell Personal Stories, but Cautiously

There’s nothing wrong with telling a story about crazy Uncle Jim or the kind old lady who lives down the street.

But when you tell stories about other people, the potential for connection is limited. It’s only when you tell a personal story about your own life that you create the greatest opportunity to connect with others.

So tell stories about your own life! They don’t have to be dramatic or monumental. Your audience might enjoy hearing about the games you played with your childhood friends, or the drama team you were on in college, or the new ballet classes you just started taking. If your story is about something that is important to YOU, there’s a decent chance it will be interesting to your audience. Plus, stories from your life allow your audience to learn something new about you, which builds connection.

Also, you have many more memories to draw on when you tell a story from your life. If you’re telling a secondhand story you heard from someone else, you probably don’t remember many details, and it will be much harder to make the story interesting. But if your story is about something that happened to you, then you can draw from your memory banks to fill the story with richness and interesting detail.

That being said, you need to be careful about how much you share. Connection needs to build over time. If you jump right to a very intimate story before connection has had the time to build, it can make your audience uncomfortable.

For instance, let’s say you recently had a family member pass away from cancer and you went through a period of depression. If you share the story of their illness and your depression with a casual acquaintance, they might feel uncomfortable because you’ve shared something very personal with someone you didn’t know very well. Conversely, it would be fine to share that story with a group of close friends because they do know you well.

Of course, you don’t have to wait until someone is your best friend before sharing personal stories with them. But be extra careful with people you don’t know as well.

Start by sharing a semi-personal story and see how they react. If they react positively, then down the road you could share stories that are more personal. If they become uncomfortable, then you can avoid sharing personal stories with that person (at least until you get to know them better.)





Share Firsthand Thoughts and Feelings When you tell a story about something that happened to you, don’t just say what happened. Talk about how you felt and what you were thinking.

In other words, don’t limit your story to facts that an outside observer would have noticed. Instead, give your audience a window inside your head by sharing your thoughts and feelings. This will help your audience to experience the story as you did, building connection.

Here’s an example.

Bad:

“I stood up in front of the class to give a presentation on the War of 1812. I hadn’t prepared at all for the presentation, and I didn’t know anything about the War of 1812. Just then, the school prankster pulled the fire alarm and we all left class.”

Good:

“I stood up in front of the class to give a presentation on the War of 1812. I was incredibly nervous because I hadn’t prepared at all for the presentation. I remember feeling so queasy I wondered if I would throw up – and then I remember thinking, “It would be better to throw up then to fail this presentation!” I racked my brain for anything I knew about the War of 1812, when I heard the fire alarm ring. This feeling of absolute bliss welled up inside me as I left the class, and I remember having the biggest smile on my face for the rest of the day.”

Both stories are about the same events, but one story is rather bland, whereas the other story lets you get to know the narrator a little bit. When you tell your stories, give your audience a window inside your head, and they’ll feel more connected to you.





A Satisfying Conclusion




Stop When you Reach the End

The easiest way to tell a bad story is to tell a good story, and then keep going after you should have stopped.

Once your story reaches the climax – the punchline of a funny story, the creative solution in a story about solving a problem, the moment of greatest emotional impact in a touching story – you should try to bring it to an ending as quickly as possible. In other words, when you reach the end, stop!

Obviously, you don’t need to end the story abruptly as soon as you say the climax – it’s okay to have a little resolution. But your natural temptation if you’ve told a good story is to keep talking, because everyone will be paying attention to you and attention feels good. Resist that temptation.

When the story is done, stop talking. Don’t give minor details, or summarize the story. And for goodness sake, don’t launch immediately into another story – give someone else the floor.

Good:

“…And when he got back from the hospital, he found that the entire office had come together to raise money to pay for his treatment.”

Bad:

“…And when he got back from the hospital, he found that the entire office had come together to raise money to pay for his treatment. It was such a touching and heartwarming moment. The office really supported him in that moment, and he felt like everything was going to be okay. I mean, can you believe how generous the office was to pay for his treatment?”

Really Bad:

“…And when he got back from the hospital, he found that the entire office had come together to raise money to pay for his treatment. It was such a touching and heartwarming moment. The office really supported him in that moment, and he felt like everything was going to be okay. I mean, can you believe how generous the office was to pay for his treatment? And by the way, that reminds me of another story…”

In some cases, your story might not have a climax. Perhaps you’re telling a story about what you did on your vacation to Europe, and while you have many interesting memories to share, there’s not a single memory that works as the “climax.”

In that case, just wrap up your story in a deliberate way. That will signal to everyone that you are done speaking. For instance, you might conclude a story about your European vacation by saying. “Gosh, it’s overwhelming how many memories we have from that trip. Even though we enjoyed it, I’m definitely happy to be home and sleeping in my own bed again.”

Your audience is not expecting your wrap-up to be brilliant or compelling. As long as your story finishes in a deliberate way instead of just trailing off, you should be fine.



Pass the Spotlight

Okay, you’ve just told your story, and it went great. Your audience was interested the whole time, and you gave them a great conclusion. Time to tell another story, right?

Wrong.

Storytelling works best when everyone gets a turn. Groups get a particular kind of energy when great storytelling is happening – each person builds off the person before them, and the story I told inspires the story you are about to tell. It’s a great experience that is much harder to achieve when just one person is telling the stories.

So be gracious. Pass the attention to someone else. This might be subtle – just pausing for a few seconds to let someone else jump in. Or this might be more direct – perhaps you ask the group, “Does anyone else have any childhood stories to share?”

You might even invite someone directly to share a story. For instance: “Jose, didn’t you go to Disneyland last week? Want to share some stories from that trip?”

Inviting someone directly is especially useful for making others feel included, and for helping shyer members of the group get a chance to share.

Of course, you’re not limited to one story per conversation. Just let one or two others share before you tell another story. The rest of the group will appreciate the opportunity to share, and the group conversation will be more satisfying for everyone.



Application and Practice

If you want to be a good storyteller in conversation, you need to hold your audience’s interest, provide your audience with a satisfying conclusion, and look for opportunities to connect with your audience.

You also need to practice. The best place to start practicing is by writing stories down. That way, you can practice in private, and you can also read through your stories afterwards to critique yourself. (You can also record yourself speaking and listen to the recordings.)

When practicing a story, don’t worry about getting it perfect. Each story should only take you 1-3 minutes to tell, so avoid spending a ton of time on each story. And since you’re practicing your storytelling technique, not your writing technique, don’t worry about things like spelling or word choice.

These are some ideas to get you started. Do your best to write a story for each of these experiences. Once you’ve written about each one of these ideas, try to come up with your own ideas for stories you can tell!

Tell a story about…

A childhood memory

Learning a new skill

A time you felt really happy

A funny mistake you made

Your first day at a new job

Discovering a new hobby

A time when you were really proud of yourself



Once you’ve practiced writing stories down and you feel confident, it’s time to practice telling stories in conversation. When in conversation, look for an opportunity to share a relevant story. To start with, try to share short (30 seconds or less) stories. As you have success with shorter stories, try longer stories.

Of course, this requires consistency. If you practice storytelling once a month, you’re unlikely to get better. So be deliberate to build in several opportunities to practice each week.

Over time, you’ll find your storytelling skill gets better and better. Keep practicing, and you’ll be a storytelling expert before you know it!





