Chapter 11: Best Blog Posts


Better Every Day





So my work just unveiled a new slogan: “Better Every Day.”

Normally, company slogans are pretty bland. But there’s a powerful idea here.

Greatness doesn’t happen overnight. Most things worth doing take persistence and hard work.

But often, we look for a quick fix and fast results. When we put in some effort and don’t see immediate improvement, it’s easy to give up or say, “I’ll take a break and come back later.”

Or, we look at the end goal compared to where we are now, and the distance between them just seems unmanageable. We think, “I’ll never be able to get there from here,” so we never even try.

But here’s the thing.

If you’re 1% better every day, you are 38 times better every year.

And 1% better every day is doable. It means having one conversation that you might have shied away from, or accepting one social invitation you might have declined. It means spending ten minutes reading through a social skills guide instead of a humor site. It means deciding to ask a friend or family member for help, or pick up the phone and schedule that counseling appointment.

Commit to being better every day.

You won’t see improvement immediately, but it will come. And when it does, it will be exceptional.

How can you be better today?





Give it 100




Social skills are like any other skill — if you practice, you get better.

But in order to practice, you have to start, and you have to keep going. And both of those things are very hard. It’s really easy to wait to start until you’re totally “ready” (which will be never), or burn yourself out by pursuing a new goal in an unsustainable way.

So instead, I want to show you a better way.

There’s a website called Give it 100. The basic idea is that you practice something for 100 days in a row, and you film a 10 second clip of you doing it every day so you can see how you improve. You can also see what other users are doing, which is sometimes incredible and sometimes adorable.

Unfortunately, social skills don’t really lend themselves well to 10 second clips (in fact, a great social skills tip: don’t randomly start filming the people you’re talking to.) So instead I want to give you a different “Give it 100″ challenge. Are you ready? Here it is: Do something that practices your social skills for ten minutes, ten days in a row.

For instance, you could

Spend ten minutes reading a guide to social skills

Spend ten minutes watching TV with the volume off to analyze body language

Spend ten minutes researching therapists — and then booking an appointment when you find one!

Spend ten minutes talking to someone you otherwise wouldn’t have.



At the end of ten days, you’ll have spent 100 minutes improving your social skills. This doesn’t sound like a lot, but it’s about momentum.

I guarantee that if you “give it 100″ you will see an improvement in your social skills and your confidence – even if it’s very small (which is ok, because every good thing starts small.) Once you see that improvement, it will be much easier for you to keep improving, and do another 100, and then another 100 — until you look back and you find that your first 100 minutes of improvement has become 100 hours.

So to summarize:

Commit to spending 10 minutes over the next 10 days to practice your social skills. If possible, start today — or at the latest, tomorrow.

Once you’ve “given it 100″, notice the improvement (even if it’s small!) in your social skills and confidence

Then, keep going! Give it another 100, or maybe another 1000!

And come back and post your story on the website to encourage others.





Fight Back




Life is really hard sometimes.

There are times when all of the encouragement in the world doesn’t seem to help, times when it feels like the only emotions available are rage or grief or numbness, times when starting another day feels like getting in the ring with Mohammed Ali.

Maybe that’s your story today.

Maybe that’s been your story for a long time.

If that’s you, I want you to know that it will get better. You will not always suffer. You will find healing and you will find people who will love you very much and you will have moments when life will be so good that your heart will feel like dancing right out of your chest. You are not a mistake. You are not a lost cause. It is good that you are alive and one day you will believe that.

But I also want to recognize that things might not get better right away. And I know that when people tell me, “This will be better someday, but you just need to wait,” I don’t find their words very helpful.

So I want to give you more than just waiting.

I want to give you the chance to fight back.

In the olden days, people wrote legends of battles with monsters – dragons and hydras and sphinxes. Today we still have monsters; they just have names like depression and loneliness and addiction. Maybe you are locked in your own hard fight with one of these monsters, and maybe that fight is going to take some time to win.

But your own fight will help you fight for others.

Viktor Frankl, a survivor of Nazi concentration camps, said, “In some ways suffering ceases to be suffering at the moment it finds a meaning, such as the meaning of a sacrifice.” He found that people who fixated on escaping the camps tended to fall ill and die more easily.

But the people who created a meaning for themselves in the camp – through tending to other prisoners, creating art, or simply maintaining their dignity in the face of incredible suffering – were more likely to survive and even find moments of joy. Frankl said, “Those who have a ‘why’ to live can bear almost any ‘how.’”

If you’ve forgotten your ‘why’, I want you to find it. I want you to remember that you matter very much, and it is very good that you are alive and that your life has meaning.

And I want you to know that your suffering can have meaning, if you let it.

For me, my suffering taught me how to love other people better. My childhood of social rejection taught me to reach out to others on the outskirts – and eventually to write a social skills guide that helps readers find community. For one of my friends, surviving abuse led her into a career where she could help protect others. Another friend fills her writing with the healing wisdom that she learned from her pain.

For you, maybe your suffering will equip you to reach out to others who are suffering in a similar way. Maybe you will create art or music or writing that is beautiful and life-giving, because your suffering has taught you how to touch the deep places in a person’s soul. Maybe someone will stay alive because you can sit with them and say, “I know what you’re going through.”

Henri Nouwen once wrote, “The great illusion of leadership is to think that man can be led out of the desert by someone who has never been there.”

Maybe today you are in a desert, and it feels like the sand will never end. You don’t deserve that, and I don’t know why sometimes it takes so long for things to get better.

But I do know that even if you can’t leave your desert yet, you can be an oasis to someone in their own desert. I know that your words and your love and your presence have the potential to heal and to bring joy to others. And I hope that when you see your power to bring light into the life of others, some light will enter your life too.

I’m not saying that you should take care of others instead of taking care of yourself. But I am saying that your suffering is not meaningless, just as your life is not meaningless. Your suffering will teach you to love better, to create art that is truer and more beautiful, to be an agent of healing and light for people who are desperate for both.

For wanderers lost in a thirsty desert, you will provide relief and encouragement.

For weary warriors locked in battle with a fierce monster, you will be a stalwart comrade-in-arms.

And as you fight for others, you will find that you are worth fighting for, too.





Take Care of Yourself and Others




Would you climb a mountain with a backpack full of rocks?

You would probably stop and remove the rocks first — even if this means you don’t start your climb right away. Or, if you couldn’t remove the rocks, you would still understand that you don’t need to climb as fast as someone who isn’t weighed down.

For some reason, we don’t apply this same logic to self-improvement.

We might be weighed down by social anxiety, or past trauma, or an empty bank account, or problems with physical or mental health, or by a schedule that is jam packed with commitments — the rocks that we carry can look very different.

But our response to them is unfortunately very similar. Either we try to ignore them and push ourselves towards incredibly ambitious goals (and then pay the cost in burnout and shame when our burdens block us from those goals), or we give up and say, “I can’t even try to climb this mountain — my rocks are too heavy.”

I’d like to propose a different way.

Instead of surrendering to our burdens or trying to ignore them, let’s try to take care of ourselves.

Maybe that means spending more time doing the things that you love, even if it feels like a waste of time.

Maybe that means reaching out to a counselor or a friend and letting them know you’re struggling.

Maybe that means saying, “No,” to some things in your life.

Maybe it just means giving yourself permission to not be ok all the time.

Don’t get me wrong — I’m all about self-improvement. But sometimes you need to take care of yourself before you can improve yourself.

So my challenge for you is simple. Figure out how you could take the first step towards removing some rocks — or at least towards accepting yourself, rocks and all — and then go do it.





The Case for Small Talk




Lots of people tell me, “I hate small talk.”

And in truth, small talk can be tiresome sometimes. When you’re discussing a topic you don’t care about, it’s natural to get bored.

Small talk can be doubly frustrating when you’ve craving deep interactions. After you’ve experienced true heart-to-heart conversation, how can you go back to discussing the weather?

It’s understandable to feel like small talk is a waste of time – the “busywork” of social interaction.

Understandable – but wrong.

Small talk has huge potential to help you connect with others. Let’s look at the three reasons why:



1) Small Talk Prepares You for Connection

Just like stretching helps prepare your muscles for exercise, small talk helps prepare people for intimacy.

When you make small talk with someone, you give them the opportunity to get used to you and to settle into the conversation.

Moreover, people expect deeper conversations to be preceded by small talk. Even if you are comfortable skipping straight to the “meat” of the conversation, it will throw others for a loop. It’s kind of like shaking hands when you meet someone – if you don’t do it when they expect it, it comes across as weird.



2) Small Talk Communicates Interest.

With small talk, what you communicate is more important than what you say.

If you say something insignificant like, “What do you think of the weather?” you are communicating that you want to hear my thoughts. When you crack a lame joke, you are communicating that you want to make me laugh. All of these things communicate that you like me and you want to get to know me better.

This is important because it paves the way for deeper interaction. Deeper interaction involves risk. If I share my personal beliefs with you, I risk you starting an argument with me. If I share a personal struggle, I risk you responding with cruel callousness. So I need to know it’s safe before I go deeper.

When you communicate interest, you communicate safety. You communicate, “I care about what you have to say, and I’m open to you sharing it.” Obviously, this isn’t a perfect guarantee – sometimes people will be very pleasant in small talk and still respond poorly when the conversation goes deeper. But in general, when you show interest during small talk, you help people feel comfortable going deeper with you.



3) Small Talk Establishes Common Ground

Small talk lets you discover what you have in common.

You can find the topics that get both of you excited, the parts of your stories that you’re eager to share. This will naturally lead the conversation into paths that are more intimate and meaningful.

Not only does this give you fuel for more conversation, but it also helps you form bonds with the other person. When you discover common ground, you start to imagine life through the other person’s eyes. As Donald Miller says, small talk lets us ask, “What do we have in common, so I can understand you through the lens of my own experience?”

While deep heart-to-heart conversations are very intimate, small talk can be intimate too. Heartfelt friendships will begin to form even before the first deep conversation – because small talk allowed the friends to discover how much they resonate with each other.



The Value of Small Talk

If small talk feels like busywork, you’re missing the big picture.

Instead of treating small talk like a chore you have to get through, make small talk an opportunity to make a connection. When you begin small talk, ask yourself:

How can I help the other person feel comfortable?

How can I communicate interest and friendliness?

How can I discover common ground?



Let these questions guide you, and you’ll find big value in small talk.





3 Hobbies that Teach Social Skills




Social skills improve with practice. The more time you spend interacting with others, the better you become at social interaction. (Makes sense, right?)

Unfortunately, finding the opportunity to practice can be difficult. If you want to be a better runner, you can lace on your shoes and run around the block, but if you want to get better at social skills, where do you go to practice?

That’s what this article is all about. Sit tight, and I’ll tell you three of my favorite hobbies that helped me improve my social skills – and that can help you, too!

1) Improv Theater

In improv, everything is made up on the spot. No script, no planning ahead of time. You just go out and make a scene from nothing. The scenes are often hilarious, sometimes poignant, and always entertaining.

As I’ve noted elsewhere, improv is a lot like social interaction. And the same principles that equip you to feel confident striding on stage and making a scene from nothing will also help you to have confidence and competence in social situations.

And, just like social interaction, improv is for everyone. You don’t have to be naturally funny or theatrical. Improv works based on a few simple principles (like accepting and building on what your partner brings to the scene), and any improv class will teach you to apply those principles like a pro.

In an improv class, you start by doing lots of fun games and exercises that help you become comfortable with using your imagination and thinking on your feet, and then you start making some scenes with other students. It’s super fun, and you will often make good friends with the other students.

Improv has taught me to have more confidence, think on my feet, and be comfortable when I’m pushed outside my comfort zone. Take a moment and search for improv theater classes in your area – then sign up! You’ll be happy you did.

2) Partner Dancing

Partner dancing is a great way to meet people and become more comfortable in your own skin.

I’m not talking about choreographed dancing (although that can be fun too!) Instead, I’m referring to dances like salsa, swing, or ballroom, where you’re paired up with someone and you make up the dance as you go along.

Much like improv, anyone can learn partner dancing. There are tons of beginners classes designed for people with no experience, and it doesn’t take long to get the basics down. And once you have a few classes under your belt, you’ll find that you move with more grace and confidence in your everyday life, which will help you make positive first impressions.

Plus, dancing allows you to meet new people. Many cities have social dancing events, where people go to meet others to dance with. You might dance with a dozen people during the course of the night, which means you get a dozen opportunities to practice conversation, get to know someone else, and make a new friend!

Bottom line: Dancing is a great skill, it’s a lot of fun, and it will help you socially. Give it a try!

3) Toastmasters Public Speaking

Toastmasters is a public speaking club that is active in over 100 countries. It is a phenomenal way to overcome social anxiety, get better at public speaking, and learn how to communicate clearly and effectively. I did Toastmasters and loved it – you can see me giving a Toastmasters speech here.

You don’t need speaking experience to join Toastmasters – most people who join have never given a speech before.

Toastmasters clubs usually meet once a week and follow a simple format. Everyone gets the chance to speak for about a minute at every meeting, by giving an impromptu answer to an interesting question (e.g., “What would you do if you were president?”) Then, 2-3 people will give a prepared speech, about a topic that they chose. After that, someone will offer constructive, positive feedback to the people who gave a speech.

Toastmasters works wonders on your social skills because it gives you consistent opportunities to practice and to get good feedback. Instead of practicing blindly, you’ll get expert advice from people who want to help you succeed. And you’ll have the opportunity to practice every week, so you will improve quickly. There is probably a Toastmasters club near you, so check them out!

Social Skills Hobbies

There you have it – three hobbies that improve your social skills.

All three of these hobbies have helped me in my own life, and I strongly encourage you to give them a try.

Are there any hobbies that have helped you in your social skills journey? Share them on the website!





How to be More Social




If you’ve come to Improve Your Social Skills, it’s probably because you want to be more social. You don’t study social skills so you can sit in your room alone – you study them so you can go out and be social!

But how do you actually make that happen? And what does “being social” even mean, anyway?

Well, the first step is to spend some time building up your social skills. If you try to be social and then run into trouble because your social skills need work, you’re going to get discouraged and it will be harder to be social in the future.

But let’s say you’ve already put in the time to study and practice your social skills, and you feel confident. You’ve studied how to make conversation, and you’ve brushed up on your body language. You may not be perfect, but you’re ready to put your social skills to use.

If that’s you, then becoming more social is easy. Here’s how you do it:



Many Roads To Social Success

First, realize that there is no one right way to be social.

“Being social” for you will look different than it does for others, and that’s ok.

I have a friend who plays in a different Dungeons and Dragons game almost every night. He dedicates the majority of his social time to these games, but it’s a social life that works for him. He gets to spend hours with his friends, doing an activity he enjoys.

I have another friend who goes out dancing 3-4 times per week. Most of her social time is dedicated to meeting new people on the dance floor, and that’s the social life that works for her.

I prefer to bounce between a lot of different social activities – my social calendar is always different week to week. That’s the social life that works for me.



Find Your Social Rhythm

By now, you’ve realized my point.

“Being social” doesn’t mean that you have to hit the bar scene, or go to parties.

“Being social” means that you discover what a rich, fulfilling social life looks like for you, and then live that out.

If you need a long time to rest between social engagements, being social might mean one social event per week. If you thrive on interaction, being social might mean a new event each day.

If you already have a solid group of friends, being social might mean that you spend most of your time with them. Or, it might mean that you split your time between your old friends and opportunities to meet new friends.

In any case, it needs to be something that works for YOU.



Your “Be Social” Blueprint

Of course, you might not know what a rich, fulfilling social life looks like for you. And that’s ok.

Like many other areas of life, being social takes time to figure out. But there’s an easy two-step process that can help you through it. I call it “Ponder & Go Yonder.”

First, ponder your social goals and your previous social experiences.

Think through what has worked for you in the past, and what has been flawed in the past that you would like to improve for the future. The goal is not to figure things out completely, but to discover a few possibilities for areas where you can grow your social life.

Second, go yonder.

By this I mean try something that is new but achievable. The word “yonder” refers to something that is distant but within view. Try for that balance of “distant but within view” when pondering new ways to be more social.

In other words, explore new social opportunities that may be a bit challenging or scary (i.e., “distant”) but make sure they are still achievable (i.e., “within view.”)



Growing Towards Social Success

“Ponder & Go Yonder” is a repeating process.

You’ll spend some time thinking, which will give you an idea for something new for you to try. That new experience will give you more fuel for thought, and your thinking will in turn lead to new experiences.

The cycle keeps repeating, and every time it does, you grow a little closer to a full understanding of what “being social” looks like for you.

So there’s no rush. Just commit to a slow and steady cycling of “Ponder & Go Yonder” and you grow steadily closer to the rich, fulfilling social life you desire.





Making Great First Impressions with the Name Game




People like hearing their names. When you use someone’s name, it helps them to feel comfortable, and remembering their name makes it much easier for you to strike up a conversation later on.

Unfortunately, if you want to use someone’s name, you need to remember it, and remembering names is hard. Fortunately, remembering names is much easier with one simple trick.

I call it “Playing the name game.”

To play the name game, follow these three rules.



Rule 1: Get their name ASAP

When you first meet someone, get their name within the first few minutes of the conversation. You can either ask for it directly, or just introduce yourself. Most folks will give you their name when you give them yours. Once you get their name, repeat it immediately. If they say “My name is Bob” say “It’s great to meet you, Bob” not “It’s great to meet you.” The early repetition ensures that the name makes it into your short term memory.



Rule 2: Make their name memorable

Now, it’s time to move the name into your long-term memory. To do that, combine the name with a memorable adjective. A memorable adjective is either an adjective that starts with the same letter as the name, or that rhymes with the name. For instance, “Cool Carl” or “Dan the Man.”

Ideally, this adjective should be somewhat related to the person (“Bob from Boston” is great if Bob is actually from Boston), but it doesn’t have to be. Any combination that either rhymes or starts with the same letter will do. Repeat this combination to yourself a few times to make sure it fixes in your memory (but make sure you don’t say it out loud – Mustache Mike might not appreciate the title you’ve given him)



Rule 3: Lock their name in your memory

Then, cement the name/adjective combination in your memory by repeating it mentally a few times during the conversation. This is exactly as simple as it sounds – just think to yourself, “That is Cool Carl,” a few times during the conversation. You don’t have to keep up a constant repetition in your head – just remind yourself whenever you think of it.

When you follow these three rules, you’ll find remembering names are much easier. Getting their name immediately allows you to focus on their name before the conversation takes off and demands more of your attention, and repeating a memorable name/adjective combination will cement their name in your mind for the long term.

Also, one bonus rule: If you forget their name, just make sure you ask again near the end of the conversation. I find that once you’ve had the chance to get to know someone in a conversation, remembering their name is much easier (because you have some memories to pin the name to.) So if playing the name game at the beginning of the conversation doesn’t work for you, just play it at the end. Chances are, they forgot your name too, so they’ll appreciate the chance to ask again.

In any case, remembering names will still take work, and you won’t remember every name. But play the name game and I guarantee that you have much greater success remembering names.

And of course, when you have greater success remembering names, you have greater success making a great first impression and then making great friends (which is what social skills are for!)





How to Make Eye Contact




Making good eye contact is tough.

Give too much eye contact, and you come across as too intense (at best) or a staring creeper (at worst).

Give too little eye contact, and the other person might think you don’t care about what they have to say.

Plus, when you’re worrying about making good eye contact, the rest of the interaction suffers. Instead of enjoying a great conversation, you’re stressing about eye contact.

That’s not good for anyone.



The Secret of Great Eye Contact

Fortunately, there’s a simple trick that will help you master great eye contact.

Just match your eye contact with your partner’s.

If they look at you, look at them. If they look away, look away.

Easy, right?

Here’s why it works. There’s no such thing as “perfect” eye contact. Your goal is to make your partner feel comfortable with you, which means all you need to do is avoid giving too much eye contact or not enough.

Different people feel comfortable with different levels of eye contact. But almost everybody will initiate the amount of eye contact that they feel comfortable with. That means that if you give them the same amount of eye contact that they give you, they’ll probably feel comfortable.

Look at your partner when they look at you (and look away when they don’t), and you’ll be squarely inside the level of eye contact they feel comfortable with. It really is that easy.



Mastering Good Eye Contact

Of course, there are a few details to take care of.

You don’t want to mirror your partner exactly, or they’ll quickly realize you’re copying them. It’s ok to instantly match their eye contact on occasion, but in general, you should wait a few seconds before copying them. Wait about one second before looking at them, and about two or three seconds before looking away.

Those numbers are just rough guidelines, of course. Feel free to experiment to find what feels natural for you. The important thing is that you avoid moving like a mirror image of your partner. The exact timing of your pauses is less important.

Also, be aware that eye contact rules change somewhat when you’re having an emotional conversation. It’s sometimes easier to discuss emotional issues when you’re not looking at someone, so when people are sharing something very personal or emotional, they will sometimes look away from the person they are speaking to.

If that happens, you still need to look at them to show that you care. If your gaze wanders, that communicates that you don’t really care about what they’re saying, which is bad at any time but especially hurtful when they’re sharing something emotional.



Eye Contact Rhythm

As you start to practice matching your partner’s eye contact, you’ll start to develop a sense of how much eye contact feels “natural.” Eventually, you won’t even need to consciously think about matching their eye contact – it will just happen automatically.

If you want to speed that process, there’s an easy way to get a better sense of the “rhythm” of eye contact. Just watch some movies and pay attention to the eye contact given between the characters. That will help you see what kind of eye contact matching looks natural.

Bear in mind that different settings lead to different kinds of eye contact. Two flirting lovers might match eye contact shifts instantly and have more prolonged eye contact, whereas two acquaintances might take several seconds to match each other and look away often.

Also, when you analyze the movie interactions you might notice that characters will not match each other 100% – sometimes one character will look at another even though the other character is still looking away. This is totally ok.

All you need is a similar level of eye contact. There’s no need to match their eye contact perfectly. If on occasion you feel like looking at them even though they’re not looking at you, or you feel like looking away before they do, that’s fine.

The important thing is that you are “in general” matching what they do. As long as you’re in the same ballpark as them, then your eye contact will be fine. When you’re starting out, you’ll want to match their eye contact very closely to make sure that you stay in the safe zone.

But as you gain more experience, you’ll get a better sense of what eye contact level feels natural. That will let you adjust your eye contact to what feels comfortable for both you and them, not just them.

The end result is that you won’t have to think about eye contact at all – you’ll just do the eye contact that feels natural for both you and your partner.

Take a bit of time to learn these good eye contact techniques, and you’ll find yourself richly rewarded with more comfortable and enjoyable conversations for both you and your partners.



To Summarize:

When your partner looks at you, look at them. When they look away, look away

Pause for a few seconds before matching your partner’s eye contact

As you develop more experience, you won’t need to match your partner’s eye contact as exactly because you can rely on your instincts.



That’s all there is to it!

Of course, there’s lots of other ways to master how your body communicates. If you want to continue building your social skills, check out my section on body language.





Overcoming Anxiety: One Simple Rule




Fear often keeps us from the things we want.

Maybe we want to go talk to that guy, or ask that girl out, or go to that party. But we’re afraid.

What if he doesn’t want to talk to me?

What if she says no?

What if I feel awkward at the party?

In the moment, these fears can seem really big. And when our fears are big, we play it safe, which means we avoid the things we really want to do.

Fortunately, there’s one simple rule you can use to give yourself courage.



10-10-10

It’s called the 10-10-10 rule, and it was developed by Suzy Welch, a business writer. In a nutshell, the 10-10-10 rule asks you to imagine the likely outcomes of a decision…

10 minutes in the future

10 months in the future

10 years in the future



It’s developed for business decisions (what will happen in 10 minutes/10 months/10 years if we launch this new product?) but it’s really useful for social situations too.



10-10-10 for Social Situations

What happens when you apply the 10-10-10 rule to social situations?

Well, let’s say you’re at a party and you want to strike up a conversation with someone. What are the best and worst things that might reasonably happen? Well….

In 10 minutes, best case you will be having a great conversation, worst case the conversation will flop and you’ll feel awkward.



In 10 months, best case you are still friends with the person you talked to, worst case you have a dim memory of an awkward conversation



In 10 years, best case you are STILL friends with the person you talked to, and there is no worst case – you’re not going to remember an awkward conversation from a party ten years ago.





Long-Term Courage

When you look at it this way, the path is clear. You should start the conversation, because the potential upside (a new friend!) is much greater than the potential downside (10 minutes of awkwardness.)

And you’ll find this is true in many social situations where you feel anxious or scared. When you use the 10-10-10 rule to give yourself a long-term perspective, it’s much easier to overcome fear and make the best decision.

Or to put it another way – it’s hard to be afraid of 10 minutes of awkwardness when you’re thinking about the next 10 years of your life.

So try it out!

Next time you are afraid of taking the initiative in a social situation, just ask yourself, “If I do this, what is the best and worst thing that might reasonably happen in 10 minutes, 10 months, and 10 years?” This only takes a moment, but it will give you a clear direction and the confidence to push past fear.





20 Seconds of Insane Courage




Growth is scary.

But growth happens one step at a time And one little baby step, while still scary, is doable.

In the movie We Bought a Zoo, Matt Damon’s character says that sometimes all you need is “20 seconds of insane courage.”

And 20 seconds of courage, while scary, is doable.



20 Life-Changing Seconds

I don’t know what 20 seconds of courage looks like for you.

But you do.

Maybe it’s saying “Yes!” to that invitation. Maybe it’s scheduling that first appointment with a counselor.

It might even look like taking 20 seconds to speak truth to yourself, and encourage yourself not to give up.

Regardless of what it looks like, I know you have 20 seconds of insane courage in you. You have the courage to take that next small step towards growth – even though it’s scary.

So muster up your courage. Take a deep breath.

And be insanely, crazy-go-nuts brave for 20 seconds.



The Courageous Life

When you do, you’ll realize two things.

First, that 20 seconds of insane bravery, while scary, is doable – and it’s something that you can do again.

And second that, done often enough, 20 seconds of bravery adds up to a lifetime of courage.

Be courageous, my friends.
