Chapter 2: Body Language




Relationships are built on communication. I share with you, and you share with me. When we share with each other, we understand each other better – which grows our relationship deeper.

The tricky part is that a lot of communication is non-verbal. I might not use words to tell you if I feel upset with you, but I might physically draw back from you – for instance, by crossing my arms, angling my feet towards the door, or avoiding eye contact. If you don’t catch my physical signals, you might not realize that something is wrong until it’s too late.

Even if you understand the body language signals other people are sending, you might not realize what your own body is communicating. When your body language is cold and standoffish, people are unlikely to approach you, even if you want them to.

Fortunately, it’s easy to make body language a positive part of your interactions. In this section of the guide, I will walk you through the simple, practical principles that will guide you to a great understanding of body language.



Body Language contains five lessons:

Comfort and Discomfort: The Only Two Signals You Need



Pick up a book on body language, and you’ll be confronted with hundreds of pages filled with different body language signals. The hidden meanings of every possible movement, glance, and nose scratch is explained in painstaking detail. It makes for interesting reading, but it’s not very practical to memorize hundreds of body language signals.

Fortunately, there’s a better way. There’s only two major body language signals that you need to know: “Comfort” and “Discomfort.” In this lesson, I explain how to use each of these signals in conversation.

A Field Guide to Comfort



There are several body language signals that indicate someone is feeling comfortable. In this lesson, I teach you how to recognize the most common comfort signals and explain how to respond.

A Field Guide to Discomfort



Much like comfort, bodies also have several ways to signal that someone is feeling uncomfortable. In this lesson, I walk you through the most common discomfort signals so you will know when your partner is feeling uncomfortable.





Understanding Body Language in Context



In order to respond appropriately to body language during a social interaction, you need to understand the context of the interaction. This section teaches you how to recognize key signals from context that help you to respond better to body language.

Your Body Language



Understanding the body language of others is extremely useful, but you also need to understand the messages your own body language is sending. It’s easy for your body language and your words to send conflicting messages, which is a recipe for misunderstanding. In this lesson, I help you make sure that your body and your words work together.





Comfort/ Discomfort: The Core of Body Language




Body language helps us understand one another.

If you encounter a friend whose body language shows sadness, you know to ask them what's wrong.

If you start to tell a story and your friend's body language shows interest, you know to keep talking.

It's useful stuff.

Unfortunately, body language is very complex. There are hundreds of different signals our body can send, and unless you are Paul Ekman or are willing to put in decades of work, you can't learn them all.

Fortunately, you don't need to learn them all.

In fact, there are only two signals you need to learn: "comfort" and "discomfort."

Comfort signals tell you that the person is feeling good. People give off comfort signals when they like the person they're interacting with, they enjoy their current activity or interaction, and there is nothing troubling them.



Discomfort signals tell you that something is wrong. People give off discomfort signals when something is bothering them, when they're not feeling happy, or when they are not enjoying their current activity or interaction.



Responding to Comfort and Discomfort

Comfort and discomfort signals are the clues that tell you how your partner is feeling. Once you know how your partner is feeling, you know how to respond.

Here's how it works:

Think of these signals as red light/green light. If you're picking up "I'm feeling comfortable" messages, then you've got a green light.

When you get a green light, your job is simply to relax and enjoy the interaction. Keep an eye out in case their body language changes to discomfort, but otherwise, just relax and keep doing whatever you were doing.

If you're reading "I'm not comfortable" signals, then that's a red light (or at least, a yellow "caution" light.) When you get a red light, your job is to help your conversation partner feel more comfortable. Try to learn what caused them to feel uncomfortable and see if you can remove the source of the discomfort.

In other words, this is how you use body language in social interactions:

Look at body language signals to find out if your partner is comfortable or uncomfortable.

If they're comfortable, then relax.

If they're uncomfortable, try to find out what's wrong and fix it.



Comfort and Discomfort in Practice

In practice, this is very simple. Let me give you an example.

A few days ago, my friend asked me a question, and I launched into an extremely long-winded answer. Midway through my response, I checked their body language and realized they were giving off several discomfort signals. Oops.

I realized the source of their discomfort was my long-winded answer (they had wanted a short response, not a massive lecture.) I cut my long-winded explanation short and was rewarded with my friend's body language becoming more comfortable.

My friend never told me that they were bored, but their body clearly communicated it to me. Because I knew how to understand their body language, it was easy for me to see their discomfort and realize I needed to cut my answer short.

People communicate comfort and discomfort to you with their bodies all the time. Learn to understand and respond to these body language signals, and it will be much easier for you to have positive interactions.

Of course, in order to respond to body language in this way, you need to be able to notice when someone is signaling that they are comfortable or uncomfortable. You also need to be able to look at the context to understand what is causing your partner to feel comfortable or uncomfortable. Fortunately, we'll cover all of these topics in the next few lessons.





A Field Guide to Comfort




Comfort is a great signal to receive. When you know that your conversation partner is comfortable, you can relax and enjoy the conversation.

People will signal comfort in a variety of ways, the most important of which I’ve highlighted below. Your goal is to look for patterns in the signals. If someone is truly comfortable, they will send multiple “Comfort” body language signals.

The list below consists of signals that are both common and easy to spot. It’s not an exhaustive list of comfort signals, but it is enough for you to be able to reliably detect if someone is comfortable.



Key Comfort Signals

Leaning In, Moving Closer, or Turning to Face You



When someone is comfortable with you or interested in what you’re saying, they want to remove distance between the two of you. You can think of it as “If someone FEELS close to me, they want to BE close to me”.

Removing distance can take different forms. Sometimes your partner will lean towards you—a good sign! Other times, they’ll turn to face you, or physically scoot closer. They might also remove an object that is between the two of you (for instance, setting their dinner plate aside when at a restaurant.)

Feet in particular are a reliable (if subtle) indicator of someone turning towards you. Someone might consciously choose to face you, but most people aren’t consciously aware of what their feet are doing. So if someone turns their feet towards you, that’s probably a genuine expression of comfort and therefore a very good sign.

A Tilted Head or a Head Rested on a Hand



A tilted head indicates curiosity, whereas resting their head on their hand implies that they’re listening intently. Both indicate comfort. If someone is focused on what you’re saying, it’s very common to see them leaning forward, resting their elbow on a table and their head in their hand.

One Leg Tucked Underneath On a Couch (Girls Only)



This is a girl-only signal, but a very powerful one. If a girl is sitting next to someone she feels comfortable with, she will often tuck one leg underneath her and turn towards that person. If you are on the receiving end of this, count yourself lucky. It means the girl really enjoys being with you.



The “I’m Digging This” Smile



Generally, someone will not be grinning madly throughout an encounter—if they are, you are probably talking with The Joker and should be concerned.

But when people are enjoying themselves, often the corners of their mouth will be turned up slightly. It’s subtle, but I call this the “I’m digging this” smile—it shows that people are enjoying whatever’s going on. If you’re telling a funny story to your friends and you notice this smile, that’s a good sign.

Physical Touch



This is a significant indicator of comfort. If someone is feeling comfortable with you, they’re much more likely to touch your shoulder to get your attention, or put their hand on your knee when they ask if you’re ok, or give you a hug when they greet you.

Physical touch varies a lot by individuals, so don’t worry if someone is not touching you physically—they might just not be touchy. But if someone is touching you, you can conclude that they’re feeling fairly comfortable with you.

Mastering Body Language

Focusing on comfort and discomfort is considerably easier than trying to memorize every single facet of body language, but it’s still a fair amount to swallow all at once.

Fortunately, you don’t need to memorize these all at once. I have an exercise for you that will help you break the body language pieces into bite sized chunks for easy memorization.

The exercise is simple:

Choose one or two signals from the list.

Turn on the TV to your favorite show. Ideally, your favorite show should be live-action and have a lot of social interaction. If it doesn’t, consider watching another show. Reality TV is actually a very good choice, since it’s mostly talking.

Enjoy the show, but look for the signals you chose as the characters interact. Don’t be afraid to rewind a scene to get a closer look at a signal. Keep practicing until you feel confident that you could notice the signals in a real interaction.

Once you feel like you could recognize the signals you chose in a real interaction, pick a few more and start looking for them as well. Eventually, you’ll find yourself able to look for all of the signals on the list.



With a little practice, awareness of body language starts to become second nature. Once you know what you’re looking for, it’s easy to spot patterns of signals and decipher what your partner is feeling.





A Field Guide to Discomfort




Discomfort signals work together with comfort signals to help you manage interactions. When you realize that someone is uncomfortable, you can quickly take action to fix the situation. Once the person is giving off comfort signals again, then you know you have successfully put the conversation back on track.

Like comfort signals, discomfort signals appear in patterns, and are best understood in context. When you see a discomfort signal, think through the other comfort and discomfort signals you have seen, as well as the overall context.

I’ve compiled a list of the most common discomfort signals. I’ve picked these particular signals because they’re both very common and very easy to spot, making them the perfect place to begin. This is not an exhaustive list, so as you learn additional discomfort signals, feel free to add them to your repertoire. But this list is all that you need to start noticing discomfort signals and using that information in your interactions.

Key Discomfort Signals

Neck Touching or Neck Rubbing



Your neck is home to many nerve endings that, when rubbed, will lower your heart rate and comfort you. When people are uncomfortable, they will unconsciously touch their necks so that these nerves will activate and help to calm them.

Rubbing or stroking on the front or back of the neck is the most common kind of neck touching, but if the person is wearing a necklace or a necktie, they might fiddle with that also.

Face Touching or Face Rubbing



There are also nerve endings in your face, so some people will rub their face to comfort themselves. Look for rubbing the forehead, rubbing the eyes, playing with the hair, rubbing lips—all of these are behaviors people use to calm themselves down. People will also sometimes puff out their cheeks and exhale.

Leg Rubbing



This is where a seated person puts their hands (or hand) palm-down on their legs and slides it towards their knees. Picture someone wiping off sweaty palms on their pants and you’ve got the idea.

Withdrawing or Blocking



If someone is in conversation and they become uncomfortable with the person or the topic of conversation, they may try to pull back or place objects between themselves and their partner. They might lean away, adjust their chair so that they’re not facing the person directly, cross their arms to block their chest, and/or cross their legs so that their knee is between themselves and the other person.

Be careful with this signal, though. Some people might cross their legs or lean back to sit more comfortably, or cross their arms because they’re cold. That’s why it’s important to look at it in context—if you are seeing crossed arms or legs but otherwise positive signals, you are probably okay.

Feet Pointed Away



Feet are extremely powerful indicators of how someone is actually feeling. If someone’s feet are pointed away from their conversation partner, that’s often a signal that they’d rather exit the conversation. Of course, this only applies if the person could comfortably and naturally point their feet at their partner—if you’re sitting next to each other on an airplane, this doesn’t apply because it would be very difficult for them to point their feet at you. But if you’re standing facing one another, and you see their feet start pointing towards the door, you might want to graciously bring the conversation to a close.

The Interruption Hand



This is not a sign of discomfort so much as an indication that the other person wants to speak. When someone wants to speak, their hand will often jerk upwards—sometimes with their pointer finger raised. The hand will only raise partway before stopping. Essentially what’s happening is that the person wants to interject, but they stopped themselves before they actually said anything. Do them a favor and give them a chance to speak.

Very Little Eye Contact



Nobody maintains eye contact all the time, but when they look away they should soon look back to you. If someone is looking everywhere but you, they’re probably not comfortable. A simple way of testing this is to say their name in the conversation: for instance “Isn’t that right, Carl?” Most people, upon hearing their name, will look at you and hold eye contact for several moments. If someone glances at you when you say their name, then immediately looks away, they may be uncomfortable.

Also, pay attention if someone is repeatedly looking away from you at one specific thing. For instance, if you’re talking with someone and they keep glancing over their shoulder at someone else, it might be that they want to talk to that person.

Acting on Discomfort Signals

Of course, it’s not enough to just know when someone is uncomfortable. You also need to take action to make them comfortable again. Fortunately, it’s easy to know how to make your partner comfortable if you know how.





Understanding Body Language in Context




Let’s say you’re in a conversation and you notice that your partner has crossed their arms, leaned away from you, and is repeatedly rubbing their face. That’s definitely uncomfortable body language. But why is your partner uncomfortable?

Well, they might be uncomfortable because they don’t like the conversation topic.

Or they might be uncomfortable because you have food in your teeth and they’re not sure if they should tell you.

Or perhaps something is wrong that has nothing to do with you, like an upset stomach.

If you only look at their body language, you won’t have enough information to identify the source of their discomfort. Body language will tell you that someone is comfortable or uncomfortable, but it can’t tell you why.

That’s why you look at the context.

What Is Context?

Looking at context means being aware of three things:

The conversation itself. Did something in the conversation cause your partner to become more or less comfortable? For instance, if your partner’s language changed when you asked a specific question, perhaps there is something about that question that made them uncomfortable.

The environment the conversation takes place in. Conversations don’t occur in a vacuum (unless you are an astronaut.) Look around the room to see what your partner might be reacting to. An argument at a nearby table, an overly crowded room, or an ex-girlfriend who just entered the party could all be reasons why your partner suddenly became uncomfortable.

Your partner’s recent experiences. Your partner’s day did not begin when you started talking with them, and the experiences they had prior to your conversation might still be affecting them. For example, if your partner had a rough day at work, they might give off discomfort signals because they are still thinking about their stressful day.



Applying Context

Take the time to look at context, and you will normally identify a few potential causes for your partner’s discomfort. Try to remove the discomfort caused by the context, and see if your partner becomes comfortable.

For instance, let’s say their body language signaled discomfort when you introduced a controversial topic. Change the topic and see if their body language relaxes. Is there a bad smell in the room? Suggest changing rooms and seeing if they lighten up.

And remember that if you can’t deduce the source of their discomfort, it’s usually ok to just ask them what’s wrong. You don’t need to be Sherlock Holmes; it’s enough that you made an honest effort to look at the context.

After all, even if you don’t know the source of their discomfort, you can still try to make them more comfortable. Offer to fix them their favorite drink, or pick a fun topic to talk about instead of a serious one. It’s preferable to know the specific source of their discomfort, but simply being aware that they are uncomfortable goes a long way.

I know that context can seem overwhelming at first. And in honesty, it will take some practice before you become comfortable with both looking at context and also focusing on the conversation. But I think that as you practice, you will find that looking at context is very simple.

In a nutshell, the purpose of looking at context is to find clues that help you make your partner more comfortable. When someone’s body language tells you that they are uncomfortable, you can look at context to find out why. Then, use that information to help you remove the source of discomfort. Practice looking at context until it becomes natural, and you will have a powerful tool to add to your social skills repertoire.

Of course, body language is not just about your partner’s body language, or even your partner’s body language combined with context. Your own body language plays a role, too.





Your Body Language




In the previous lessons on body language, you learned how to understand the body language signals of others. If you detect a body language that signals someone is uncomfortable, you know to look for the cause of their discomfort and then try to remove it. If someone signals that they are feeling comfortable, you know that you can relax and enjoy the interaction.

But how do people interpret the body language signals that you give? It’s true that only a few people have trained themselves to consciously analyze body language. But even if your conversation partner never consciously thinks about your body language, they will still subconsciously react to it.

For instance, if your body language exhibits warmth and friendliness, your partner is likely to sense that and relax. If your body language demonstrates disinterest or boredom, your partner will think twice before sharing something personal with you.

When Your Body Language and Your Words Don’t Agree

Unfortunately, most people don’t think about their own body language. They might spend a lot of time thinking of the perfect words to say, without realizing that their body language and their words are sending very different messages.

For example, say you have had a long, hard day, but your friend wants to talk with you about something that they are struggling with. You obviously care about your friend, so you tell them that you want to talk.

But if during the conversation you are yawning, looking at the clock, and leaning back in your chair with your arms crossed, your friend might conclude that you don’t really want to talk with them after all. They storm off, and you are left wondering what you said wrong. (Of course, you didn’t say anything wrong—that’s the point!)

That’s just one example; it’s easy to think of other ways your own body language can create misunderstandings. When your words and your body are sending different messages, people will tend to go with the message that your body is sending. If you didn’t mean to send that message, trouble ensues.

The Power of Self-Awareness

Fortunately, that trouble is entirely avoidable. Just be aware of the messages your body is sending. Your body is going to communicate—that’s just part of being human. Take the time to notice what it is communicating, and you can make sure that your body and your words are sending the same message.

Let me be clear. I’m not talking about changing your body language to mask deception – if your words are communicating something untrue, then you should change your words instead of your body language. Relationships built on deception will never give you the long-term satisfaction and intimacy that you need.

Instead, focus on presenting a cohesive, genuine message of the thing that is both true and most important. If you are tired but you care about your friend, the message that is most important is “I care about you,” not “I’m tired” (even though both messages are true.) If you are excited to meet someone new but also nervous, the message that is most important is “I am excited to meet you,” not “I am nervous.”

The message of “I care about you” is more important than the message of “I am very tired” because your commitment to your friend runs deeper than your physical fatigue. The message of “I am excited to meet you” is more important than the message of “I’m feeling nervous” because your desire to make a new friend is greater than your nervousness.

It’s ok to make sure your body language communicates the message that is most important. That’s not deception; that’s just making sure the most important message is communicated well. When you are aware of your own body language, you can be sure that both your words and your body language reflect the message that is the most true.

So take the time to be aware of your own body language. The lists of comfort and discomfort signals are just as useful when you are using them to understand your own body language as when you are analyzing someone else’s. Be aware of what your body is communicating, and make the effort to mute discomfort signals and broadcast comfort signals. You’ll find that as you match your body language to your words, you will have much greater success in your interactions.





