Chapter 4: Group Conversation




In the previous section on conversation, I laid out a detailed blueprint for conversation. I explained how to build conversations that flow smoothly, feel comfortable, and lay the foundation for great relationships.

However, most social interaction takes place in a group setting, and navigating the waters of group conversation can be much trickier than one-on-one conversations.

Trickier, that is, until you know the principles behind group conversations and joining groups. And as luck would have it, those principles are what we’ll discuss next.

Group Conversation contains three lessons:

Open and Closed Groups



In order to successfully join a group at a social event, it’s important to make sure the group is welcoming to new members. If you know how to read a group’s body language, it’s easy to discern whether a group is open or closed to new members. In this lesson, I teach you the key signals that show a group is open to your approach.

Joining Group Conversation



Once you’ve identified a welcoming group, you need to walk up and start participating in the conversation. That’s easier said than done, so this lesson teaches you the practical techniques you need to join new groups and participate in group conversations.

Group Conversation Flow



Once you’ve begun participating in a group conversation, how do you make sure that the conversation continues to flow smoothly? And how do you speak up in conversations where you feel uncomfortable or on the outskirts? This lesson has the answers.





Open and Closed Groups




In the next few lessons, we’ll discuss how to participate in group conversations.

However, to participate in group conversations, you need to join a group. That can be easier said than done.

I’ve often walked into a social event, only to find everyone already bunched up in small groups. Nobody waves to invite me into their group, and I don’t see any other solitary newcomers to cling to.

You’ve probably been there, too, and standing alone is a real bummer. What do you do?

Well, first of all, don’t panic.

Second, take a moment to scan the room for a group to join. You want to quickly categorize groups into open groups and closed groups.

Open groups and closed groups are exactly what they sound like. Open groups are open to new people joining them, while closed groups are not open to newcomers.

Closed Groups

You can normally tell whether a group is open or closed by looking at their body language. For instance, a closed group will close off from the crowd—they will move closer together, plug the gaps in between members of the group, and turn directly towards each other.

Closed groups are not necessarily unfriendly, and a group that is closed now might become open later. When a group is closed, all it means is that they are content with the number of people currently in the conversation, and they’re not interested in more people joining. They might be closed because they are discussing a sensitive topic, or simply because they don’t want to go through the rigmarole of welcoming a new person to the group.

People rarely make a conscious decision to close off their group; the closed signals that you see are their body language communicating their desire to be left alone. Respect the signal their body language is sending, and focus instead on open groups.

Open Groups

Open groups are groups that don’t mind new people joining them. They have a “the more the merrier” mindset, and people might flow in and out of these groups naturally. These are the groups you want to target.

The easiest way to find open groups is by looking at body language. Open body language will look different depending on how many people are in a group, so let’s examine the different ways groups will show their openness.

One Person

Open and closed is not limited to groups – individuals can also be open and closed. One open person will be facing the crowd and not busy. Look for full facings—their feet, torso and face all pointed towards the center of the room or towards the crowd. They will look alert and excited, and ready for someone to come over.

In contrast, closed individuals will be looking down, facing towards the door, or otherwise orienting themselves away from the group. It’s common to also see them busy with an activity – reading a book, texting, etc.

However, it’s possible that individuals that might look closed would actually love to be approached, but instead close themselves off because they feel shy or uncomfortable. Because of this, it’s usually fine to approach a closed individual as long as you are cautious. Keep an eye on their body language, and be ready to gracefully exit the conversation if you sense they would rather not talk.

In other words, if they light up when you say hello and you see their body language becoming more comfortable, then you have a green light to keep chatting. On the other hand, if their body language remains uncomfortable or they act standoffish and cold, it’s best for you to excuse yourself.

Two or Three People

For a pair or trio of people talking, look at how they face one another. If group members are facing directly towards each other, they are more likely to be closed. In contrast, if group members are angled away from one another, they might be happy to have you join their group.

To determine where someone is facing, pay attention to where their feet, torso, and face are pointed. It’s common to find two people whose faces are pointed at each other, but whose feet and torsos are facing the crowd. The more of those three factors (feet, torso, and face) are pointed away from other group members, the stronger the indication that you would be welcome to join their group.

Large Groups

For large groups, pay attention to the shape of the group. Open groups have gaps large enough for you to walk through. Look for something like a horseshoe shape – the gap in the horseshoe is where you can stand to enter the conversation. Groups with no large gaps between their members are closed off, and you will have a difficult time breaking into them.

Also, keep an eye out for large groups formed around public spaces. By public spaces, I mean an area or activity at a social event that everyone is welcome to join. If you’re at a Superbowl party, the TV is a public space. If you’re camping, sitting around the fire is a public space. Groups formed around a public space are almost always open groups, and it will usually be socially acceptable to join them.

Joining a Group

When you know how to read open and closed body language, finding the right group to join is easy. Just make sure that you continue to pay attention to body language once you’ve joined a group. If the group turns away from you or otherwise closes off, perhaps they were not open after all, and you should seek greener pastures. In most cases, though, the group will stay open or turn towards you—if that happens, you can relax and enjoy the conversation.

Of course, it’s hard to enjoy the conversation if you are only a listener. It’s one thing to join a group conversation, and another to be a full participant. Fortunately, with a little practice you’ll find it easy to jump into group conversations!





Joining Group Conversations




Knowledge of open and closed groups will guide you towards the best conversational groups to join, but you still have to actually join a group. Simply standing near an open group does you no good; your goal is to become a full member of the conversation.

It’s possible that someone else will invite you into a group without any effort on your part, but it’s best not to leave things to chance. Once you’ve approached a group, you need to be deliberate to integrate yourself into the conversation.

Fortunately, integrating yourself into a conversation is easy when you know how. You have two options for integrating in a group – the direct approach and the indirect approach.

The Direct Approach

The direct approach is simple and straightforward.

Walk up to the group and wait for a brief pause in the conversation or for attention to turn to you. Then, introduce yourself and immediately ask a follow-up question.

The trick here is to have a question to ask immediately after the introductions. If you walk up and introduce yourself, then just stand there, that’s awkward. But if you introduce yourself and then ask an engaging question, you’re off to a good start.

Two things to keep in mind with this question, though:

First, make sure your opening question relates to the context.



If you don’t reference the context, your question can seem weird or awkward. But if you reference the context, people are much more likely to accept your question.

By context, I mean the environment around you, as well as the information the person is displaying about themselves. If you’re at a party, the party is the environmental context, so you can ask questions like, “How are you enjoying the party?” or “Have you tried the chocolate fondue fountain yet?”

You can also look at the information the person is displaying about themselves – for instance, the things the person is wearing or the activities the person is participating in. If someone is wearing a Darth Vader shirt, you could mention their shirt and ask them if they are a Star Wars fan. If someone sang a karaoke song, you could ask them where they learned to sing.

Just make sure that it’s clear what you’re referencing. If someone is wearing a Darth Vader shirt but you don’t make any mention of the shirt when you ask them about Star Wars, they might be confused by your question. Otherwise, it’s pretty easy to use the context in your opening question.



Second, make sure your opening question is open-ended and engaging.



I discuss open-ended questions at length in the section on invitation, so I won’t repeat myself here. But if you’re fuzzy on how to ask a good question, make sure you read that section and refresh your memory before jumping into conversations. Remember, your goal with the direct approach is to get a conversation rolling, and you can’t do that with a closed-ended question.

Of course, it’s not always easy to just walk up and introduce yourself. For the times where a more subtle method is needed, you can apply the indirect approach.

The Indirect Approach

The direct approach requires you to interrupt whatever the group was previously discussing, and redirect the conversation towards whatever your opening question was. With the indirect approach, you join in with the group’s existing discussion. Both approaches are perfectly valid, so feel free to try both.

You have a few different options for making an indirect approach:

Join a group that includes someone you know.



This is the easiest option. When you join the group circle, make eye contact with your friend and greet them in some way (wave, nod, say hello). The goal is to both let your friend know that you are there, and to let everyone else in the group know that the two of you are friends. When this happens, your friend will often invite you into the conversation, or someone else in the group will ask your friend to introduce you. Either way, you have successfully joined the conversation.

Join the group without announcing yourself, then participate as if you were there all along.



This can feel awkward at first, but people will usually quickly accept your presence, especially if you’re in a context (like a party) where people are moving in and out of groups all the time. It’s also more likely to work with larger groups – if there are only two or three people in a group, you probably need to announce yourself when you join.

Also, bear in mind that this method only works with open groups. If a group is displaying closed body language, you can seriously irritate them by wandering into their conversation uninvited, so be careful. If you’re not sure whether or not a group is open, it’s best to not use this approach.

Join by mentioning something you overheard.



This works best if you are near the group and can listen for a period of time before joining. Just listen until you overhear something that you can comment on, then turn to the group and say something like, “Wait, are you guys talking about the new Switchfoot album? I like their older stuff – do you think I should get the new album?” Don’t spend very much time listening for the perfect topic to jump in on. Even if your segue is slightly forced, people will usually accept it.

Enjoying Group Conversation

Once you’ve joined a conversation, relax and enjoy. Make sure you speak up every now and then, but don’t monopolize the conversation (other people want to talk too). Use group conversations as a place to learn more about potential friends. If you connect with someone in a group conversation, try to chat with them later one-on-one and get to know them better.

Of course, there are some principles of group conversation that will help you make the most of those interactions and increase your chances of making a new friend from a group conversation. Our next lesson tells you everything you need to know about smooth flowing group conversation, so keep reading!





Group Conversation Flow




In the previous section on conversation, we discussed how invitation and inspiration work together to help conversations flow. With a little practice, you will find it easy to use invitations or inspirations to avoid awkward pauses and keep the conversation flowing.

These principles can also be adapted to group conversations. Group conversation is tricky, because it forces you to divide your attention among all members of the group. But with a little practice, you’ll find group conversation can be just as rewarding and fun as one-on-one conversation

Group Conversation Flow

Conversation flow is just as important in groups as it is in two-person conversation. No matter how many people are participating in a conversation, it’s important for the conversation to flow smoothly and feel comfortable.

However, your role in creating conversation flow will be different when there are more people in the conversation.

In two-person conversation, you helped to create flow by ensuring that your partner always wanted to speak once you stopped speaking. But when there are multiple people in the conversation, flow takes a different form. Because there are many participants in the conversation, it’s likely there will always be at least one person who is willing to speak up.

This means that inspiration is not as essential. It’s still important to share something that inspires others to share as well, but with multiple participants the conversation is likely to continue even if you don’t inspire anyone else to share.

Letting Everyone be Heard

However, it’s not uncommon for a few speakers to monopolize the conversation, while everyone else in the group simply listens. While on occasion this is ok – sometimes folks just want to listen – it’s not good when someone wants to speak but doesn’t feel included. That’s why it’s important to make sure that every person in the conversation feels invited to speak.

This means exactly what it sounds like. Periodically, try to make invitations to those who have not spoken much, so they have the opportunity to join the conversation. Ask them a question, or their opinion, or say something like, “Oh yeah, Jack had an experience like that – Jack, why don’t you tell us about the time you…” When you do, they will feel encouraged to speak, and later in the conversation they will be more likely to chime in without needing an invitation.

It’s doubly important to do this if you notice signs of discomfort from someone who is not speaking. If someone is showing signs of discomfort and is not speaking up, they might feel excluded or wonder if they are really wanted in the conversation group. Dispel their fears by drawing them into the conversation, and you will likely be rewarded by seeing their body language relax.

Now, you don’t need to be on constant patrol for people who are not speaking up. Your primary focus should be on enjoying the conversation. But when you notice someone who has fallen silent, extending an invitation to them will keep the conversation flowing.

Plus when you draw someone into a conversation, you make them feel welcome and included. I’ve experienced being on the outskirts of a group at various times in my life, and I still remember the people who made the special effort to draw me in. When you make an effort to invite people to participate in the conversation, you not only encourage the conversation to flow, but you might spark the beginning of a friendship.

Letting Yourself be Heard

Of course, sometimes you are the one who feels on the outskirts of a group. What do you do in that situation?

Well, there’s no one-size-fits-all perfect solution. But in order to find the right solution for you, just follow one simple rule: Self-examine to see where your feelings of exclusion are coming from

It’s important to know why you feel excluded in a group because the source of those feelings will help determine how you respond to those feelings. Do you feel like you are on the outskirts because nobody in the group is talking with you? Well, perhaps you need to take the first step and be more deliberate to join their conversation.

Do you feel excluded because group members are actively making fun of you and putting you down, or because group members have made it explicitly clear they don’t want to spend time with you? Well, chances are the folks in that group are not good friend material anyway. You should cut your losses, leave that group, and spend time with people who will be good friends to you.

Do your feelings of exclusion spring from your own social anxiety rather than the actual behavior of the group members? Perhaps you should spend some time getting in touch with your own feelings, so you can tell when others truly don’t want you there or when your sense of exclusion is simply your anxiety talking.

No matter why you feel excluded, you’ll find that taking the time to reflect on the source of your feelings makes it easy to develop an appropriate response. And when you know how to respond, you’ll be able to negate your feelings of exclusion and enjoy everything group conversation has to offer you. No more being held back by fear or awkwardness. Just you, some soon-to-be-friends, and smooth, enjoyable group conversation. That’s a goal work working for.





