Chapter 5: Empathy




Empathy is the art of seeing the world as someone else sees it. When you have empathy, it means you can understand what a person is feeling in a given moment and understand why other people’s actions made sense to them.

Empathy helps us to communicate our ideas in a way that makes sense to others, and it helps us understand others when they communicate with us. It is one of the foundational building blocks of great social interaction and, quite obviously, powerful stuff.

But how do you get empathy? How do you understand what someone else is feeling, if that isn’t happening automatically?

Well, to a certain extent we are all designed to naturally empathize with others. Our brains are wired to experience the emotions that someone else is feeling. That’s why we wince when someone hits their hand with a hammer, or why we’re more likely to laugh if someone else is laughing too. There’s an excellent book called Social Intelligence on this topic, which explains all of the research behind this natural empathy.

Unfortunately, only a few people have excellent natural empathy. Our empathic wiring exists on a continuum. Some people have fantastic natural empathy and can pick up on how someone else is feeling just by looking at them. Some people have only a tiny amount of natural empathy, and they won’t notice that you are angry until you start yelling. Most people lie somewhere in the middle and understand how someone else is feeling only part of the time.

Fortunately, empathy is part talent and part training. Depending on your starting level of ability, getting better at empathy might require more or less work than someone else – but no matter what your starting point, you can teach yourself to be better at empathy.

And this section is here to teach you how.

Empathy contains three lessons:

Understanding Yourself



If you want to understand the emotions of others, you have to learn to empathize with yourself. Understanding Yourself was written to help you understand and accept your emotions. Understanding and accepting your own feelings is essential for a healthy life, and it’s the foundation of empathizing with others.

Understanding Others



Through practice and a commitment to thoughtfulness, anyone can learn to understand how others are thinking and feeling. Understanding Others is the blueprint that shows you how.

Nonverbal Empathy



When you understand what someone else is thinking or feeling, it becomes easier to interact with them. But there’s a nonverbal aspect to interaction that deserves special attention. The knowledge you gain from empathy can help you to use appropriate nonverbal communication. Nonverbal Empathy explains how.





Understanding Yourself




Learning to empathize with others is a key skill in social interactions. If you understand what other people are thinking and feeling, you’ll be able to be a better friend and have better interactions.

However, to learn to empathize with others, you first need to learn to empathize with yourself.

That sounds really touchy-feely, but stick with me. This is important, and incredibly practical. Learning to empathize with yourself means learning to understand and accept what you’re feeling and why you’re feeling it.

If you’re feeling angry, you should be able to recognize, “I feel angry,” and understand the reasons why you feel angry. You should be ok with feeling your emotions and not ignore them or stifle them.

Fundamentally, if something really bad happened to you, it should be OK that you feel sad. You should give yourself permission to feel sad. Sometimes, we get this idea that we need to act happy all the time, or that our problems are not as important as the problems of others, so we feel selfish when we are sad or upset.

But that’s not true. Your problems matter, because you matter. And if something is happening to hurt you or make you feel sad, it’s ok to express that sadness and to let yourself feel that sadness. You don’t have to keep that bottled up.

Accepting Your Emotions

Of course, it’s a great idea to try to improve your situation, so whatever is causing you to feel sad isn’t causing that sadness anymore. You don’t have to STAY sad.

And, although everyone gets sad or angry sometimes, if it seems like you’re sad or angry all the time, you should think seriously about seeing a counselor. Just like a doctor can help you heal physically, a counselor can help you heal emotionally, and there’s no shame in talking to one.

That goes for more than just understanding emotions, by the way. If you’re struggling with depression or anxiety or loneliness or any number of other things, see a counselor. There’s no shame in it, and it might just change – or save – your life. (If you need to talk to someone right away, call 1-800-442-HOPE and you’ll be connected to a volunteer counselor for free.)

But the point is that you should give yourself permission to experience the feelings you have. If something bad happened to you, it’s ok that you feel sad. You should feel comfortable telling friends and family what you’re feeling, even when you’re not feeling positive, or even when you’re not sure why you feel the way you do. On a fundamental level, you should accept that your emotions are a part of you, and just as you need to accept yourself, you need to accept your emotions.

Take a second and re-read through that paragraph again. No, really. Go back and read it. I’ll wait.

Understanding Your Emotions

Ask yourself seriously if these things are true for you. Do you understand the cause of your emotions when you feel something? Do you give yourself permission to feel an emotion? Do you accept that it’s ok to feel the way you do? Do you have a healthy way to express those emotions?

If the answer to any of those questions is, “No,” or, “I’m not sure,” then take some time to think through how you experience emotions. Ask yourself why you are answering in that way, and what you need to do to better empathize with yourself. Talk with someone you trust and get their advice and support, or consider making an appointment with a counselor.

It might take some time to process through this, but it’s worth the investment. Having a solid and healthy understanding of your own emotions helps you to live a happy, healthy life. Humans are emotional beings, and your emotions are a part of who you are.

And, of course, emotions are a part of everyone else, too. If you understand what it’s like when you feel an emotion, you’ll be better able to understand and interact with a person who is feeling something similar. So even if you don’t want to understand your emotions for your own sake, do it for the sake of your relationships with others. It’s worth it.

Thinking It Through

I have an exercise for you to do today. It might seem a little weird, but trust me – I think you’ll find a lot of benefit to it.

As you go through the day, keep an eye on your emotions, and look for the times in which you are feeling something (whether that something is frustration or happiness or sadness or boredom or anything else). Then, take the time to think through why you’re feeling that way.

I want you to go below the surface here. It’s easy to have someone cut you off in traffic and say, “Well, I feel angry because I was cut off.” But if you think a bit deeper, you might find that you’re angry because the other driver disrespected you, and you often don’t feel respected in your other relationships. Or, you might feel angry because you’re hurting from a hard time that you’re going through, but you’re not acknowledging that pain. You might even realize you don’t have a good reason to be angry, and then your anger fades away.

Think through your emotion in whatever way works best for you. Perhaps you might set aside some time at the end of the day to go for a walk, so you have a quiet time to think. Perhaps you could write down your thoughts on your emotions for the day, and then compare your notes from different days to look for trends. Or perhaps you should ask a friend or family member to help you understand your emotions, and talk it over with them.

Whatever the result, I think you’ll find at the end of the day you understand yourself a bit better, which in turn will make it easier for you to understand others. Give it a try. And when you feel you are starting to understand your own emotions, read on to find out how to understand the emotions of others.





Understanding Others




In the last lesson, we talked about how to empathize with yourself. Empathizing with yourself helps you to empathize with others, because if you understand your own feelings it is easier to understand the feelings of others.

However, if you really want to understand others, you need more than self-empathy. You also need to spend some time thinking about the way other people understand the world.

This sounds complicated, but it really boils down to one thing: Train yourself to ask the question “How does this situation appear to the other person?” during every interaction – and spend the brain cycles necessary to think of a reasonable answer.

The goal here is not to be a mind reader or to know with certainty what the other person is thinking. All you need to do is imagine what it would be like to be that person, and make some reasonable guesses about what that person is thinking or feeling.

Empathy and the Art of Sock Collection For instance, let’s say a friend corners you and starts chatting about a topic you find excruciatingly boring (their sock collection, perhaps).

If you view the situation from your perspective, you’re liable to get frustrated and snap at your friend – they should have known how boring socks are to you!

But if you take the time to look at it from the friend’s perspective, you get a better understanding of their actions. Most likely, if the person is your friend, they care about you and they’re not trying to bore you. Chances are that in their excitement to tell someone about their new alpaca wool crew socks, they just forgot how boring socks are to you.

From your perspective, you have been trapped in a boring conversation. From their perspective, they’re sharing something exciting with you.

Once you take the time to look at it from their perspective, you can handle the situation in a much better way. You won’t snap at them now – you understand that they don’t mean to bore you.

Instead, you might try to gently change the subject. Or, you might decide this is an opportunity to grow closer to your friend, and use the conversation to find out more about something (socks!) that is important to them.

The Danger of Your Perspective Unfortunately, our natural tendency is to see things from our own perspective (that’s why it’s called OUR perspective.) Rather than trying to find out how the other person sees things, we try to convince them to see things our way. Instead of accepting that the other person will always see things differently, we get angry at them for not seeing things the same way we do.

I used to be guilty of this all the time. I would do something that my parents found disrespectful, so they would get upset with me. Then, I would get upset with them for being upset with me!

I didn’t mean to be disrespectful, so I became indignant when they accused me of disrespect – it seemed like my motives should have been obvious to them!

The Need for Discipline

Everything changed once I started to train myself in empathy, I began to ask myself, “Why are my parents so upset?” And when I really thought through that question, I realized that even though I didn’t mean disrespect, my parents still felt disrespected. I have great parents, but they’re not mind-readers, and so they couldn’t know my motives – only my actions.

Once I realized this, I was much better equipped to handle our conflict in a positive way. I would ask myself, “How would this look to my parents?” when I was considering an action, which helped me avoid saying or doing something that would upset my parents. Our relationship improved, and conflict with my parents became much less common.

I share that example to illustrate a key point. When people do something that seems irrational to you, it still makes sense from their perspective. If you take the time to step back and ask, “Ok, why is this person behaving like this?” you will usually find a reasonable answer, and that answer will help you respond better.

But asking that question doesn’t happen automatically. You need to make a deliberate decision to ask yourself, “How does this look to the other person?” You need to be willing to surrender your insistence that the other person sees things your way. And you need to do this again and again and again, until it becomes automatic.

The Power of True Empathy

Building empathy is not easy. I’ll admit that.

But as you continue to ask yourself, “How does this situation appear to the other person?” something remarkable will occur. The question itself will become less and less necessary. You will start to intuitively sense how the other person is feeling.

In other words, you will start to develop true empathy.

This does take time. You’ve spent a long time looking at the world exclusively through your own perspective, so you will have to overwrite many years of habit. But trust me, it’s worth it.



I have an exercise for you today, too. You might find it difficult at first, but it will kick-start your ability to build empathy towards others. Here’s the exercise: In the conversations you have today, ask yourself, “What is the other person thinking and feeling right now? How are they perceiving this interaction?” Of course, you won’t know for sure if your guess is accurate, but more likely than not, you’ll be close.

Once you feel comfortable asking that question, see if you can act on that knowledge. Maybe the grocery store clerk says, “Hi,” to you in a dull voice, and you realize, “Gosh, this person has probably been working all day, and they’re feeling worn out.” Well, see if you can cheer them up! Tell them they’re doing a great job, compliment them on their smile, or ask them where they got their earrings.

It will take time to become comfortable with this, but it becomes easier each time you do it. Once you learn to develop empathy with others, it will become second nature to show empathy to them.





Nonverbal Empathy




When you ask yourself what other people are thinking and feeling, you gain insight into how best to interact with them. This insight helps you defuse conflict and guide the conversation.

There is a nonverbal element to responding to empathy as well. If you realize a friend is sad but ask them, “What’s wrong?” in a very cheerful way, your friend might think you don’t really care. But when you change your tone to sound sympathetic and concerned, your friend is more likely to believe you want to hear what’s wrong. As you might remember, your words and your nonverbal signals work together to communicate, and you want them to be in harmony.

Now, I realize I’ve given you a lot to work on already. Empathy will eventually become second nature for you, but it can be a lot of work to train yourself to be aware of what the other person is thinking and feeling. When you add the need to manage your own nonverbal signals, empathy can seem overwhelming.

But don’t worry. Nonverbal empathy is actually very simple. Similar to the way that body language boils down to just two signals, there are only two nonverbal empathy options you need to worry about: whether to be high-energy or low-energy.

What do I mean by high-energy and low-energy?

High and Low Energy Defined

When someone is high energy, they tend to act

Excited

Expressive

Loud



In contrast, when someone is low energy, they tend to act

Reserved

Relaxed

Quiet



Note that high-energy doesn’t always mean happy, and low-energy doesn’t always mean sad. Someone who has just won the lottery might jump up and run around the room celebrating, or they might lean back in their chair with a slow, satisfied smile spreading across their face. Both are happy responses, but one is high-energy and one is low-energy.

Also note that people will feel high-energy sometimes and low-energy other times. When you see your friend in a moment of excitement, you should conclude, “My friend is feeling high-energy right now,” rather than decide, “My friend is always high-energy.”

Energy and Empathy

The idea of high-energy and low-energy is simple enough. But how does it apply to empathy?

Well, if your partner is high-energy, try to be high-energy.

And if your partner is low-energy, try to be low-energy.

Here’s what I mean by that.

Let’s say you meet a friend for dinner. Your friend has had a busy day, and you notice they are less boisterous than usual. They are clearly feeling low-energy.

You, on the other hand, are very excited about the restaurant. So you gush about the food and the ambiance, you flirt with the wait staff, and in general, you act expressive and excited. Your friend, meanwhile, picks at her food and wishes you would settle down, so she could have a quiet conversation with you.

In other words, you are being high-energy, and your friend is being low-energy. Your friend wants a restful evening, while you want to party and be goofy. Because there’s a mismatch, it makes it harder for you to connect with your friend.

Nonverbal Energy Matching

But if you match your energy level to your friend’s energy level, the evening will go much better. When you notice your friend is low-energy, you can act more reserved and sedated, even if you are feeling excited. Or, if you notice your friend is high-energy, you can respond by acting more expressive and boisterous.

Note that you should match your partner’s energy level, not exceed it. If your partner is relaxed and sedate, you should be low-energy, but there’s no need to act like Eeyore. If your partner is boisterous and loud, you should be high-energy, but there’s no need to go crazy.

Energy matching applies to social situations, too, not just to individuals. For instance, a formal event is likely to be low-energy, (so it’s wise to be somber and reserved, even if you feel excited), whereas a party is likely to be high-energy (so it’s wise to be more expressive and boisterous, even if you feel relaxed.) When entering a social situation for the first time, take a moment to figure out the energy level of the situation, and then use it to guide your own energy level.

Of course, your own energy level matters, too. If you’re feeling high-energy or low-energy, it’s ok to express that, even if your partner is feeling something different. But it’s wise to start by matching your energy level to your partner, and then move back to your natural energy level. This allows your partner to move energy levels with you.

When you monitor the energy levels of those around you and adjust your own energy level accordingly, you’ll find connecting with others to be much easier. Plus, you’re also practicing being aware of what others are thinking and feeling, which will feed back into your study of empathy in general.

As you begin to master empathy, you’ll find yourself understanding others better, having fewer conflicts, and building better relationships. That’s a reward well worth the effort.





