Chapter 6: Meeting People




Ok. You’ve practiced your conversation technique. You’ve brushed up on body language, and you’re starting to train yourself to see things from your partner’s perspective. You feel ready to go out and make some friends.

Unfortunately, unless you are five, your Mom is not going to set up play dates for you. The responsibility for meeting people and creating a connection with them falls squarely in your lap.

This is a tough responsibility because it means going outside your comfort zone. Unless you are a natural extrovert, you probably prefer spending time by yourself or with people that you already know. A social event filled with strangers can feel overwhelming and draining.

Fortunately, meeting people is not as hard as you think.

Social events don’t need to feel like you versus a room full of strangers. When you find a group that fits your personality and interests, it’s much easier to feel comfortable and connect with potential friends. Learn how to identify the right groups, and you’ll find that meeting people is much easier.

Plus, you don’t have to be limited to making friends at social events. Potential connections are all around you – from a classmate sitting next to you to a barista taking your order. Learn to take advantage of the connection opportunities that life sends your way, and you’ll find yourself richly rewarded.

In other words, there are bedrock principles that you can learn to take the guesswork out of meeting people and making new friends. That’s what this section is all about. Let’s dive in.

Meeting People contains three lessons:

Finding Your Group



Social groups are not created equal. Some groups will make it much easier to make friends than others. In this section, I show you how to find the right group for you.

Everyday Connections



Social groups are not your only option for meeting new people. In this section, I explain how connecting on a person-to-person level allows you to make friends with the people you meet in your day to day life





Person-to-Person Connections



When you connect with people on a person-to-person level, you open the door to a new friendship. This lesson builds on the advice in the Everyday Connections lesson and gives practical guidelines for connecting with others on a person-to-person level.





Finding Your Group




If you ask someone for advice on meeting new people, they will probably respond, “Go join some social groups.”

That’s true, but not very helpful. Not all social groups are created equal, and if you join a group that is a poor fit for you, it will be hard to make friends.

Sounds obvious, I know. But people often miss this.

Many people sign up for groups willy-nilly, then find themselves stuck in boring groups with boring people. Because these groups are not a good fit for them, they find it hard to make connections, and because it’s hard to make connections, their motivation to go to socialize withers away. After a few fruitless attempts at connection, they revert back to their comfort zone and give up on making friends (until their next burst of determination, when this cycle repeats.)

Don’t let that be you. Break out of the cycle of boring groups and boring people, and find the groups that give you a great chance at making friends.

The DNA of a Great Group

When you know what to look for, it’s easy to identify these groups. And it’s easy to know what to look for – just read on!

Look for groups built around something you love.



I don’t mean something that you like, or something that you kind of enjoy, but something that you love. When you have a shared passion with other members of the group, you will naturally build a quick rapport around that passion. Plus, your shared passion will give you lots to talk about, which makes building a friendship much easier.

The easiest ways to discover these kinds of groups is to do online research. A Google search for [your passion] + [your city] will often yield lots of results. Sites like meetup.com or the subReddit for your city are also great sources to look for groups related to your passion.

You’re not limited to online research, either. If your passion has a shop associated with it (for instance, if your passion is sci-fi novels, then a bookstore is your shop), there’s a good chance you can find like-minded folks there. Volunteering is another good option – if you love animals, volunteering at the animal shelter is a great way to give back as well as meet new people.

Look for groups that your friends are involved with.



If someone you already know is in a group, they can introduce you to others and include you in conversations. It’s much easier to meet new people when you have a friend to help you out.

To find out about the groups your friends are in, you have two options. The first is to just stay alert in conversation. If you ask a friend what they’re doing over the weekend, and they tell you that about a group that they are attending, it’s appropriate for you to express interest and ask if you could check out the group. The other option is to tell your friends that you are looking for new groups to get involved with, and ask their advice.

Both options will usually result in an invitation, although if your friends seem uncomfortable about the idea of inviting you to their groups, don’t press them on it. Sometimes people like to keep their friend groups separate, so don’t be offended if a friend doesn’t feel comfortable with the idea of bringing you to another group.

Look for groups that focus on improving people skills.



When everyone else at a group is also learning people skills, you are guaranteed to have a shared interest. Plus, these groups offer you an opportunity to learn new social skills and make new friends at the same time.

The most common of these groups is Toastmasters, which is a public speaking group. Although public speaking is different from having a conversation, practicing public speaking will greatly help your poise, confidence, and comfort in conversation.

Of course, public speaking is not the only skill that will help you in your social interactions. Partner dancing lessons are a great way to become comfortable with physical touch and to learn how to use physical contact appropriately. Improv theater classes will improve your self-confidence and teach you to think on your feet. Martial arts might improve your discipline and reduce your anxiety. You get the idea – look for groups that give you an opportunity to learn something that will improve your people skills.

Look for groups that meet on a regular basis.



It’s much easier to make friendships when groups meet regularly because you will have more opportunities to establish a connection with people. For instance, if the group meets weekly, then you can meet someone the first week, learn that you both enjoy fishing the second week, and then invite them to go fishing on the third week. That’s much easier than having to make all of that happen the first time you meet someone, or spacing those three interactions over three months.

The Right Group for You

Remember, there’s no perfect group. You might never find a group that includes all of these ideal characteristics. But your goal is not to find the perfect group – it’s to find the right group for you. The principles in this lesson will help guide your search, but don’t be afraid to try a group that doesn’t meet all of these criteria, and don’t hesitate to add your own criteria to the list.

At the end of the day, if you enjoy going to a group and you feel comfortable making friends with the people there, then it’s a good group for you. Keep that in mind, and you’ll have no problem finding great groups.





Everyday Connections




In our last lesson, we discussed how to find the right social group for you. Social groups are a great way of meeting people, and signing up for a new group is a great way to kick-start some friendships.

However, organized social groups are not your only opportunity to meet new people. Relationships can spark anytime two people interact, and great relationships can start whenever a customer chats with a waiter or travelers strike up a conversation.

Making the most of these everyday connections is easy. All you need to do is connect with others on a person-to-person level, not a functional level.

Here’s what I mean.

Functional Interactions

When you walk into a coffee shop and order coffee from the barista, you are interacting on a functional level. You are ordering coffee, the barista is giving you coffee.

Or, perhaps you sit next to someone on a plane and only talk to them when you need to use the restroom. Again, functional level. You go to the bathroom, they get out of your way.

When you interact with people on a functional level, you reduce them to an obstacle in your path or a means to an end. A barista gives you a coffee fix—that’s his function. A fellow traveler blocks your path to the bathroom—he’s an obstacle.

But here’s the thing. The barista taking your order at a coffee shop is not a robotic coffee machine; they’re a person, with dreams and passions and a life outside of making cappuccinos. The person sitting next to you on the plane is not just a body blocking your path, but a fellow traveler who might be returning home from a long journey or visiting a sick loved one.

It can be hard for us to realize this, because it’s easy to see the barista as a means to a coffee fix and nothing more. But when our interaction with them is completely limited to coffee, we miss our chance to connect with them on a person-to-person level.

Fortunately, it doesn’t have to be that way.

Person-To-Person Connections

When you connect with someone on a person-to-person level, you lift the interaction beyond the functional level and allow real connection to take place.

To connect on a person-to-person level, just say or do something that communicate the message: “I recognize that you are more than a means to an end.” You can communicate this message in many different ways. You might ask a friendly personal question, or express your gratitude for the work that they’re doing, or maybe just offer a warm, genuine smile.

When you acknowledge the personhood of someone else in this way, you create an opportunity for them to connect with you. Make the effort to connect on a person-to-person level, and it will be easy for others to recognize you as a person, too.

Try an experiment. Next time you go into a coffee shop, ask the person taking your order, “What do you do when you’re not working?” Watch them light up when they tell you about the friends they hang out with, or the degree they’re pursuing, or the kids they’re raising.

And that’s not limited to that one question, or to just coffee shops.

Tell the person browsing your favorite section in the bookstore that it’s your favorite section, then ask them what their favorite book is.

Ask the fan standing next to you at a concert if they’ve ever heard the band live before.

Ask the passenger next to you on the train where they’re going, or where they’re coming from.

Tell the girl singing in the coffee shop that her music is beautiful, and ask what inspired her to write her songs.

Your life holds endless opportunities to connect with others. Make the extra effort to recognize the personhood of the people you encounter, and you will find yourself making connections you never thought possible.





Person-To-Person Connections




Person-to-person connections are a powerful way to connect with others, but it will take time before you become comfortable with them. Keep these simple rules in mind as you practice, and you will become an expert connector much faster.

Some people are not open to connecting.

Most people welcome the opportunity to connect on a person-to-person level, but some people will not. It’s important for you to recognize when others would rather not connect, so you can respect their wishes and avoid irritating them.

For instance, if the person next to you on an airplane puts her headphones on after answering your first question, she’s probably not interested in talking. If you ask the barista about his personal life, and he immediately brings the conversation back to coffee, he might prefer that you keep things professional.

Be alert to the signals that someone is not interested in connecting person-to-person and back off when you detect disinterest. A review of comfortable and uncomfortable body language will serve you well here. If someone’s body language becomes uncomfortable when you start talking to them, that’s a strong signal that they’d rather not talk.

Avoid interrupting.

If you attempt to connect with someone when they are in the middle of an activity, it’s possible that you’ll irritate them. In general, you should feel comfortable attempting a connection if the person is already talking to you, or able to continue their current activity while chatting. But if talking to you will break their concentration on their current activity, you should be cautious about approaching them.

In other words, if you want to talk to the singer at a coffee shop, it’s much better to approach when they are taking a break, rather than when they are reading their sheet music to prepare for the next song. There are exceptions, of course – that traveler in the seat next to you may be happy to put down their book and talk – but you need to be much more cautious if you plan on interrupting someone.

Start conversations by referencing context.

If you turn to someone else waiting in line for a concert and the first thing you say is, “So, do you like Italian food?” you are going to come across as very weird.

But if you ask them their opinion on the band’s new album, or comment on how long the line is, or ask them if they saw the band last time they were in town, the conversation will be much less awkward.

This is especially true when you want to move a conversation from functional to person-to-person. Don’t suddenly go from ordering coffee to “So, what do you think about the latest Coldplay album?” It catches the barista off guard – one moment you were ordering coffee, the next you’re talking about something totally different.

In order to make the transition from functional interaction to person-to-person connection feel more natural, it’s best to mention the context. That’s why “What do you do when you’re not working?” is a perfect icebreaker question. By mentioning them working, you reference the context, and by asking them about life outside work, you open a bridge to connecting on a deeper level.

Be prepared if your everyday connection does not become a friendship.

When you connect person-to-person with someone, you will usually still go your separate ways after the conversation. You might have a great conversation with your waiter, but you are still a customer and they are still a waiter, and it is difficult to move permanently away from those roles into a friendship.

But that’s ok. Even if your interaction didn’t turn into a relationship, it was still a positive interaction. You learned something new about another person, and you had the chance to share something about yourself. Plus, you got the chance to practice your social skills and build your confidence.

Make person-to-person connections a part of everyday life.

When you make the effort to seek person-to-person connections whenever you can, you’ll find that a brand new area of life has opened to you. Interactions that were previously forgettable and superficial are now meaningful. People who would have stayed strangers become friends. Person-to-person connections are your gateway to a richer life, and I encourage you to make them a part of your everyday life.





