Chapter 7: Making Friends




If you followed the advice in the Meeting People section, you might have already made a few connections. Maybe you’ve checked out a few social groups or made a few everyday connections, and discovered some friendly folks.

Unfortunately, friendly folks are not the same as folks who are your friends. It’s nice to feel welcomed when you attend a group meeting, but it’s much more valuable to have relationships that thrive outside of the meetings.

But how do you build those relationships? It’s one thing to meet someone that you get along with. It’s another thing to grow your relationship with that person to the point where you feel comfortable inviting them over to hang out. Sometimes relationships will grow quickly on their own, but if they don’t, how do you encourage them to grow?

Fortunately, like every other topic in this social skills guide, making friends is a skill that you can develop. With the right guidance, you’ll find it easy to make lasting, fulfilling friendships. This section was written to show you how.

Making Friends contains three lessons:

Finding Good Friends



It’s possible to be friends with anybody. But some people are just better friend material than others. In this section, I teach you how to identify the people who are the most likely to treat you well, and whose friendship you will most enjoy.

Starting a Friendship



Once you’ve met someone that you want to be friends with, how do you get the relationship off the ground? In this section, I explain how to give an invitation that will open the door to a new friendship.

Deepening a New Friendship



When you’ve just made a new friend, it’s important to nurture that friendship. This section will show you how you can grow a new friendship into a strong, lasting relationship. It also contains advice for being a good friend to others.





Finding Good Friends




When you want to make new friends, start by identifying the people who will be good friends to you.

A good friend cares about you, enjoys spending time with you, and gives you the freedom to be yourself. Good friends accept you as you are – you don’t need to pretend to be someone else when you’re spending time with a good friend. And although good friends might jokingly tease you, they will never bully you, disrespect you, or pressure you to do something that makes you feel uncomfortable.

You can find the people who will be good friends to you in the future by looking for the people who treat you well today. In order to do that, just ask yourself three simple questions:

Do I like spending time with this person?

If you don’t want to spend time with someone, chances are either they won’t be a good friend to you, or you won’t be a good friend to them. Spending time with a friend shouldn’t feel like a chore.

However, bear in mind that good friends don’t need to be outwardly similar to you. It’s nice to have common interests or shared experiences, but if you feel comfortable with a friend and enjoy their company, it doesn’t matter if you like soccer and they like ballet. Good friendship goes beyond shared interests, so make sure that you give a fair consideration to people that might not seem similar to you at first.

Does this person treat me and others well?

You will sometimes encounter people who are a lot of fun to be with, but who don’t respect your opinions and beliefs, or tease you in a hurtful way, or generally just push you around. Those people are not real friends and are not worth your time.

Even if they treat you well, you might notice that they are often rude or hurtful to others. That’s a warning sign that they may one day be hurtful to you. As the old saying goes, “The person who is nice to you, but rude to the waiter, or to others, is not a nice person.” There are plenty of fun folks who will treat you well; don’t waste your time building friendships with people who will not treat you the way a friend should.

Does this person seem like they want to spend time with me?

Sometimes you will enjoy spending time with someone but they don’t seem to have much interest in spending time with you. This is usually not a good situation to be in.

If you invest lots of time and effort trying to make friends with someone who doesn’t really want to be friends with you, you will usually find yourself frustrated and worn out. It’s much better to pursue friendship with someone who also wants to be friends with you.

Of course, it’s possible that someone might want to spend time with you, but right now is not a good time for them. If you really want to be friends with someone, but they don’t seem to want to be friends with you, it doesn’t hurt to try again a few weeks or months later. But you deserve friends who are excited to spend time with you, so don’t spend much time pursuing people who won’t pursue you back.

Pursuing Good Friends

If you ask yourself these questions about someone and answer no to any of them, don’t make friendship with that person a priority. That’s not to say that you can’t give someone a second chance – after all, first impressions are not always accurate, and it never hurts to spend some more time with someone before you rule them out.

But in general, you should focus your attention on the people who give you the best chance to be good friends. If you spend your time chasing after people who will not be good friends to you, you’ll find yourself disappointed down the road.

Take a few minutes right now and use this list to think through the people you know. Find a few people who you think might be good friends to you, and keep them in mind as you read the next lesson.





Starting a Friendship




Once you know that someone is good friend material, you still need to get the friendship started.

This can be tough to do. Many people either don’t know how to move the relationship from friendly acquaintance into true friendship, or they’re afraid to – they don’t want to offer friendship and then have it be rejected. So they wait for the other person to make the first move.

Unfortunately, if you wait for them, and they wait for you, then nothing will ever happen. You need to be willing to make the first move.

Fortunately, that first move is very simple.

All you need to do is invite the person to spend time outside of the normal context that you see them. If you see someone at church, invite them to come to bowling. If someone is on your bowling team, invite them to see a movie with you. You get the idea.

Choosing the Right Activity

Ideally, you should invite them to an activity that gives you the chance to talk and get to know each other. It’s also good to pick an activity that the other person will enjoy. If you share a common interest or if they’ve told you about a particular activity they enjoy, use that to guide your invitation. If you have no idea what they’re interested in, try to pick an activity that most people would enjoy (perhaps seeing a movie, or shopping in the mall).

One of my favorite invitations is to ask someone to share a meal or get some coffee together, because this means that you can focus on the conversation in a calm environment. However, it’s important to pick an activity that you feel comfortable with. If you feel uncomfortable with the idea of an entire social encounter built around nothing but conversation, then there’s no need for you to pick coffee as your activity.

And this goes beyond coffee. There might be popular social activities that you just don’t enjoy, or that you don’t feel comfortable doing. If the smoky atmosphere of a bar makes you feel sick, don’t invite your new friend to get drinks. If large groups of people make you nervous, don’t invite your partner to a concert. If you just plain hate putting, don’t invite your partner to mini-golf.

This is especially good to keep in mind if you struggle with anxiety. If the thought of conversation makes you nervous, spend time with your new friend somewhere that you find relaxing and peaceful. Of course, you should make sure that it’s somewhere your partner also enjoys – but with a bit of thought, I’m sure you’ll find many possible activities that both you and your partner can enjoy.

Also, one word of warning. If you invite someone of the opposite sex to hang out, they might assume that you’re expressing romantic interest in them. If all you have in mind is friendship, that can be awkward, so it’s best to avoid misunderstanding. (If you really are interested in dating them, that’s fine – but this is the Making Friends chapter, and we’ll cover dating later in the book)

Because of the potential for misunderstanding, you should do your best to avoid inviting friends to explicitly “date night” activities, like dinner and a movie. It also doesn’t hurt to clarify in your invitation that you are only interested in friendship. Simply saying, “Hey, I’d like to be friends,” before you invite someone to hang out can help make sure everyone stays on the same page.

Your Friendship Begins

Once you choose an activity and invite someone to hang out outside of your normal context, something cool happens. Your invitation signals to them that you want to be friends. Without this signal, the other person may have never even considered friendship with you. That’s not because they dislike you, but simply because they never knew that you wanted to be friends with them.

But now, because you invited them to hang out outside the normal group, you show that you are interested in being friends with them. Your invitation causes them to think, “This person wants to be friends with me,” and ask themselves, “Do I want to be friends with this person?”

If the two of you get along, most likely their answer will be a resounding “Yes!” to both your invitation and the resulting friendship.

Of course, they might say “No” to your invitation. But if they turn down your invitation, that doesn’t necessarily mean they don’t want to be friends – it could just mean they’re busy or not interested in the activity you are inviting them to.

As a rule of thumb, you should wait until someone has turned down your invitations three times before you conclude that they don’t want to hang out with you. If you’ve invited them three times, you’ve sent a clear signal that you want to be friends. If they want to be friends back, they’ll usually make the time to hang out with you.

Fortunately, most likely their answer to your invitation will not be not “No” but “Yes!” Once they reach that “Yes!” something very important happens. They stop thinking of you as “Bob, the guy from my book club” but “My friend Bob.”

And once they think of you as their friend, it’s no longer weird for you to call them up and ask them to hang out that weekend, or invite them to grab lunch, or see if they want to see the latest movie with you. That’s just what friends do.





Deepening a New Friendship




Ok, you’ve found someone who seems like quality friend material. You invited them to hang out, and they’ve accepted.

At this point in the relationship, you should be feeling excited. You’ve met a cool person, you enjoy spending time with them, and a friendship is taking off.

But you want to be careful here.

Just like a flower can wither if you give it either too much water or not enough, you want to strike a balance with how much you pursue this new friendship.

In other words, you should pursue a new friend at a steady rate, but not one that is overwhelming. If you hang out with a new friend once, and then start calling them every day, they’re going to feel uncomfortable and may back off from the friendship.

Similarly, if you spend time with them once and never call them again, they’ll probably conclude that you don’t want to be friends after all.

Finding the Middle Ground

Of course, it’s easy to see how either extreme causes problems, but finding the right middle ground is harder. Unfortunately, there’s no perfect way to know how often to spend time with your new friend. It will depend on how well the two of you get along, and how busy your schedules are.

However, a good rule of thumb is to invite them to spend time together at least once a month, and no more than once a week.

Being a rule of thumb, this is obviously only a rough guideline. If you really enjoy spending time together, you may find yourself hanging out multiple times each week, and if they are very busy, you might find you can only hang out less than once per month.

If this sounds complicated, don’t worry. In practice, you’ll find it’s simple to strike the right balance.

Just base the frequency of your invitations to them on the frequency of their invitations to you. If they are frequently inviting you to hang out, then you have a green light to invite them more often. If they rarely invite you to hang out, then you should probably invite them to hang out less frequently. You will quickly get a feel for what works for you and your new friend.

Becoming a Great Friend

Of course, there’s more to friendship that simply knowing how often to spend time together. Growing in friendship means learning how to be a good friend.

Remember, good friends care about each other, enjoy spending time together, and give each other the freedom to be themselves. At the beginning of your friendship, you looked for someone who might be a good friend to you. Now, be a good friend to them.

Show that you care about your friend by asking good questions that show you want to know more about them, and by making the effort to see the world from their perspective.

Help your friend enjoy your time together by having smooth conversation, and by watching for the body language signals that tell you if they are uncomfortable.

And give your friend the freedom to be themselves by letting them know, with words and deeds, that you care about them, you believe in them, and you accept them just the way they are.

Making friends is an awesome, worthwhile, life changing goal. But the joy you get from having friends is only a tiny fraction of the joy you gain from being a great friend to others.





