Chapter 8: How to Support Your Friends




How do you help friends who need support?

Well, there’s no foolproof formula for instant success. But there are solid principles that can guide you.

They won’t tell you exactly what to do because each situation is different, but they’ll put you on the right track.

I’ve organized the principles into three categories.

First, I teach you how to respond in the moment. Learn the principles you need when you are face to face with a struggling friend who needs support.

Second, I teach you how to help your friend over the long term. Most serious problems are not solved in a single conversation, and you may need to support your friends over weeks or even months. That’s why I lay out the principles that you need to support friends with long term problems.

Third, I’ll teach you how to protect yourself from burnout, manipulation, and unhealthy boundaries when you are helping others. Lifeguards learn to protect themselves from being pulled under when rescuing a drowning swimmer, and you also need to learn how to protect yourself from harm when you are helping others.

Finally, I conclude with some encouragement.



In the Moment

Be Present

It’s Not About You

Make Specific, Tangible Offers

Offer Support, Not Solutions

Don’t Tell Them What to Feel

Don’t Minimize the Problem

Don’t Change the Subject

Don’t Panic





The Long Term

Follow Up

Don’t Insist

Educate Yourself

Suggest Professional Help



Take Care of Yourself

Let Your Friends Support You

Don’t Solve Their Problems for Them

Make Sure They Want to Get Better

Practice Self Care





Supporting Friends in the Moment




Be Present

Your job is not to give advice (although a little advice might be helpful.)

Your job is not to make them feel better (although your presence may comfort them.)

Your job is not to know the right thing to say (in fact, sometimes silence is the perfect response.)

Instead, your job is just to be with them. Give them a space to express their feelings. Give them a space to talk if they want. Give them the assurance that even though you can’t fix their problem, they don’t have to face it alone.

Henri Nouwen said it better than I ever could:

“When we honestly ask ourselves which person in our lives means the most to us, we often find that it is those who, instead of giving advice, solutions, or cures, have chosen rather to share our pain and touch our wounds with a warm and tender hand.

The friend who can be silent with us in a moment of despair or confusion, who can stay with us in an hour of grief and bereavement, who can tolerate not knowing, not curing, not healing and face with us the reality of our powerlessness, that is a friend who cares.”

It’s all right to offer advice now and then. But for the most part, you should say things like, “I don’t know how to fix it, but I’m here with you,” or “That sounds really hard, and I’m sorry.”

If you’re not sure what to say, try reflecting back to them what you’re hearing. For instance, you might say something like, “It sounds like the stress just keeps piling up and it feels overwhelming,” or “It sounds like you’re really frustrated with the way you’re being treated at work.”

You can also ask simple open-ended questions, such as, “So what are you going to do now?” or, “How are you holding up under all this stress?”

Remember, you’re not a counselor, and it’s not your job to lead your friend to new insights. Don’t ask leading questions or dig into their subconscious. Instead, just do your best to give them a safe space where they can process how they’re feeling.



It’s Not About You

When someone shares a problem with you, it’s often appropriate to share similar experiences from your own life.

For instance, if they are worried about failing a class, you might share about a time when you almost failed a class – either to empathize with them, or to encourage them that you survived and they will too.

However, there is a fine line between sharing an experience to help another person, and sharing an experience to put the spotlight on yourself.

It’s okay to tell a suffering friend that you know how painful breakups can be. It’s not okay to spend ten minutes complaining about your ex, or tell them, “I had that problem too and then I solved it,” and talk about how great your life is now.

Be particularly careful to avoid the “bigger fish” response. The term comes from a habit among fisherman who will interrupt anyone telling a story about catching a big fish in order to tell about the time they caught an even bigger fish.

Among fishing buddies, this is a bit irritating but not a big deal. But if your friend comes to you for support, it’s hurtful to respond, “That’s nothing! I’m the one who really has it rough – let me tell you about my problems…” Not only did you fail to give your friend support, but you also hurt their feelings by acting like their problem didn’t matter.

You also want to avoid reacting like their problem is the biggest thing in the world (otherwise known as the “your fish is gigantic and incredibly scary” response.) Their problem might be serious, but life goes on. Don’t act like their problem is the worst thing in the world, or that you have no idea how to handle it. That will just make them feel worse about the problem. No matter how you’re feeling about their problem, keep your focus on them.

Bottom line: don’t make it about you. Use stories from your own experience sparingly, and make sure to only tell stories to encourage the other person – then put the spotlight right back on them. And no matter how you feel about their problem, don’t let your emotions take center stage — again, keep the spotlight on them.



Make Specific, Tangible Offers

It’s good to say “I’m here for you” or “Let me know if you need anything,” but it’s not ideal.

Offers like this are vague – what exactly does it mean to be “here for someone?” These offers also put the onus on the other person to figure out what to ask you for, which can be a lot to ask of a suffering person.

Instead, make specific, tangible offers. Don’t say, “Wow, that sounds rough. Let me know if I can help.” Instead, say, “Wow, that sounds rough. Do you want to talk about it?”

Instead of saying, “Let me know if you need anything,” ask “Would it help if I bring you a meal this week?” or “Would you like to hang out later?”

If they say no to your specific offer, it’s okay to make one generic offer like, “Is there anything else I can do to help?” but start by making specific offers.

Note: when making your specific offers, be careful not to try to fix the other person’s problem, and be careful not to trivialize their problem.

For instance, I remember a time I was very sad because I was mourning the death of my cat. A friend of mine noticed I was sad and said, “Let me show you cute kitten photos – that will cheer you up!” Although she meant well, her words were hurtful because they implied that my problem was trivial and could be solved with a few cat photos.

Here’s some examples of good specific offers you can make:

Do you want to talk about it?

Do you want to get some coffee?

Do you want to go for a walk?

Do you want a hug?

Want to play some video games with me?

Can I cook a meal for you?

Do you want advice?

Do you want to tell me about the person you lost? [if they are in a breakup or lost a loved one]

Can I sit next to you?





Offer Support, Not Solutions

Like most people, your immediate response to someone’s problem might be trying to offer a solution.

And this is a natural response – after all, who doesn’t want to solve a friend’s problem?

Unfortunately, this response usually backfires. When a friend comes to you, they are normally looking for support, not solutions. They want to be able to talk about the issue; they want to receive encouragement and validation – they might even want a safe place to cry.

But when you immediately offer advice or try to fix the problem, you prevent your friend from finding the support they are looking for. Once they’ve had the opportunity to share their emotions with you, then they might be open to hearing your advice. But when they first open up to you, they need you to listen, not to fix it.

Honestly, your friend has probably already spent an awful lot of time thinking through their problem. While it’s possible that you’ve thought of a solution that hasn’t yet occurred to them, it’s unlikely.

So be humble when offering advice.

Ask them if they want to hear your advice before you start giving it, and if they don’t like your advice, drop it. They are the experts on their own problem, and if you insist on telling them what to do, you will just irritate them and make their situation worse.



Don’t Tell Them What to Feel

Everyone’s suffering is different.

Even if you’ve dealt with the exact same issue as your friend, the issue will affect you differently. So don’t tell your friend empty platitudes like, “The same thing happened to me, and so I know how you must be feeling.”

Instead, give them space to process their feelings. Ask gentle questions, listen attentively, and don’t rush them.

In the moment, your friend might not really know what they’re feeling. Have you ever thought you were angry, but really you were embarrassed? Or thought you were sad, but really you were lonely? Emotions are complicated. It can take time for someone to sort through their feelings and figure out what’s really going on. So don’t rush your friend as they work through that process.

And don’t tell them, “You must be angry,” or “You must be so miserable.” Instead, ask questions. “Did it make you angry when she said that?” is good, although it’s not great because it’s a leading question. “How did you feel when she said that?” is better.

Another option is to share how YOU would feel in that situation. For instance, you might say something like “Man, if my boyfriend cheated on me, I would be furious. How are you handling it?”

By sharing your own feelings, it can help your friend process their own feelings. They might realize, “Yeah, I feel furious too,” or “Actually, I don’t feel furious – I feel relieved. I guess I’m glad the relationship is over.”

Most importantly, you should never tell them to “get over it” or “pull yourself together.” As with a physical wound, emotional wounds take time to heal. An injured person can’t make a broken bone heal faster through willpower, and a suffering person can’t heal emotionally faster through willpower.

It takes time – don’t rush them.



Don’t Minimize the Problem

When a friend brings a serious problem to you, it may be tempting to minimize the problem so you don’t have to deal with it.

Your first impulse may be to say, “Oh, it’s not that bad,” or “Don’t get so emotional about it,” or even “This isn’t that big of a deal.”

However, this is usually the last thing that a struggling friend wants to hear. Even if it’s objectively not a big deal, it FEELS like a big deal to them (or else they wouldn’t have asked you for support.) Meet them where they’re at. If it feels like a big deal to them, treat it like a big deal.

You also need to avoid the temptation to minimize their problem by blaming them for it (“I’m sorry you’re stressed about your bad grade, but it’s your fault for not studying.”)

Sometimes people do cause their own problems, but even if the problem is 100% their fault, it doesn’t help for you to point that out. Your job is to be a supportive friend, not to assign blame.

So give them space to express their feelings. Help them explore why this feels like such a big deal to them. You may want to gently provide perspective – perhaps reminding them that even with this problem, there are still a lot of good things in their life, or encouraging them to see that the current problem is temporary.

But don’t tell them what they’re feeling is wrong, or that they just need to “get over it.” Accept that their problem is a big problem to them, and support them without trying to correct them.



Don’t Change the Subject

Do you get uncomfortable when someone brings up a serious problem?

It’s very difficult to respond when someone tells you that the cancer came back, or their parents are getting divorced, or they are failing their classes. A common response is to shift to a more lighthearted topic – usually after a brief, awkward pause.

But what if the person really needed to talk about their problem? What if they took a big leap of courage to tell you how they were really doing – and then you changed the topic as if nothing had happened?

Most of the time when someone brings up a problem with you, it’s because they want to talk about it. It’s deeply comforting to have someone care enough to listen to your problems, so you can help your friend just by listening.

I know it’s uncomfortable to listen to a problem when you can’t fix it, but trust me. You make a difference just by listening.

So as a rule of thumb – if someone wants to talk about a problem they’re having, make yourself available to listen. Ask them questions. Be curious and supportive. Don’t try to fix it, but let them know that you are on their side.

If they want to change the topic, let them. But if they’re not afraid to talk about their pain, you should be brave, too.



Don’t Panic

Let’s say you get sick, so you decide to visit the doctor.

As you explain your symptoms, the doctor looks more and more concerned, until she finally starts flailing her arms, running around the room and screaming “OH NO YOU HAVE PNEUMONIA I’M FREAKING OUT RIGHT NOW AAH!”

It’s a ridiculous image – because we expect that, no matter what’s wrong with us, the doctor is going to calmly help us get better.

And when your friend comes to you with a problem, they also expect you to be calm and help them get better. I’m not saying that you need to be an unemotional robot – it’s fine to get emotional, or even to cry with your friend.

But remember that your job is to support your friend, and sometimes that means that you need to put your own emotions to the side so you can be a good helper. There will be time later for you to process your feelings – but if you freak out when your friend needs you, then you can’t support them.

Again, your friend is the one having the problem, not you. If you are ever more emotional than your suffering friend, that’s a good sign that you should calm down and refocus on helping them.

We’ve finished Part 1: In the Moment. Our next pages are from Part 2: The Long Term.





Supporting a Friend Long Term




Follow Up

Big problems don’t go away overnight.

If you learn a friend is struggling with a significant problem, they’ll probably still be struggling down the road. Help them out by remembering to check in.

For instance, if your friend shares a struggle they’re having, it might be appropriate to text them the next day to say “Hey, I’m thinking of you and I’m behind you 100%” or call them a few days later to invite them to coffee.

If you know a friend is having a hard time in general (maybe they are struggling with depression or recovering from a breakup), be deliberate to occasionally ask them how they are doing – and stick around to hear the real answer. People will often withdraw from social interaction when they are depressed, so reach out to them if you haven’t seen them for a while.

Remember, your friend might be in so much pain that they don’t want to talk about their problem. I know that when I am going through a breakup, the last thing I want to do is talk about it – the pain is still too raw.

If they don’t want to talk about it, provide them with some positive interactions that aren’t focused around their problem. Invite them to hang out with you at the mall, or see a movie together, or go for a run. Basically, invite them to remember the good parts of life, and give them a respite from brooding over their loss.

It’s possible they won’t want to do any of these things – sometimes when you are suffering, you can’t enjoy normal activities. But even if they say no, it helps to know that you cared enough to ask.

It makes a huge difference to have a friend care enough to check in. Don’t let your friend drop off the radar. If you know they’re struggling, follow up on a regular basis and make sure they know you care about them. Invite them to coffee. Let them know you care. Give them a call.

They’ll be glad you did.



Don’t Insist

Sometimes, the best thing you can do is back off.

Maybe the other person doesn’t really want to talk about their problem, or they don’t feel close enough to you to open up – or maybe they’re already getting great support from someone else.

If you insist on helping, you can easily make their situation worse. Now they have to deal with their problem AND an annoying wannabe helper.

If you’re a guy, you want to be especially careful here. It’s common for guys to convince themselves that girls need their help (especially when they’re attracted to her), and insisting that a girl accept your help is a sure way to annoy her. If she needs your help, she’ll ask you for it. If you cared about her, you would respect her no instead of looking for an opportunity to show off.

But whatever the gender of the person you’re helping — offer your support, and then if they choose not to take it, let it go.

I usually try to ask twice – for instance, “It looks like you’re feeling down. Do you want to talk about it?”

If they say no, I might add, “Are you sure? I’m here for you if you need me.” If they turn me down again, then I let it go and change the topic.

Even if they do choose to talk about it, don’t assume they want you to solve their problem. Several months ago, I had a friend who complained to me about a problem she was having. I suggested she do something to solve her problem, and when she decided she didn’t like my idea, I went ahead and did it for her.

At the time, I thought I was being helpful. But when I told her what I had done, she was very upset. She explained that she was responsible for solving the problem, not me, and because I had done it for her, it communicated that I didn’t trust her to take care of herself. Needless to say, this caused her to feel very hurt and disrespected.

Don’t make the same mistake as me – if you offer someone a solution and they don’t take it, don’t insist on it.

If you offer support and they turn you down, let it go. Let the suffering person be in charge.



Educate Yourself

It’s hard to help when you don’t understand what they’re dealing with. So do some homework on your friend’s struggles.

If they have a diagnosed mental health condition (like depression or anorexia), find a book or some reputable websites that talk about those conditions.

Another option is organizations that provide support. To Write Love on Her Arms is a great organization that provides advice and encouragement for many common struggles.

Of course, your friend can also educate you – they are the expert on their own struggle. They might not want to talk about their struggle, but usually people are happy to open up about how their problems affect them.

If you do talk to your friend about their struggles, remember to suspend judgment. It might not make sense to you why a breakup is so painful or why depression makes it so hard to get out of the bed in the morning. But your friend has no reason to lie to you, so if they’re telling you something about their situation, it’s probably accurate.

Again, your friend is the expert on their own struggle. Don’t disagree with them about their experiences, or invalidate their feelings.

Instead, be a curious student. Ask questions and let them know you want to learn everything you can in order to help them better. The more you know, the more you can help.



Suggest Professional Help You wouldn’t try to set a friend’s broken leg just because you’ve watched some Grey’s Anatomy.

Similarly, a few self-help books or a psychology class do not make you a therapist. So don’t act like one! If you think your friend needs professional help, please refer them to a counselor.

It might be a good idea for your friend to see a counselor if:

They are very unhappy.

They can’t enjoy normal things in life.

Their performance in work or school is suffering.

They’re using substances (like drugs or alcohol) to cope with the problem.

They are in an unhealthy or abusive relationship.

The problem has persisted for a long time and hasn’t gotten better.



Of course, if you have any problems that fit these descriptions, please see a counselor too!

Most importantly: if your friend is talking about hurting themselves or someone else, or if they match any of the other warning signs of suicide, then it is very important that you get them to see a counselor as soon as possible. If you ever think they may be in immediate danger of suicide, you should call 911 (or whatever your local emergency number is.) Although counselors can seem expensive, most health insurance covers counseling, and many colleges have counseling centers that are free to students. In addition, some counselors offer “sliding scale” fees where people with lower incomes pay lower rates. Money should never be an obstacle to getting counseling.

Not sure how to find a therapist? Psychology Today and Good Therapy have lists of therapists that you can look through to find a good match. You can also find online therapist at Breakthrough (although this is not available in all areas.) Many therapists will do a free phone consultation, so a good strategy is to research a few therapists that seem good, give each of them a call, and then book a session with the one that seems like the best fit.

If you start seeing a therapist and they don’t actually end up being a good fit, that’s okay – just find someone else! You’ll know it’s a good idea to look for a new therapist if you really don’t get along with your therapist at all in the first session, or if you don’t see any progress by the fourth session.

There’s no such thing as a perfect therapist, but most therapists are pretty good. So if you or your friend is really struggling, reach out to a therapist today.

That’s all for Part 2: The Long Term. Next up is Part 3: Take Care of Yourself





Taking Care of Yourself




Let Your Friends Support You

In a healthy friendship, both people give, and both people receive.

At times one person might be doing most of the giving or receiving, but over time, it should average out.

Or to put it another way: In a normal healthy friendship, sometimes you support your friend, and sometimes your friend supports you. If you are always supporting your friend and they never support you (or vice versa), that should raise a red flag.

Now, sometimes doing 100% of the giving is the right thing to do – for instance, maybe your friend is in a crisis and they can’t give back yet.

But usually, if you are doing all of the giving, then it signifies a problem. This is especially true if the one-sided giving lasts for a long period of time.

In that case, I would step back and take stock of the relationship. Is it possible that the other person is taking advantage of you?

It’s likely you are being taken advantage of if you feel like the other person guilts you into giving, or if the other person never does any work to improve their own situation.

It’s also possible that you might be more comfortable in the giving role, and you are resistant to receiving. This is especially likely if you are in the giving role in almost all of your close relationships.

You might wonder why someone would feel more comfortable in the giving role (after all, it’s more work.) Simple: when you are the giver, you are the one with the power. You don’t have to be dependent or vulnerable; instead, the other person is dependent on you.

I used to be like that.

Early in life, I thought, “I don’t know if people will want me, but if I can make them need me, then they will stick around.” So I worked to make myself indispensable to others. I offered support, encouragement, advice – and I never asked for anything in return.

The problem? The resulting relationships were shallow and unfulfilling.

I knew a lot about the other person, but they didn’t know much about me. They could always call me when they needed a friend, but when I was having a hard time I suffered through it alone.

Eventually, I realized that I was being foolish, and I started opening up to my friends.

I started showing them the real me, started sharing my struggles, my dreams, my quirks. And you know what? They accepted me just as I was. I didn’t need to be needed to be wanted.

And neither do you. So if you find that your relationships are mostly one-way, start sharing the real you with your friends. I think you’ll be glad you did.



Don’t Solve Others’ Problems for Them

It’s tempting to step in and solve your friends’ problems for them.

But if you do something that your friend should do themselves, then it creates dependency and makes it easy for them to take advantage of you.

During my college years, a classmate didn’t do his part of a group project. Instead of telling the teacher, I just did his work for him.

As you might guess, during the next project his work was once again incomplete, and I once again felt the need to step in and do his job as well as my own. Once I confronted him and told him that I would no longer cover for him, his work magically improved.

Of course, there is a balance here. Sometimes taking some responsibilities off a friend’s plate can provide them with a big boost.

A few years ago, I was moving and felt very stressed about getting everything done. My roommate took the initiative to disassemble my desk and prepare it for moving (a major project that would have taken me a lot of time.) His help really reduced my stress levels and made me feel cared for and supported.

So I’m not saying that you should never do something that your friend can do for themselves. Instead, I’m warning you to look for patterns.

If you start to feel obligated to do something for your friend that they should normally do for themselves, or if they expect you to do things for them while they laze about, that’s a sign that you probably need to rethink how you support that friend. If you’re not sure, try saying, “No,” sometimes and see what happens.

In addition, be careful to maintain good emotional boundaries. You need to be able to live your life even if your friend is struggling. If you can’t feel happy as long as your friend is struggling, or if you feel personally responsible for your friend’s recovery, it’s likely your boundaries have collapsed.

Remember, you are not responsible for your friend. Your friend is responsible for themselves.

Decide what is appropriate for you to give, and trust your friend to do the rest.





Make Sure Your Friend Wants to Get Better

I had a friend in college who would frequently message me right before I was going to go to bed and share a problem that she wanted to talk about. I stayed up late talking with this girl numerous times, sacrificing my sleep (and sometimes, my grades!) to give her encouragement and support.

However, my friend:

Would never see a counselor, despite my requests.

Would always wait until late at night to bring her problems to me – she would never discuss them during the day even when I gave her the opportunity.

Would never do anything to improve her situation. (For instance, she would spend hours and hours complaining to me about her boyfriend, but she refused to break up with him or ask him to improve his behavior.)



Ultimately, I realized that she didn’t really want to get better – part of her that wanted the “victim” identity, and she liked the power that her pain gave her over other people. For instance, I think she may have waited until late at night to talk to me because she felt important when I sacrificed my sleep for her.

She wasn’t faking it, exactly – a lot of bad things happened to her, and she was genuinely unhappy. But she did not want to get better, and I couldn’t force her to get better against her will.

Ultimately the sacrifices I made to support and encourage her were wasted. All of my efforts only served to pull me down, not to bring her up.

So what does this mean for you? Basically – be careful when it seems like the other person is not an active participant in their recovery. If they expect you to sacrifice for them but they won’t do basic things to improve their own situation, something is wrong and you need to protect yourself.

You don’t need to cut ties or do anything drastic, but if there is strong evidence they don’t want to get better, then it might be reasonable for you to require them to invest in their recovery before you will make more sacrifices for them.

For instance, I should have told her, “I know you are feeling bad tonight, but I think what you really need right now is to talk to a counselor, not to talk to me. Once you schedule an appointment with a counselor, I’ll be happy to talk with you about your problems again.”

Of course, it can sometimes be hard to tell if someone is trying to get better, because sometimes things that seem really easy (like scheduling an appointment with a counselor) can be really hard for someone who is struggling with depression or another mental health issue. Don’t give up on a friend just because they’re not doing everything you think they should be doing. It’s always better to err on the side of generosity.

But if over time you see a pattern of the person not working to get better, then it may be time to put some boundaries in place. Not only will this protect you from burnout, but it may also show the other person that they are caught in a self-destructive pattern.



Practice Self Care

If you go too long without sleeping or eating, you’ll collapse.

It doesn’t matter how strong you are – your body has physical limits, and when you reach them you will shut down.

Similarly, if you go too long without taking care of yourself emotionally, you will burn out or melt down. It doesn’t matter if you are Mr. Rogers or Mother Teresa – even the most loving people in the world can’t take care of others unless they take care of themselves, too.

The bottom line: If you want to take care of other people, you need to take care of yourself.

Therapists call this idea “self-care” but you can call it whatever you want. Just make sure you do it!

To help you figure out if you need better self-care, I’ve written up some questions you should ask yourself. Take some time to think through these questions now.

Physical

Are you getting enough sleep?

Are you eating three meals a day?

Are you able to exercise?



Relational

Do you have people you talk to about your problems?

Do you spend time with people just to have fun, not so you can support them?

Are you able to say “No” to your friends when you need to?



Balance

Do you have time to do the things you enjoy (hobbies, etc.?)

Can you be happy even when you know your friend is still struggling?

Are you able to take care of your personal responsibilities? (Schoolwork, your job, etc.?)

Are you able to pursue personal goals and dreams that are important to you?



If you answer “No” to any of these questions, it may be a sign that you should prioritize self-care.

If you answer “No” to a lot of these questions, you need to take better care of yourself or you will burn out.

Remember, nobody needs you to be a superhero. It’s wonderful that you are supporting your friend, and sometimes it can feel like you need to burn yourself out to be a true friend.

But you can’t help anyone if you burn out — and if you don’t take care of yourself, you will burn out. Remember that your life matters too, and your friend wants you to be happy even if they are not.





