Chapter 9: Dating




Dating is a big deal.

Romantic comedies and love songs tell us that all our problems will be solved if we just find the one right person. Online dating is a multi-billion dollar industry. And everything from prom dances to Valentine’s Day seems to exist to extol the virtues of dating.

And the truth is, dating can be wonderful. Having a special someone to share your experiences with makes life sweeter and having someone who knows you deeply can help you understand yourself better too.

But dating can also be very destructive.

It’s easy to develop an unhealthy dependency on the person you are dating, or for manipulation and disrespect to poison the affection that you share.

Fortunately, a little knowledge goes a long way in avoiding these problems. There are bedrock principles that will help you make sure your dating relationships are healthy, positive, and life-giving for both you and your partner.

Since I value lasting, intimate relationships, I discuss more than just how to get a girl or guy’s attention. This section will guide you all the way from your first meeting to a long-term relationship, and will show you the pitfalls to avoid along the way.

And since this is a social skills guide after all, I’ll also address the social skills of dating. How to ask someone out, what to do on that first date – I’ll cover it all.

So what are you waiting for? Dive in!

Healthy Relationships Defined



What is a healthy relationship, and why is it important?

How to Have a Healthy Relationship



How do you make sure that your relationship is healthy, positive and fulfilling?

Beginning a Romance



How do you start a romance on the right foot? Where do you go to meet your next partner?

From Friendship to First Kiss



How do you move from friendship to romance? How do you let someone know you like them?

Building a Relationship Worth Having



Once you’ve started a relationship, how do you get closer to your partner? How do you make your relationship stays healthy?

Slow and Steady Wins Their Heart



How do time and commitment play into your relationship?

Slow and Steady Wins Their Heart, Part 2



How do you grow in physical and emotional intimacy, without damaging the relationship?





Healthy Relationships Defined




Ok. Let’s get philosophical for a second.

I know you probably want to jump ahead to the more “practical” portion of this section. You want to know how to ask someone out, what to do on a date – and trust me, we’ll get there.

But those skills are useless if you don’t know how to have a healthy relationship. In fact, they can be worse than useless, because being in an unhealthy relationship is often much worse than being single.

So let’s take the time to go over some foundational principles of healthy relationships (because remember, the foundation is everything.)

But before I start, one important note.

There’s a big difference between a relationship that is unhealthy and a relationship that is abusive. Good-hearted, well-intentioned people can easily slip into relationships that are unhealthy, and although sometimes the right response to an unhealthy relationship is to end it, often a little work can make those relationships healthy again.

In contrast, if you are in an abusive relationship, you need to get out and you need to get help. And if someone you know might be in an abusive relationship, you need to tell someone and get help for them.

Take a minute and read through the warning signs of abuse right now. Seriously, I’ll wait.

Even if you will never be in an abusive relationship, knowing the signs will help you recognize when a friend is at risk of being abused. And if you recognize those signs in your relationship or a friend’s relationship, you should call a domestic abuse hotline and tell someone what’s going on.

Healthy Relationships: A Love Story

Still with me? Cool.

Let’s move on to how to make sure your relationship is healthy. But what do I mean by a healthy relationship?

Well, let me tell you a story.

My senior year of college, I dated a girl named Sam, who is a wonderful young woman with a loving soul and an incredible gift for art.

One evening, Sam asked me “Daniel, what is your goal for our relationship?”

I replied, “Sam, I want the people who know you and love you the best to be able to say ‘We are so glad that Daniel dated Sam, because he made her really happy, and because he helped her become more the person that she was supposed to be.’”

My relationship with Sam is now over, but I still take a great deal of joy in the knowledge that I did my best to live out that answer. I accepted Sam for who she was, brought joy to her life, and encouraged her to grow more into the person she was supposed to be.

And you know what? Sam accepted me for who I was, brought joy to my life, and encouraged me to grow more into the person I was supposed to be.

That is a healthy relationship in a nutshell. It was a relationship in which we accepted and cherished each other, where we encouraged each other to grow, and where we were more focused on giving to each other than receiving from each other.

It was also a healthy relationship because of what we did not do. We didn’t disrespect or manipulate each other. We didn’t drop everything else in our life to focus solely on each other. We didn’t pressure each other to change (we encouraged each other to grow, but we always accepted each other for who we were, not for who we might be in the future.) And we didn’t rush things – we let the relationship grow at a natural, healthy pace.

Committing to Healthy Relationships

My relationship with Sam was a wonderful part of my life, and I want you to have wonderful, healthy relationships too.

But I’ll be honest. Healthy dating relationships take work. They require that you dedicate yourself to your partner’s well-being and happiness, and that you swallow your pride and your selfishness. They require a willingness to make short-term sacrifices so that you can have lasting joy.

They require a commitment, in short. And commitments are hard.

But when you have experienced the joy of a truly healthy relationship, you won’t ever want to settle for anything less. I hope that when you enter your next relationship, you commit to making it a healthy one – both for your sake, and the sake of your partner.

Of course, even if you are fully committed to a healthy relationship, wanting a healthy relationship is not the same as knowing how to get there. Fortunately, the next lesson explains in detail “How to Have a Healthy Relationship” and contains all of the practical information you need to know.





How to Have a Healthy Relationship




If you’ve read the previous lesson, you hopefully understand why healthy relationships are important.

Now, it’s time to learn the details of what makes a relationship healthy (or unhealthy.)

Because every relationship is different, there’s no way to make an exhaustive list of all the ways relationships could be healthy or unhealthy. But if you focus on the most important things, you will avoid the vast majority of problems.

With that in mind, I’ve listed the three major principles that need to be true for any relationship to be healthy. Learn these three principles, and you’ll know how to have a healthy, fulfilling romance.

Ready? Let’s dive in.

Freedom and Acceptance

In a healthy relationship, both partners feel accepted, and have the freedom to be themselves.

That means that both partners should be able to relax and be themselves, without worrying that the other partner will judge them for their thoughts or actions. You should never need to hide part of yourself to be accepted by your partner.

Of course, this doesn’t mean that your partner has to approve of everything that you do. If you’re making a bad decision, I hope your partner speaks up to let you know!

But you shouldn’t feel that you have to agree with their opinions for them to accept you, and you shouldn’t feel like you need your partner’s permission to make your own decisions about your life.

Even when you disagree, you should still respect each other’s opinions. If your partner belittles your opinions and beliefs, or doesn’t treat you like an equal, that’s a serious sign of an unhealthy relationship.

In addition, you should both feel that you have the freedom to talk about the relationship, and to bring up problems that you see. If my partner does something that upsets me, I should be able to (gently) let her know.

And if she sees a problem in our relationship, she should be able to let me know so we can find a solution. Both partners are equal members of the relationship, so they should have equal say about what happens in the relationship.





Meaningful Lives Outside the Relationship

In a healthy relationship, both partners have fulfilling lives outside of their dating relationship and maintain close friendships with people other than their dating partner. In addition, both partners support each other to pursue those important parts of life that are outside of the dating relationship.

It’s not uncommon for people to let everything else in their life slide when they start a new relationship. They stop spending time with friends or pursuing their goals because the new relationship quickly takes up all of their time.

This is unhealthy.

A dating relationship should be a significant part of your life, but it’s only part of your life.

You should still have other close relationships, as well as hobbies that you enjoy and life goals that you pursue. Your relationship shouldn’t be the only thing you spend your free time on, nor should it be the only important thing in your life.

In addition, your partner should support you in your outside relationships, hobbies, and goals. Your partner should encourage you to get that degree, or to sign up for that bowling league, or to spend some time with that friend that you haven’t seen in a while.

And you should encourage your partner in the same way – even if that means they spent less time with you. If it’s important to them, it should be important to you.

Shared Selflessness

In a healthy relationship, both partners make it their goal for their partner to be happy and fulfilled, not to have their partner make them happy and fulfilled.

This is the most important point. So listen carefully, and please make sure you understand what I’m saying.

If you are more concerned with what your partner can do for you than with what you can do for your partner, then you should not be dating them.

And if they are more concerned with what you can do for them than with what they can do for you, then they should not be dating you.

It’s natural to think about the good things our partner can do for us – they give us someone to talk to, alleviate our loneliness, and feel really nice to kiss or hold. And it’s ok to want those things, and to enjoy them.

But your goal in your relationship should not be to get everything you can from your partner. It should be to give everything you can to your partner, because after all, giving is what love is all about.

Of course, your partner should also have this motive.

If you give everything you can to your partner, but your partner rarely gives to you, then they are taking advantage of you (and you shouldn’t be dating them.) Stay away from the trap of “If only I gave more/became a better partner, maybe my partner would start to give to me.”

The Beauty of Interdependence

But hopefully, you do care about your partner, and they do care about you. And when that is true, something incredible happens.

You can stop worrying so much about yourself, and instead focus on meeting their needs. And they can stop worrying so much about themselves, and instead focus on meeting your needs. You trust your partner to take care of you, and they trust you to take care of them.

There is a beautiful interdependence that is created, where the two of you can rest in each other’s presence and know that you are safe and loved and accepted. You can trust that you don’t have to have it all together, because your partner has your back, and loves you even when you make mistakes.

One day, you might be presented with the opportunity to settle for a relationship that is unhealthy and superficial. Don’t do it.

The beauty and joy of a healthy, interdependent relationship is an experience like none other, and it’s worth the wait. Don’t cheat yourself by settling for something less.

Of course, you can’t get to that point of interdependence without first starting the relationship.





Beginning a Romance




Ok. You’ve read through the explanation of a healthy relationship, and you’re excited to experience a great relationship with that special someone.

So… now what?

With a few exceptions, your perfect partner is not going to drop from the sky into your waiting arms. You need to meet them first, and then get to know them, and then take the plunge of admitting your feelings and entering the strange and wonderful world of more-than-friends.

But with a little guidance, that process can be exciting and joyful, instead of confusing and scary. Let’s walk through each of the steps in turn.

Meeting Your Partner

Forget singles events and awkwardly trying to pick up people at bars.

You should meet potential romantic partners in the exact same way that you would meet new friends. This flies against a lot of conventional wisdom, I know.

But hear me out – there is an important reason why I believe this is true.

When you go to an event for the express purpose of meeting a romantic partner, you’re much more likely to link up with someone who is a bad fit for you. Because the pressure is on, you are probably going to focus on making a good impression, instead of putting your focus on getting to know the people you meet.

Authenticity and vulnerability (the building blocks of real connection and intimacy) go out the window, and superficial attractiveness and charm take the spotlight.

The result? You zero in on the folks who are the most superficially attractive – not the people who will be the best long-term partner for you.

The solution? Take the time to get to know that attractive guy/girl as a person before you start thinking about them as a potential romantic partner.

True Attraction

It’s fine to be initially attracted to someone. But take a step back and remind yourself that you don’t really know them yet. Just like there is true fear and physical fear, there is true attraction and physical attraction.

You want to wait for true attraction – which is the sweet moment where you realize you like the other person for who they are, not for what they can offer you. And that true attraction takes time to build.

And when I say it “takes time to build,” I’m referring to days or weeks, not minutes. I know that seems dull and unromantic (what happened to love at first sight?) But remember that the foundation is everything, and it takes time to make a good foundation for your relationship.

If you take the time to really get to know the other person, you will build your romance on a rock-solid foundation of true attraction. Rush in, and your relationship will balance precariously on the shaky foundation of physical attraction.

Application

Here’s how you put this in action.

First, check your motives. Finding a dating partner should not be your primary motive for meeting new people. It’s fine to have that be part of your motives, but it shouldn’t be your number one.

The primary motive of “find a date” means that you’re missing out on the chance to make good friendships with people that don’t ping your “possible date” radar. Plus (like I explain above), when your primary motive is finding a date, it’s actually much harder for you to find a good dating partner.

So take the time to think through your motives. If you find that your primary motive is in fact finding a dating partner, don’t despair. Just spend some time speaking truth to yourself, and remind yourself of the reasons for getting to know people as people, instead of as potential dates.

Second, shake up your routine. If you’re not going to dating-focused events, you need another way to meet people. If you keep going to the same events or spending time with the same groups, your opportunities to meet new people will be very limited.

So try new things. Sign up for a class in a topic that interests you. Join a volunteer group. Make a rule that you’ll try one new thing every week, or make a list of new groups to check out.

Of course, this advice will also help you with life in general. Shaking up your routine is a surefire way to make new friends, enrich your life, and discover new passions. But it’s also extremely applicable to finding a dating partner – every new thing you try is another opportunity to meet that special someone.

Third, pursue deep connections. Remember when I said you want to get to know that attractive guy/girl as a person before you start dreaming about them as your boyfriend/girlfriend? Well, that requires that you make a point of getting to know people.

So pursue deep connections with people. Try to push past superficial conversations about the weather or the latest movie and try to learn the story of the people you are talking with. Find out what makes them unique; ask them about their passions and their dreams – and share your story with them in response.

Of course, making deep connections takes time, and it takes practice. Some people won’t be open to connecting, and that’s fine. You should always be ready to steer the conversation away from personal topics if you sense the other person becoming uncomfortable, and it’s often wise to take gradual steps towards a deep connection when you’re not sure if the other person will be comfortable.

But give people the opportunity to connect – don’t assume they will say no. Ask questions that show your genuine interest in the other person. Share parts of your own story to let the other person know that sharing is ok.

If the other person sees that you genuinely want to get to know them, they almost always will respond positively to your attempts to connect. Most people really want to connect with others – they just want someone else to make the first move.

So make a point of connecting with everyone you can. I think if you do, you’ll find your life blessed with new friends, good conversations, and perhaps (one day soon) a new special someone.

Moving Beyond Friendship

Ok. Let’s say you resisted short-sighted “find a date at all costs” motives, you shook up your routine, and you’re making a genuine effort to connect with the new people you’ve met.

And let’s say that one of those new people has connected with you in a special way, and after getting to know him/her as a person, you’re ready to enter the strange and beautiful world of more-than-friends.

Now what?

Well, that’s what we’ll tackle next, in a lesson I call “From Friendship to First Kiss.”





From Friendship to First Kiss




Ok. Let’s say you’ve spent the time to get to know this new person. You enjoy spending time with them, you feel close to them, and they seem to enjoy spending time with you too.

Plus, you’ve sorted through your emotions and you feel that true attraction is starting to build – this is more than a crush. And you’ve taken a look at how the two of you interact to make sure you don’t see any warning signs of an unhealthy relationship.

You’re ready to move the relationship into dating territory, in other words.

But how do you do it?

Well, there’s no one right way. Relationships are different because people are different, so your love story will be different than the couple down the road.

But in general, there’s three simple steps that you can follow.

First, gauge their interest.

Second, signal your interest.

Third, declare your interest.

Ready? Let’s tackle each in turn.

Gauge Their Interest

This one can be tough.

People will often treat a good friend and a romantic interest in a very similar way, so it’s easy to get a false positive.

It IS possible to tell when someone is romantically interested in you, but it’s hard, and it requires a lot of practice. You need to experience several people interacting with you as a friend and also several people interacting with you as a romantic interest before you can reliably tell the difference between the two.

Because of this, the best way to tell if someone is interested in you is to compare the way they interact with you with the way they interact with others of your gender.

If someone is very physically affectionate with you, but they’re also very physically affectionate with their other close friends, that’s not a signal that they’re interested in you. If someone spends lots of time with you one-on-one, and they rarely hang out with other friends one-on-one, that’s a much more positive signal.



Signal Your Interest

If you have a reasonable suspicion the person is interested in you, it’s time to let them know that you are interested too.

However, you shouldn’t force them into a decision. At this stage, you want to give them the chance to get used to the thought of dating you, without the pressure of a commitment.

In other words, ask them on a date, but don’t ask them to be your boyfriend/girlfriend.

Now, if you followed the advice in the guide, you’ve already spent some time with this person and gotten to know them. So if you ask them to spend some more time together, you’re not sending a clear signal of interest.

Instead, invite them to something that feels like a traditional date – dinner and a movie, a school dance, etc.

Put some effort into making it feel romantic, and feel free to be more flirty, but don’t go overboard. You want to be the same person they got to know pre-dating, so if you act artificially romantic, it will make them uncomfortable.

Mostly, just relax and enjoy the evening. Your date is an opportunity to get a hint of what a relationship would be like, so the goal is not to woo your partner but to give the two of you a chance to consider the idea of more-than-friends.

They might ask if it’s a date, in which case you should be honest and say yes. The point is not to be coy about your interest but rather to share your interest in a way that doesn’t force them to immediately decide if they are interested in you.

Declare Your Interest

After you go on a date (or two) and all goes well, it’s time to share the way you feel.

This doesn’t have to be an elaborate affair. Just pick a time when you’re both relaxed, find a quiet place, and speak from the heart. Don’t worry about flowery language or being romantic – just be honest.

It’s ok to share your feelings in a creative way. For instance, if the thought of sharing your feelings out loud terrifies you, perhaps you could write them a letter (of course, make sure you’re there when they read it!)

When you’ve shared how you feel, give them some space to share how they feel. It’s possible that they’re not sure yet, or they need more time to get to know you. So be willing to talk through their feelings with them, and be willing to wait for an answer if they’re not ready yet.





A Brief Note on Rejection

It’s also possible that they don’t share your feelings.

Usually you would have found this out before you explicitly shared your feelings, but sometimes you have to put all your cards on the table before you learn how someone really feels.

If that’s the case, it’s going to suck. It’s hard to tell someone you like them, and find that they don’t like you back (at least, not romantically.) So you’re going to have to deal with some pain, and it’s important to acknowledge that pain and not bottle it up or ignore it.

But it will be ok.

You don’t need to date someone to be happy. And although you felt a special connection with this person, you will find that special connection with someone else in the future.

And in the meantime, you can have a wonderful friendship with this person that you’ve grown fond of. Instead of being angry that you can’t have a romance with that person, be grateful for the friendship that you can enjoy.

It will take some work to retrain your heart, but it can be done.

(Of course, this advice applies more to relationships that never really get off the ground rather than to breakups of committed relationships. Once you and your partner have become boyfriend and girlfriend with someone, it is much harder—although still possible—to return to a state of close friendship. But we’ll discuss breakups later)

More-Than-Friends

I needed to address rejection because it can happen, and you need to be prepared for it.

But although you need to prepare for it, it’s probably not likely. If they don’t share your feelings, you probably would have figured that out when attempting to gauge their interest, or they would have let you know when you invited them on that first date.

So most likely, when you take the plunge and admit your affection, you will find that your partner returns that affection.

In that case, congratulations! The start of a relationship is an incredible experience, and a special, wonderful time of your life is just beginning.





Building a Relationship Worth Having




Ok. You’ve found that special someone, expressed your interest, and got the “Yes!”

Now, it’s time to enjoy the wonderful process of getting to know your new partner and growing deeper in intimacy, affection, and love.

However, there’s a right way and a wrong way of doing this.

The wrong way (that many couples fall into), is to rush into the relationship full throttle. You may have been cautious when gauging the other person’s interest, but now that the relationship is official, any thought of brakes go out the window.

You share your deepest, darkest secrets with them. You let yourself get so emotionally attached that a breakup would devastate you. And you remove all limits from your physical affection – all before the relationship is two weeks old!

The Dangers of Full Throttle Intimacy

There’s a reason I call this the “wrong way” of going about relationships. Your relationship needs time to grow if you want it to be healthy.

Think back to your last Thanksgiving dinner.

The turkey has to stay in the oven for hours before it’s ready, and there’s no way to shortcut the process.

If you crank the oven temperature up to 1000 degrees, you’re not going to get a delicious turkey in five minutes – you’re going to light the turkey on fire (and possibly burn your house down.)

This same principle works in relationships.

It takes time for true intimacy to build.

It takes time for someone to truly earn your trust.

It takes time for two people to learn to love each other well.

And if you’re not willing to give it that time, you run the risk of having a relationship that ends up like our scorched Thanksgiving turkey. You don’t want that – and what’s more, you don’t want to inflict that on your partner.

The “Slow and Steady” Square

Of course, you don’t want to go too fast – but you also don’t want to stand still. So how do you know that your relationship is growing at a healthy pace?

A very handy rule of thumb is something I call the “Slow and Steady” Square

In a square, there are four equal sides. If every side increases by the same amount, then each side is still equal and you still have a square.

If some sides increase but others do not, then you no longer have a square.

For the “Slow and Steady” Square, think of the four sides of the square as Time, Commitment, Physical Intimacy, and Emotional Intimacy. You want each of those four sides to go up at more-or-less the same rate, so that you keep a square.

In other words, as you spend time with your partner, you want commitment, physical intimacy, and emotional intimacy to increase at similar rates. And, you want a significant amount of time to elapse before you reach significant levels of commitment, physical intimacy, or emotional intimacy.

If some of those four aspects increases significantly faster (or slower) than the others, don’t freak out. Just take deliberate action to bring all four back into balance.

In other words, if one side is growing too fast, slow it down. If it’s growing too slow, speed it up. Simple, right?

“Slow and Steady” in Practice

I’ll admit, this is not a perfect rule.

In a real relationship these four sides will never move at exactly the same speed.

But that’s ok. Your goal is to keep your relationship more-or-less in balance, not to perfectly adhere to the square.

Basically, use the square as a check-up tool. Every now and then, take some time to think through where your relationship falls on the square.

If you’re finding that some of the sides are increasing much faster or slower than the others, then make deliberate decisions to bring them more in balance.

For instance, if you find that your emotional intimacy does not seem to be increasing, maybe you and your partner can try having more conversations about personal topics.

Or, if you find that physical intimacy seems to be increasing way faster than everything else, make an agreement with your partner that you’ll be more hands-off for the time being. It’s not that physical intimacy is wrong – you just don’t want to get there too soon.

Make sense?

This is a lot to digest, so it’s ok if it’s still a little fuzzy right now. In the next section, I’ll explain in detail what I mean by each of the four sides, and how to tell if a side is increasing too fast or too slow. With that advice under your belt, you’ll be fully equipped to apply the “Slow and Steady” squares





Slow and Steady...




Ok. You want your relationship to grow at a healthy rate. And you (mostly) get the idea of the “Slow and Steady” square – it makes sense that time, commitment, physical intimacy and emotional intimacy should go up at the same rate.

But you’re probably still left with a lot of questions.

How do you actually figure out how fast those four sides are going up, relative to each other?

How much time do you need before the commitment of boyfriend and girlfriend? How much emotional intimacy do you need before that first kiss?

And what do I mean by all these terms anyway?

Fortunately, the answers to those questions are what we’ll address next as we unpack each of the “sides” in turn. In this section, we’ll tackle time and commitment, and in part two, we’ll discuss emotional and physical and intimacy.

Time

This is the easiest concept to explain, but can be the hardest one to apply. As we’ve already discussed, relationships need time to grow in a healthy way.

The problem is, how much time?

How soon before your first kiss? How soon before you can share that big secret with them?

There’s obviously no one right answer for this. It might be ok for one person to have their first kiss on their first date, whereas someone else might choose to wait until their wedding day for their first kiss.

But if you’re committed to asking the question of “Are we going too fast?” you will often find the right answer for you. Just trust your gut.

Or to be more direct, if you feel that you might be going too fast, you probably are.

Slow down.

My friend Scott unintentionally gave me some of the best relationship advice I’ve ever received. We were baking cookies and he said “I always like to check them a few minutes before they’re done, just in case. You can always cook them more, but you can never uncook something.”

You can’t “uncook” a relationship.

But if you take things slow, it’s easy to take the brakes off once a little time has passed and you’re sure that you’re ready for that next step.

So if you’re not sure, slow down.

It’s ok to just enjoy the stage of the relationship that you’re in. You don’t have to zoom to the next level of intimacy right away.

Commitment

Commitment is the side of the relationship that signals “We’re in this for the long haul.”

Formal relationship stages are a big part of commitment. Becoming boyfriend and girlfriend, becoming engaged, getting married, etc., are all stages of commitment.

But sometimes commitment takes a more subtle form.

Moving to a different state to be with the person you’re dating is a big commitment. Signing up for couple’s counseling is a sign of commitment. So is choosing to forgive instead of walking out when you’ve been hurt.

Take a look at all the ways you are committed to someone – not just what your Facebook relationship status says.

Also, make sure that your commitment grows in pace with everything else. If you’re still in the early stages of the relationship with someone, you shouldn’t be making long-term commitments because you don’t yet know if you’re going to be together long-term.

And if you’ve been with someone for a long time, something is probably amiss if you’re not willing to make a commitment to them that reflects the length of your relationship.

In other words, your commitment to the other person should reflect the stage your relationship is currently at. If your commitment to them is way more or less than your intimacy and shared history with them, then something is probably wrong.

Intimacy

Following me so far? Sweet.

Next, we’ll explore the final two sides of the “Slow and Steady” Square: emotional and physical intimacy.

Intimacy can be harder to measure than commitment or time. Gauging your intimacy level is much tougher than checking how long you’ve been dating, or your current stage of commitment. But intimacy is super important, so I’ve made sure that the next section will prepare you to grow intimacy in your relationship in a healthy way.





...Wins Their Heart




We’ve discussed time and commitment – the first two sides of the “Slow and Steady” Square. Now, let’s dig into physical and emotional intimacy.

Physical Intimacy

There’s nothing wrong or shameful about physical intimacy with your partner – provided you go about it in the right way.

Physical intimacy feels good, and if you’re attracted to someone it’s natural to want to get physical with them.

But physical intimacy is designed to be an expression of emotional intimacy. Doing something physical without an emotional connection feels good in the moment, but it ultimately leads to feelings of emptiness and loneliness.

Plus, too much physical intimacy too soon can cheapen the emotional intimacy of a relationship. You want your feelings of love and affection towards your partner to be based in who they are and how much you care about them – not based in how nice it feels when you are physical with them. One of the easiest ways to “burn the turkey” when it comes to relationships is to get really physical, really fast.

So when is it ok to start being physical with your partner?

Again, this answer will vary for different couples. But there’s a three-step process you can follow to figure out the right answer for you.

First, check your motives for wanting to get physical. Are you more excited about the thought of all of the fun sensations, or are you more excited about the thought of sharing a special kind of intimacy with your partner? Be brutally honest here. If you’re more excited about the physical sensations, wait.

Second, take stock of where you are at commitment-wise. Are you still in the very early stages of commitment? Then your level of physical intimacy should probably be very mild. Are you in a later stage of the relationship? Then you can think about introducing a deeper level of physical intimacy.

Third, make your decision about reaching a new level of physical intimacy when you’re calm, happy, and not with your partner. 11:30 PM when you’re snuggling on the couch is not a good setting for making a wise decision.

If you’re curious, my rule of thumb for my own relationships is that I need to wait on cuddling until I’ve started dating the girl, I need to wait on kissing until we’re boyfriend and girlfriend, I need to wait on intense kissing (i.e., making out) until we’ve been boyfriend and girlfriend for a while, and I need to wait on sex until marriage.

These boundaries might be different for you, but pick boundaries and stick to them. And make sure you know your partner’s boundaries, and stick to those, too.

It’s fine if you are ready for something at a different stage than me, but make sure you are actually ready. If you jump into physical intimacy too soon, you can’t “uncook” that.

Emotional Intimacy

Emotional intimacy is both the easiest and the hardest relationship aspect to describe.

How close do you feel to your partner? How much do you trust them? How well do you know them?

These are easy questions to understand, but are often hard to answer. Feelings are not easily quantified.

The solution is to spend the time you need getting in touch with your feelings. Relationships kick up a maelstrom of emotion – excitement, nervousness, jealousy, joy, all mingled together. It takes time and deliberate work to sort through those feelings.

Are you nervous because this is your first relationship and you don’t want to mess up, or are you nervous because you’re sensing something wrong? Are you excited to be with this person because you really do feel close to them, or because you just like having someone to hold?

Spend the time it takes to sort through these feelings, in whatever way you process emotion best. Journal or talk with a friend or go for a run. Figure out how you are really feeling about the person you are dating.

It might not happen overnight, but the understanding will come if you keep pursuing it.

You still might not be able to quantify exactly how close you feel. But if your emotional intimacy is at a healthy place, you’ll feel a growing sense of peace and contentedness—a sense that everything is ok, and you can rest.

And if things are unhealthy, you’ll feel a growing sense of disquiet and concern—and that’s a sign that something is not right, and you should find out what’s wrong.

Living Your Love Story

Congratulations! You’ve nearly finished the dating guide.

You haven’t learned how to magically cause people to fall in love with you. Nor have I given you foolproof pickup lines, secret clues that someone is interested in you, or any of the other sneaky tricks that fill many dating guides.

What you have learned is how to have an incredible love story.

Because honestly, love is not about tricks. Love, in fact, is about finding a place where you don’t need tricks or suave moves or anything other than just being yourself.

It’s about being with someone who loves you and accepts you as you are – it’s about being with someone who says “I love you for who you are, not for what you can do for me.”

And sneaky tricks won’t get you there. You arrive at that place through commitment and knowledge – commitment to a healthy relationship, and knowledge of how to get there.

I wrote the guide to share the knowledge I’ve learned with you. You now know how to recognize a healthy and unhealthy relationship, how to start a relationship in a healthy way, and how to grow your relationship at a healthy pace.

The next step is up to you.

I guarantee that you will be offered shortcuts and compromises. You’ll be given the opportunity to sacrifice the long-term good of your partner in exchange for short-term pleasure, and in the moment it might be really tempting.

But you are stronger than that.

Choose interdependence over selfishness. Choose the slow and steady rush over the 1000 degree burnt turkey. Choose to work for a relationship where you can honestly say “I’ve done everything possible to make my beloved really happy, and I helped them grow into the person they were meant to be.”

Will you commit to healthy relationship? I promise you that if you do, you might need to work harder at the beginning. But the sacrifice will be far outweighed by the lifetime of joy and incredible intimacy that you will find waiting for you.





