Chapter 6

Influence: The Power of Persuasion

If you would persuade, you must appeal to interest rather than intellect.

—Benjamin Franklin

The epigraph sums up this entire chapter. You might be wondering why I didn’t include this within Chapter 5’s discussion of psychological principles of social engineering. Psychology is a science and a set of rules exists in it that, if followed, will yield a result. Social engineering psychology is scientific and calculated.

Influence and persuasion are much like art that is backed up by science. Persuasion and influence involve emotions and beliefs. As discussed in some of the earlier chapters, you have to know how and what people are thinking.

Influence and the art of persuasion is the process of getting someone else to want to do, react, think, or believe in the way you want them to.

If you need to, reread the preceding sentence. It is probably one of the most powerful sentences in this whole book. It means that using the principles discussed herein, you will be able to move someone to think, act, and maybe even believe the way you want him to because he wants to. Social engineers use the art of persuasion every day and, unfortunately, malicious scammers and social engineers use it, too.

Some people have devoted their life to researching, studying, and perfecting the art of influence. Those such as Dr. Ellen Langer, Robert Cialdini, and Kevin Hogan have contributed a very large repository of knowledge in this field. Mix this knowledge with the research and teachings of NLP (neurolinguistic programming) masters such as Bandler, Grinder, and more recently Jamie Smart, and what you have is a recipe to become a true artist.

True influence is elegant and smooth and most of the time undetectable to those being influenced. When you learn the methods you will start to notice them in commercials, on billboards, and when used by salespeople. You will start to get irritated at the shoddy attempts of marketing people and if you are like me, you will begin to rant and rave at terrible commercials and billboards while driving (which does not make my wife very happy).

Before getting into how social engineers will use in influence and persuasion, the chapter begins with a short tour of some of the key elements of persuasion and influence that I have compiled and used. This chapter will discuss things like reciprocation, manipulation, and the power of setting goals, just to name a few of these key elements.

Influence and persuasion can be broken down into five important aspects, as discussed in the following sections.





The Five Fundamentals of Influence and Persuasion

The five fundamentals of persuasion are crucial in obtaining any type of successful influence upon a target:

Setting clear goals

Building rapport

Being observant of your surroundings

Being flexible

Getting in touch with yourself



The whole goal of social engineering is to influence the target to take an action that may or may not be in their best interest. Yet they will not only take the action, but want to take the action and maybe even thank you for it at the end. This type of influence is powerful and can make a social engineer who possesses these skills legendary.

World-renowned NLP trainer Jamie Smart once said, “The map is not the territory.” I love that quote because it blends perfectly with these five fundamentals. None of them are the whole sum on their own, but individually they are like points on a map that show you the whole territory of what you want to accomplish. The following section delves deep into the first fundamental: why setting clear goals is very important.

Have a Clear Goal in Mind

Not only should you have a clear goal in mind, you should even go so far as to write it down. Ask yourself, “What do I want out of this engagement or interaction?”

As I discussed in Chapter 5, especially in relation to NLP, a human’s internal systems are affected by his thoughts and goals. If you focus on something, you may be more likely to become it or get it. This doesn’t mean that if you focus on the thought of getting one million dollars, you will get it. In fact, it is unlikely. However, if you had a goal of making one million dollars and focused on the steps needed to make that money, your goals, education, and actions would increase the likelihood of you achieving that goal. The same is true with persuasion. What is your goal? Is it to change someone’s beliefs? To get him to take an action? Suppose a dear friend is doing something terribly unhealthy and you want to try and persuade her to stop. What is the goal? Maybe the end goal is to persuade her to stop, but maybe little goals exist along the way. Outlining all of these goals can make the path to influencing that person clearer.

After setting the goal, you must ask yourself, “How will I know when I have gotten it?” I once listened to a training program offered by Jamie Smart, one of the world leaders on NLP, and he asked each person in the classroom these two questions:

What do you want?

How will you know when you have it?



At this point, I paused the CD for the first question and answered for myself out loud what I wanted from this course. Then I pressed Play again and when he asked that second question, “How will you know you have gotten it?” I paused the CD again and was lost. It was clear to me that I didn’t have a roadmap. I knew what I wanted out of that course, but I didn’t know how to gauge when I had gotten it.

Knowing what you want out of your engagements is an important aspect of influence and persuasion tactics. When you approach a target knowing what your goals are and what the indicators are that you are getting what you want, then you can clearly identify the path you need to take. Clearly defined goals can make or break the success of the influence tactics used by a social engineer as well as make the next step much easier to master.

Rapport, Rapport, Rapport

Chapter 5 has a whole section on rapport building. Read it, study it, and perfect your rapport-building skills.

Developing rapport means that you get the attention of the person you are targeting and his unconscious mind, and you build trust within that unconscious portion. Mastering the skill of building rapport can change the way you deal with people, and when it comes to social engineering, it can change your whole methodology.

To build rapport, start where the person you want to influence is mentally—try to understand their frame of mind. Are they suspicious? Are they upset, sad, or worried? Whatever emotional state you perceive them to be in, start from there. Do not focus on your goals as much as focusing on understanding the person. This is a very vital point. This means a social engineer must understand his target enough that they can imagine where they are consciously. What are the target’s thoughts and state of mind?

For example, imagine you want to influence your dear friend to want to quit smoking or doing drugs or something else. Notice you don’t want to convince her to quit, but convince her to want to quit. Your goal cannot be about you, right? It must focus on the target. You can’t start your conversation with what her addiction is doing to you and how much you hate the smell, and so on. The argument has to be what is in it for her. You cannot start the conversation with a verbal attack about what the person has done to you with their habit, but you need to understand where that person’s frame of mind is, accept it, and come into alignment with it.

Social engineering is much the same: you can’t start where you are mentally. This is going to be struggle for many people. Do you know why she smokes? Do you understand the psychological, physical, or mental reasons why? Until you can really get into her shoes, you cannot build a strong rapport and your efforts at influence will fail.

In addition, you cannot always base the idea of building rapport on logic. I once was in the hospital with a dear friend who was dying from throat cancer. He had smoked for more than 40 years and one day he found out he had cancer. It spread fast, bringing him to the hospital to live out his last days. His children would come to visit and every now and then they would leave the room. I thought they were overcome with emotion. One time after they excused themselves I went out to comfort them and they were outside the hospital smoking! I was dumbfounded. I don’t smoke and have no desire to, and although I can understand how strong an addiction can be, I couldn’t understand how after seeing the pain their father was in, how they could raise a cigarette to their lips.

Logic would not win in this case. Telling my friend’s children why smoking is bad and how it will kill them would do no good—this information was useless because it was combative and only made me feel good in saying it, but did not align with their present frame of mind. Until you understand the person you cannot successfully build a good enough rapport to influence him or her.

Getting someone to want to do something is a blend of emotion and logic, as well as understanding and humility in many cases. Once I walked into an office I was going to do some work for and I had heard a funny comment outside, so when I walked in the main lobby I was chuckling. The woman behind the desk must have just done something embarrassing because when she saw me she immediately got angry and yelled at me, “It’s not very funny and you are a jerk.”

Now I didn’t know this woman and to tell you the truth I had a goal in mind that this interaction was not going to help. In addition, I felt insulted that she assumed I was laughing at her, and wanted to lash back at her. But instead, I saw she was upset. I got close to the counter so as not to embarrass her anymore, I looked her in the eye, and with sincerity said, “I am so sorry if you thought I was laughing at you. I was in the parking lot and some of your workmates were telling a story about a party over the weekend and I thought it was very funny.”

She looked at me and I could tell she was now even more embarrassed, so to save face for her, I loudly said, “Ma’am, I am sorry for laughing and embarrassing you.” This allowed her to save face to those around us. She understood that I “took one for the team” and she responded with extreme kindness. A minute later she apologized and it worked to my benefit as I was given all the data I asked for, data I normally would have had to work very hard to get.

A teacher I had once used to tell me to “kill them with kindness.” That is a pretty powerful statement. Being kind to people is a quick way to build rapport and to establish yourself in the five fundamentals of persuasion and influence.

One method to influence people using kindness and rapport is to ask questions and give choices that lead them to a path you want. For example, once I was influenced to take a job I really didn’t want as part of a team effort. The team leader was very charismatic and friendly and had the “charm factor” that allowed him to speak to anyone. He approached me and said, “Chris, I wanted to talk to you separately from the team. I need a right hand for a small project. But the person needs to be a go-getter, self motivated. I think this is you, but I don’t want to assume; what do you think?”

I was excited and flattered by the compliments and the potential to be “important,” so I responded, “I am a very self-motivated person. Whatever you need, tell me.”

The team leader continued, “Well, I am a big believer in leading by example. And I think you have that leadership quality. The problem is, some on the team do not, and they need a strong person to show them how it is done.”

Before the end of the conversation, what he wanted appeared as if it was my idea, which made it impossible to back out of. Powerful indeed, and all started with the power of persuasion.

Be in Tune with Yourself and Your Surroundings

Being aware of yourself and your surroundings, or sensory acuity, is the ability to notice the signs in the person you are targeting and yourself that will tell you that you are moving in the right direction or not.

Many of the principles discussed in the previous chapter apply to persuasion. Reading body language and facial signs can tell you much about your influence on the person.

To really master the dual art of influence and persuasion, you have to become a master watcher and master listener. Chris Westbury, a cognitive neuropsychologist at the University of Alberta, Canada, estimates that human brains process information at 20 million billion calculations per second. Those calculations are represented by facial expressions, microexpressions, gestures, posture, voice tones, eye blinks, breathing rate, speech patterns, nonverbal utterances, and many more types of distinguishing patterns. Mastering influence means to be aware of those subtle things in yourself and others.

I found, for myself, the ability to be observant proved to be easier for me after receiving some training from Dr. Ekman in microexpressions. I found afterward that not only did I become much more aware of what was going on with those around me, but also myself. When I felt a certain expression on my face, I was able to analyze it and see how it might be portrayed to others. This recognition of myself and my surroundings was one of the most enlightening experiences of my life.

NLP experts promote minimizing your internal dialog when trying to influence others. If you approach the target thinking about the next stage of the attack, the end goal, or comebacks for potential conversation stoppers, that internal dialog can cause you to miss a lot of what is going on around you. Being observant takes a lot of work but the payoff is well worth it.

Don’t Act Insane—Be Flexible

What do I mean by not acting insane and being flexible? One definition of insanity that’s been floating around for years is “doing the same thing over and over and expecting different results.” Being willing and able to flex is one of the keys to persuasion.

You can think of this flexibility in terms of physical things. If you were tasked to persuade or bend something, would you rather it be a branch from a willow tree or a steel rod? Most people would say the willow branch because it is flexible, easier to bend, and makes the task accomplishable. Trying to persuade others while being unyielding and inflexible doesn’t work, and neither does persuasion if you are not flexible.

Many times, an audit will not go as planned. A good social engineer will be able to roll with the punches and adjust their goals and methods as needed. This does not go against the idea of planning ahead; instead, it bespeaks the point of not being so rigid that when things do not go as planned you can move and adapt so the goal is not lost.

The way a person would view an insane person is the way a target would view the inflexible social engineer. The social engineer would look unreasonable and you would most likely never reach endgame.

Get in Touch with Yourself

By getting in touch with yourself, I am not suggesting some Zen meditation avenue, just that you understand your emotions. Emotions control practically everything you do, as well as everything your target does. Knowing your emotions and being in touch with yourself can help you lay the groundwork for being an effective social engineer.

Going back to the earlier example of you and your smoking friend—approaching your friend if you have a deep-seated hatred for those who smoke affects your approach. It can make you act, express, say, or do something that will close the door to persuasion. You may never compromise on certain things, and being aware of those things and your emotions about them can help you to develop a clear path toward influencing a target.

These five fundamentals are key to understanding influence and persuasion. Being able to create an environment where a target wants to do what you are requesting is the goal of persuasion, and these five fundamentals will help you create that environment. The next section examines how social engineers use these fundamentals.





Influence Tactics

As mentioned, social engineers must practice the skill of persuasion until it becomes part of their everyday habits. This doesn’t mean that they must influence everyone in everything they do, but being able to turn this skill on and off at will is a powerful trait of a good social engineer.

Influence and persuasion have many aspects you can use and many that fit easily into an audit. Other aspects might not fit too easily, but hold a very powerful position in the world of influence. The following sections cover eight different techniques of influence that are used often by media, politicians, government, con men, scammers, and of course, social engineers.

Each section provides an analysis of each technique to see how it is used in other areas of influence besides social engineering, as well as takes a closer look at how it can apply to a social engineer.

Reciprocation

Reciprocity is the inherent expectation that when others treat you well you respond in kind. A simple example is when you are walking into a building—if someone holds a door open for you, he expects you to say thank you and then make sure that next door stays open for him as he comes in.

The rule of reciprocity is important because often the returned favor is done unconsciously. Knowing this means that you now have a step up on how you can use it as a social engineer. Before getting into that, though, here are a few examples where reciprocity is often used:

Pharmaceutical companies will spend $10,000–$15,000 per doctor (yes, per doctor) on “gifts” that might include dinners, books, computers, hats, clothing, or other items that have the drug company’s logo on it. When the time comes to choose a drug to support and buy, to whom do you think the doctors are more likely to go?

Politicians are influenced in much the same way. It is no secret that many times politicians or lobbyists are more favorable to people who helped their political campaign than those who did not.

Reciprocity is often used in business, especially when it comes to matters of contracts. Maybe the sales guy will pay for a meal, then later on ask for a concession in the contract. The client is compelled to give this concession.

A fellow employee filled in for you one week when you needed a day off. Now she asks you to return the favor, but you have plans. In this situation, people will reschedule and honor the request.



All of these are examples of reciprocity. Sociologist Alvin Gouldner wrote a paper called, “The Norm of Reciprocity” (http://media.pfeiffer.edu/lridener/courses/normrecp.html) in which he states:

Specifically, I suggest that a norm of reciprocity, in its universal form, makes two interrelated, minimal demands: (1) people should help those who have helped them, and (2) people should not injure those who have helped them. Generically, the norm of reciprocity may be conceived of as a dimension to be found in all value systems and, in particular as one among a number of “Principal Components” universally present in moral codes.

Basically, his research led him to see that reciprocity works despite cultural backgrounds. Reciprocity, used under the right circumstances, is all but impossible to resist.

Think of reciprocity as the process shown in Figure 6-1.

Figure 6-1: The cycle of reciprocity.



The following sections expand on some key points of the preceding idea.

Give Something Away

The thing you give away can’t be some simple piece of junk. The thing given must have value—to the recipient. Giving away a beautiful hardcover novel written in a language the recipient does not read or collect is useless.

The item can be a service, a physical item, some valuable information, assistance, or anything else that the receiver will deem as a value (even something as simple as holding the door or picking up something dropped). Some sales organizations promote this method but then fall short by offering something that has no value. Imagine you are at a trade show and at each table is a giveaway. If you walk up to a table and notice a pile of cheap-looking pens you might just walk by. The next table has an interesting puzzle-like game. You are intrigued so you pick it up; after you spend a few minutes playing with it a salesperson approaches and says, “You want a hint?” After showing you a small hint he asks whether you have a minute so he can show you a service you might really love.

How can you say no? You get an intriguing game and a free hint, and now all he wants is a minute of your time? It’s a perfect setup.

Create Indebted Feelings

The more value the gift has to the recipient and the more unexpected it is, the greater the sense of indebtedness.

Not allowing the gift to be used in an obvious manipulation tactic is important. Don’t say or act like, “I gave you this great gift now you owe me.” Even thinking it can take away any feelings of indebtedness. The “gift” should be totally free and of great value to the recipient.

The Humane Society of the United States, for instance, gives away personalized mailing labels as a free gift. No strings are attached and many people use them for holiday cards or personal letters. They are attractive and good quality. You sign up for them, and many months later you will get a call asking for a donation to support your local Humane Society. The recipient’s sense of obligation is usually too great to not contribute even a little.

By way of another example, Fortune Magazine offers college professors free issues of its magazine to try out in their classes with no strings attached at all.

Many examples of reciprocity like these exist. On the flip side, many companies fail at reciprocity by thinking things like the following are good gifts:

Sharp-looking and colorful corporate brochures

Useless and junky toys

Sales literature about your products or company



These things do not build indebtedness. The recipient must deem the “gift” valuable. Another source of “gifts” that can build true indebtedness is information. Giving away a valuable, beneficial, or useful piece of information can literally be of more interest than a physical gift to some.

Ask for What You Want

On one occasion as I was entering a building, I saw a man who looked very much to be the “boss” get out of his car parked in the spot marked “For CFO Only,” and he was on his cell phone. He was not a happy guy, and I overheard him telling someone that he was upset because he had to go inside and let some people go. I assumed from his tone that he was on with his wife or girlfriend and he didn’t like the job he was about to do.

I walked past him and went to the front desk and as I walked up I saw that the girl behind the desk was playing Minesweeper. As I approached the counter she gave me the standard, “How can I help you?” She had a look on her face that said she was bored and not in the mood. I said, “Look, I am here for a meeting, but your boss is about to walk in and he is in a bad mood…” I then trailed off and just stood there with a folder in my hand. A few seconds later the boss stormed in the front door and I said loudly, “Thank you so much for your assistance.”

She looked over and said to me, “Excuse me, sir,” then said to her boss, “Good morning, Mr. Smith, I have your messages,” and then handed him a small pile of paper as he walked by.

When he disappeared to his office she thanked me profusely. I just saved her and she knew it. The information I gave her was invaluable, and my next words would be imperative: “I need your help. I wanted to see the HR manager just for a brief meeting. Can you get me into her office real quick?”

She walked me back to the manager’s office and introduced me as “her friend” that stopped in. Within minutes my plan was launched, and all thanks to reciprocity.

As a social engineer, look for little opportunities to give out information that will make you valuable to the recipient and more importantly, make the recipient indebted to you.

Be aware of your surroundings and what little things you can do to make your targets indebted to you. Remember it doesn’t have to be something amazing, just something that they value. A good point to keep in mind is to not “stalk” the target. Standing and staring at him or her waiting for an opportunity to do or say something can be off-putting. These principles should be natural.

Naturalness means you start doing these principles in everyday life. Hold doors for people, be very polite, and look for opportunities to do good things for others. These actions will become second nature and you will have fewer struggles doing them in an audit.

Reciprocity is a powerful influence tactic, and the next two principles discussed are closely tied into it.

Obligation

Obligation has to do with actions one feels he needs to take due to some sort of social, legal, or moral requirement, duty, contract, or promise. In the context of social engineering, obligation is closely related to reciprocation but is not limited to it. Obligation can be as simple as holding an outer door for someone, which will usually make him hold the inner door for you. It can be escalated to someone giving you private info because you create in them a sense of obligation to you. Obligation is a common attack vector used when targeting customer service people.

You can also use obligation in small doses by utilizing smart complimenting. For example, compliment the person, then follow it up with a request. This technique is very easy to do wrong if you are new or inexperienced and can come across so fake that it alerts the target’s inner sense and has the wrong effect. But if done properly, it can lead to obtaining even little pieces of valuable information.

An example of complimenting in the wrong way would be something like, “Wow, you have beautiful eyes, can I get into your server room?” Sounds stupid, huh? Be sure to say your method out loud to see how it sounds. If it sounds like a cheap pickup line then it has to go.

A small conversation like this, on the other hand, can be a proper way to compliment:

As you approach the receptionist’s desk you see some pictures of a couple of little children at Disney World and after you introduce yourself you say, “Are those your kids? They sure are cute.” Regardless if they are the receptionist’s kids or her nephews, she will most likely enjoy your compliment. Then you follow up with, “I have a couple of my own. They keep us young, huh?”

“Yes, my two kids. And I am not sure about young,” she chuckles, “but they do tire me out.”

“I haven’t taken mine to Disney yet,” I say. “Did you find they enjoyed it at that age?”

“Oh yeah, they loved every second of it,” says the receptionist. “As long as my daughter is with her Daddy, she is having fun.”

“Ah, yeah, I have my little princess too,” I reply. “Well, I could stand here and talk about my kids all day, but I am wondering if you can help me out. I called in and spoke to someone last week about a new HR software package and I said I would drop off this information packet, but I lost the paper I wrote her name on. I am terribly embarrassed.”

“Oh, that’s probably Mrs. Smith,” offers the receptionist. “She handles all of that.”

“You are a life saver. I owe you one. Thank you.”

These types of compliments go a long way to opening the target up to be more agreeable to influence.

The golden rule—treat others as you would wish to be treated—is a key principle in creating obligation. Treating people kindly and giving them something they may need, even if it is as small as a compliment, can create a sense of obligation to you.

Psychologist Steve Bressert makes this point in his article “Persuasion and How To Influence Others,” in which he states, “according to the American Disabled Veterans organization, mailing out a simple appeal for donations produces an 18% success rate. Enclosing a small gift, such as personalized address labels, nearly doubles the success rate to 35%. ‘Since you sent me some useful address labels, I’ll send you a small donation in return.’”

If you want to prove to yourself the power of this principle try this simple exercise. Even something as small as a question can create obligation. The next time someone asks you a question, say nothing. Just stay silent or ignore it and move on in the conversation. Notice how awkward that is; something as simple as a question creates a sense of obligation to answer. Simply asking the target a question can lead to amazing results.

If your first action creates a feeling that there is an expected follow-up, then fulfilling that expectation can lead to strong feelings of obligation. When the person with whom you are interacting expects a result, fulfilling it can create a strong sense of commitment in him or her to do the same for you.

This method can be used, for example, by sending the CFO of a company a piece of technology, maybe an iPod loaded with malicious software. When he gets the gift he is obligated to plug it in. One successful attack vector I saw in play was where the social engineer sent a small relevant gift to the CFO or CEO with a card that said, “Please accept a small gift from our company. All we ask is that you browse our products at www.products.com and download our PDF catalog here at www.products.com/catalog.pdf. I will call you next week.”

This method was successful every time.

Concession

A concession, or the act of conceding, is defined as “an acknowledgment or admission,” or “the act of yielding.” Concessions are used often within the social engineering context as a play on the reciprocation instinct of humans. Humans seem to have a built-in function that makes them want to “do unto others as they do unto” you. A social engineer can use the “something for something” idea or the “I’ll scratch your back if you scratch mine” principle.

There are basic principles to concessions and how to use them properly:

Label your concessions: Make it known when and what you are conceding, which makes it difficult for your mark to ignore the urge to reciprocate. This will take balance because you don’t want to blow a trumpet, so to speak, while you announce a concession, but a simple statement like, “OK, I’ll give you this one,” or “I will meet you halfway,” show you are willing to concede.

Demand and define reciprocity: You can start by planting the seeds of reciprocation and this increases your chances of getting something in return. An easy way to start planting these seeds is through nonverbal communication showing that you are flexible, and also by being a good listener. These little things can make a big difference when building feelings of reciprocation in your target.

Make contingent concessions: You can use “risk-free” concessions when trust is low or when you need to signal that you are ready to make other concessions. What I mean by this is a concession that does not come with a “now you can do something for me” attitude. By giving in to something the target wants or needs with no counter demand, you can build a very strong bond with the target.

Make concessions in installments: The idea of reciprocity is deeply ingrained in our minds. Most people feel that if someone does them a favor then they are socially contracted to eventually return that favor. Similarly, if someone makes a concession, say in a negotiation or bargaining agreement, then one instinctively feels obligated to “budge” a little bit, too. Since this is a fact, you do not have to feel that all your concessions must be at one time. You can make “installments” with your concessions, where you give in a little here and a little there over time to keep your target reciprocating.



Concessions are used daily by salespeople, negotiators, and social engineers. A successful social engineer can use and abuse this instinctual tendency by not only resisting the manipulations being placed on them by others but also by trying to take over the situation completely. Concession and reciprocation skills play well with many of the other social engineering techniques discussed within the pages of this book.

An example of how many people fall for concessions can be illustrated with telemarketers who call for donations. They use a strategy for gaining concessions after someone is first given the opportunity to turn down a large request. The same requester counteroffers with a smaller request that you are more likely to accept than the large request.

Large request: “Can you donate $200 to our charity?”

Response: “No, I cannot.”

Smaller request: “Oh, I’m sorry sir, and I understand. Can you donate only $20?”

People who are not aware of this technique might feel like the burden is taken off of them and realize they can part with a mere $20 rather than the initial asking price of $200.

Another great example appeared in an article (http://ezinearticles.com/?How-to-Negotiate-the-Salary-Using-the-Power-of-the-Norm-of-Reciprocity&id=2449465) written by David Hill:

The power of this norm can be felt in most bargaining situations. Assume a buyer and a seller are haggling over the price of a car. The seller starts out with a bid at $24,000. The buyer finds this offer unacceptable and makes a counter bid at $15,000. Now, the seller lowers his bid to $20,000, i.e., he makes a concession. In this case, the buyer will most often feel inclined to increase his bid, maybe to $17,000. The reason why the buyer will feel this inclination is because of the presence of the norm of reciprocity. This norm now demands that the buyer responds to the seller’s concession with another concession.

As with most of the principles discussed so far, the concession must be valuable to the receiver. You can’t concede something that is valuable only to you or you lose the power you gain with a good concession.

As a social engineer, not giving a concession that will cause you to lose face, rapport, or your position is also imperative. A delicate balance must exist between the concession and your standing with the target, and finding it is half the work. Find it, though, and concessions can be a very serious tool in your hands.

Scarcity

People often find objects and opportunities more attractive if they are rare, scarce, or hard to obtain. This is why you will see newspapers and radio ads filled with “Last Day,” “Limited Time Only,” “Only 3-Day Sale,” and “Going Out of Business Forever” messages that entice people to come from all over to get a share of the soon-to-be-never-seen-again product.

The use of scarcity in the sales context is best known with the catch phrase “Act now! Supplies are limited!” Other techniques are the common “The first X callers get a free widget,” or having an intentional short supply of a popular product. In recent times, this practice was most popularly alleged with the Nintendo Wii. Jason Dobson, a writer for Gamasutra, said, “But I think [Nintendo] intentionally dried up supply because they made their numbers for the year. The new year starts April 1, and I think we’re going to see supply flowing” (www.gamasutra.com/php-bin/news_index.php?story=13297).

Where I live, a car dealership ran an ad on a Thursday stating it had to get rid of X number of cars due to new stock arriving. The prices were so low and some of the cars—wait for it—were no longer being produced, and that weekend was the last weekend ever that you could come in for a piece of auto-selling history.

The sales went through the roof that weekend, so the sale was over right? Nope, that ad ran every Thursday for more than three months. I often wondered how people just didn’t catch on to it, but the dealership sold a lot of cars using this method.

Social events can often appear to be more exclusive if scarcity is introduced. The perceived social benefit of attending these events often goes up in these circumstances. In advertising, this point is driven home with ads for music events that point out how the last concert was quickly sold out.

Many popular restaurants have been known to close off sections of the restaurant to appear busier than they really are. The perception that they are extremely popular can often trigger a heightened desire to eat at that establishment. To see an ad that actually mentions the use of scarcity in promoting an event, go to www.social-engineer.org/wiki/archives/Scarcity/Scarcity-Advertisment.html.

This ad played on four major components of scarcity:

The launch is limited access.

The application is not public and only limited.

Promoters are handpicked and limited.

The e-book is free to those lucky enough to be chosen to come.



All of these points use scarcity by making the would-be partygoers feel that getting into this event is so difficult that only the elite, the few, and the proud can even have a remote chance of stepping foot onto that hallowed ground.

The basics of economics are made up of the allocation of resources that have alternative uses. This allocation is driven by the scarcity of the objects that are being allocated. The rarer the resource, the higher the perceived value the object retains. This rarity is why gold is worth more than salt, which is worth more than clay.

Also, within daily interactions scarcity is often used. Scarcity can be introduced into social situations in an attempt to make something one has go up in value. For instance, one might act like he is very busy on a regular basis, and free time is hard to come by. This action may excuse him from not spending time with someone he may have an obligation to spend time with, and at the same time make time that is spent seem that much more valuable.

You can manipulate attention through the use of scarcity as well. Think of how many people complain about salesmen bothering them in a store when there is no scarcity of salespeople’s attention, yet they are just as upset when they are ignored by salespeople when their attention is scarce. On the whole, people are driven to desire that which is hard to obtain, because it is viewed as having more value. This holds true for attention as well.

Scarcity is often used in social engineering contexts to create a feeling of urgency in a decision-making context. This urgency can often lead to manipulation of the decision-making process, allowing the social engineer to control the information provided to the victim. This is done commonly by using a mixture of authority and scarcity principles. For example, saying something like, “The CFO, Mr. Smith, called me before he left for the long weekend and told me to come down and fix his email problem. He said he was sick and tired of the crashes and wanted it fixed before Monday.” This creates urgency alongside scarcity in that the CFO is not available to speak to and time is the scarce item.

Using scarcity mixed with other principles can also make the attack even deadlier. Either way, scarcity creates a desire and that desire can lead someone to making a decision he might regret later.

This was proven to me recently when a truck pulled into my driveway with a freezer in the back. This decently dressed young man approached my wife and explained that he is a meat salesman. He delivers meat to customers and was just about to head back to the office and saw her working in the yard. He began talking about meat prices and how expensive things are in the store. My wife is a very price-conscious shopper, so this built rapport. Plus he had a very pleasant southern accent and called her “ma’am” and was very respectful.

After a few minutes of talking, she blurts out the question that usually stops salesmen dead, “How much do you want?”

Without missing too much of a beat he says, “Listen, I have been selling these all day for $400 per box, but this is my last box. I would love to just go back to the office with an empty freezer and give you some high-quality meat in the meantime.”

Oh no, the last box! He told her before he only comes through once every two months. The desire has been raised, but my wife is no dummy. She knew she was being manipulated. She excused herself and came to get me.

He went through his spiel and laid on the scarcity thick. Of course, this type of an account can be a lesson on how to not fall for this tactic. The problem is that emotion gets involved. He sees that I have a grill outside that looks used, so he knows I love to cook outside and he plays on that. He then talks about the quality of meat and quickly makes comparisons to restaurant quality and what is in his boxes.

Many people could easily fall for the emotional aspect of his sales pitch. “What if it is his last one?” “He is right, this is much cheaper than eating out.” “He comes to me…I don’t even have to drive to the store.”

Instead, I whipped out a calculator and asked him for the amount for the two last boxes, divided by the weight and then asked my wife how much she normally pays per pound for a Delmonico or ribeye in the store. When her price came in lower by $3.00 per pound I simply just shut up. Now his emotions get involved. He scrambles to save face. He lowers his price by $150 off the bat. I again do the math and he is still $.50 more per pound.

He tries to talk about quality, convenience, and all those aspects that make it worth the $.50 more. I shift my posture and position to be away from him and to show disinterest. Without saying anything, he trails off at the end of a weak spiel and offers me another $50 off. I tell him, “Sorry, I just don’t think it’s worth it.”

He then does the classic mistake that shows how his claims of scarcity were false—he caves in more. “How much do you want to pay for these boxes?”

“I probably could do $100.”

“If you can give me $125 we can call it a deal.”

Now mind you a little bit ago he was at $400 per box and they were the last two in this area for two to three months. This should have been a bidding war for that value, but instead, I sent him packing with his two boxes of meat and no cash.

The lesson in this story for social engineers is that for scarcity to work it either has to be real, or you have to stick to your guns to give the appearance of reality.

People will perceive the value higher when something is really in need. A malicious example of this is how the petrol companies raised the prices of fuel after Hurricane Katrina. The claim was that fuel was in shortage due to the destruction, which caused terrible price increases. Of course, if this were true then the fuel would be worth a lot more than it is; instead it was an example of the claim of scarcity used to make money. Yet at the same time, when BP’s error caused millions of gallons of oil to be lost in the Gulf of Mexico, ruining the ecosystem, instead of fuel prices skyrocketing due to lack of supply, they dropped. How? Well I won’t get into that here, but it proves the point that for scarcity to work, it has to be believable, and this where the oil companies fail and where social engineers can fail, too.

From a social engineer’s standpoint, the more limited or difficult it is obtain an opportunity the more value it will have to people. If information is deemed as private, restricted, and hard to come by, and you are willing to share it with someone, you have just gained a lot of value in their eyes.

A social engineer can leverage scarcity with information by using a statement like, “I am not supposed to be saying this but…” or “I am not sure if you heard this news, but I overheard…” Statements like these spoken in hushed tones imply that this information is scarce.

Authority

People are more willing to follow the directions or recommendations of someone they view as an authority. Finding a person who has enough assertiveness to question authority directly, especially when that authority holds direct power over him or is face-to-face with him is uncommon.

Children, for example, are taught to obey adults such as teachers, counselors, priests, and nannies because they have authority over them. Often, questioning authority is deemed as disrespectful and abject obedience is what is rewarded. These principles carry over into adult life because we are taught to respect authority figures and not question rules or orders given to us by those whom we deem authorities.

Unfortunately, it is this principle leads many children into the hands of abusers and molesters. Of course, not this principle solely, but those who prey on children realize how children are taught about authority and often seek out those who appear to be more compliant. Similarly, malicious social engineers use this principle to manipulate their targets to take some action or inaction that can lead to a breach.

Understanding how authority is used from a social engineering aspect is important. German sociologist and political economist, Max Weber, defined authority into categories that I have adapted to fit more closely into the realm of social engineering.

Legal Authority

Legal authority is based upon government and law. This generally applies to law enforcement officers or others who enforce the laws of the land, area, or facility you are presently in.

As a social engineer, pretexts that involve law enforcement or other government officials are usually illegal. However, security guards, bank security, or other types of enforcement authority figures can be well represented and are often used by social engineers.

In one episode of the BBC television program The Real Hustle, Paul Wilson and his cohorts dressed up like the guards who collect the money. When someone shows up in the uniforms that look similar to the real ones and acts as a normal person in that authoritative position would act, targets have little reason to doubt the imposter is who he “says” he is. Acting as an authority figure is a major ploy used by social engineers to gain access to a company.

Another ploy that can be effective is posing as a lawyer who is seeking certain information. Playing a role that is generally feared or respected by the masses can be one way a legal authority ploy is used.

Organizational Authority

Organizational authority is quite simply any authority defined by means of an organization. Typically, this refers to a supervisory hierarchy. Someone within a position of power in an organization has more power and access to more information than someone at the bottom of the hierarchy.

In a social engineering audit, a consultant may impersonate the CIO or someone else with clearly defined organizational authority. The consultant may then be able to obtain passwords or other information from the help desk or any other employee who may perceive that the impersonated person has authority over him or her.

In a paper entitled “The ‘Social Engineering’ of the Internet Fraud” Jonathan J. Rusch of the U.S. Department of Justice writes, “People are highly likely, in the right situation, to be highly responsive to assertions of authority, even when the person who purports to be in a position of authority is not physically present” (www.isoc.org/inet99/proceedings/3g/3g_2.htm).

This ploy is used in other ways, by not acting as if you are the CFO, but instead sent or authorized by the CFO. The authority the name and title wields may be enough to grant that power to the attacker in the eyes of the target.

Rusch cites an experiment performed by Robert B. Cialdini and recorded in his book Influence (1993), which showed 95 percent of nurses within 22 stations from three different hospitals were willing to administer patients a dangerous dose of medication based upon a phone call from a researcher purporting to be a physician the nurses had never met.

This experiment clearly shows that based upon orders and the perceived notion of authority, people might take certain actions despite their better judgment. This type of authority can and is often used to exploit companies into giving away valuable data.

Social Authority

Social authority refers to the “natural-born leaders” of any social group. A social group could consist of co-workers, college friends, or any other gathering of people.

In Influence, Cialdini writes, “When reacting to authority in an automatic fashion there is a tendency to often do so in response to the mere symbols of authority rather than to its substance.”

For social authority to occur, an extraordinary amount of time or structure may not be needed to define an authoritative figure. In any setting, a quick flash of social proof, where people are influenced by a group of people taking the same action, may help provide a person social authority.

Social authority can be used to an advantage in social engineering by asking or pressuring the target for information. If the target refuses and is therefore not liked by the leader of the group, the target may fall out of favor with the entire group. Complying with the leader’s social authority is perceived to be advantageous.

Social authority is successfully used when either directly stated or implied that a previous person or group reacted the way that the attacker is asking. “Yesterday the CFO sent me down to take care of this problem and Joe let me through and he checked all my credentials, did he put them on file?” A simple statement like that utilizes a few forms of authority.

If you comply with authorities mindlessly, you may respond to symbols of authority rather than to reality. Three authority symbols are particularly effective in Western countries—you may reward people with any one of these (and no other evidence of authority) for their compliance:

Titles

Clothes

Automobiles



In an interview I conducted with Dr. Ellen Langer, Harvard psychologist and researcher of persuasion and influence (www.social-engineer.org/episode-007-using-persuasion-on-the-mindless-masses), she talked extensively about mindlessness. She stated that people often do much of their work in a state where there is not much thought; in other words, they are in autopilot. In those positions, the abuse of the authority role is very dangerous. Perceived authority can make someone on autopilot react without limits.

Using the right clothes, body language, and even having a fake business card printed has worked for many social engineers in presenting an authority stance and keeping their targets in autopilot.

Other forms of authority may come into play for a social engineer than the ones outlined here, but these are the most commonly used. Authority is a powerful force when it comes to influencing others, and with a little bit of reasoning and information gathering a social engineer can effectively use an authority pretext to his or her advantage.

Commitment and Consistency

People value consistency in others, and they also want to appear consistent in their own behavior. Generally people probably want their words, attitudes, and deeds to be consistent and congruent. Consistency reduces the need to reprocess information and offers shortcuts through complex decisions.

Gut feelings—those moments where you sense that an action is good or bad, or right or wrong, based on past experience—are often indicators that a decision being made might be against previously committed feelings and beliefs. These signals often indicate that you feel pushed to agree to something that you don’t want.

Gut feelings can also occur when it comes to making commitments. Gut feelings may indicate that you are uncertain of whether your commitment was a mistake. You can ask yourself, “Knowing what I now know, if I could do that again, would I make the same commitment?”

Before looking at how a social engineer can use consistency to gain someone’s commitment, take a look at three examples that might help hit this point home.

Marketing: Companies often spend extraordinary amounts of money to gain market share. There is no real return, but they fight to remain in that share that they believe to be profitable. Coca-Cola and Pepsi are great examples of using marketing throughout the decades in the fight to remain visible, yet often a commercial will not sway a person to switch from Pepsi to Coke. Because the two companies have been “committed” to the war against each other it seems that when one of them comes out with a new product or marketing idea, the other is not too far behind.

Auctions: The increased popularity of online auction houses such as eBay has this principle more visible. People feel a level of commitment to something they place a bid on and if someone outbids them it is as if they are compelled to bid again. At times they will even increase the bid way past their comfort zone because they feel committed. One classic example of this is when Robert Campeau bought Bloomingdales. He paid $600 million dollars more than it was worth. Max Bazerman, author of Negotiating Rationally quoted a journalist from the Wall Street Journal as saying, “We are not dealing with price anymore, but with egos….”

Carnivals, game houses, and so on: Anytime gambling or game houses are involved a greater risk exists of commitment and consistency being used to persuade people. One columnist, Ryan Healy, an online marketing consultant, wrote a story about when he took his daughter to a circus (www.ryanhealy.com/commitment-and-consistency/). He spent $44 on the tickets, $5 to park his car, then 40 minutes of drive time to get there. He was committed to being at the circus. His daughter wanted cotton candy so he committed to a yes by giving her $5. How could cotton candy cost more than that? When the vendor came by and said the bag was $12, how could he back out on his commitment now? He couldn’t, and therefore ended up spending the $12 on a single cotton candy.



Consistency in this pretense is defined as what is expected based on previous experience or expectations. That experience or expectation can motivate a target to take an action that can cause a breach. For example, when the tech support guy comes it is expected he will go to the server room. That request is consistent with the previous experience and expectation. When access to the server room is requested, it is more likely to be fulfilled because it is consistent with what is expected.

Commitment and consistency can be strong influence factors upon most people to take actions, give information, or divulge secrets.

A social engineer can make commitment and consistency some of the most powerful tools in his or her arsenal. If a social engineer can get a target to commit to something small, usually escalating the commitment is not too hard.

In his book Influence, Robert Cialdini writes:

The key to using the principles of Commitment and Consistency to manipulate people is held within the initial commitment. That is—after making a commitment, taking a stand or position, people are more willing to agree to requests that are consistent with their prior commitment. Many compliance professionals will try to induce others to take an initial position that is consistent with a behavior they will later request.

The social engineer hoping to employ the technique of commitment and consistency usually tries to get the target to divulge a small piece of information toward the overall intended goal. By getting the subject to remain consistent with things he or she has already said, the attacker may get the subject to reveal even more information.

On the other hand, the attacker must remain consistent with what he is asking. The attacker should start off small and escalate the information gathering.

To use an unrealistic example, an attacker should never start off asking for the nuclear launch codes. This request will be denied, and the attacker will be left few options but to backpedal the request. However, starting off small and escalating the value of the information requested with each new piece of gathered information will seem like a more natural progression and will not appear so obvious to the victim.

Going slowly and progressively can be hard as social engineers are often impatient and want to get the “password” right now. Playing it cool and remaining patient can make this avenue rewarding. Clearly defining, maybe even writing out, a path that you can use on each audit can help you go into the audit with clearly defined goals and a path to accomplish them.

I created a chart you can see in Figure 6-2 that shows how a social engineer may be able to visualize this path to obtain information using commitment and consistency.

Getting a target to verbally commit to a certain action can force the target into a certain path of action. Cialdini states, “The commitment and consistency rule states that once we make a decision, we will experience pressure from others and ourselves to behave consistently with that decision. You can be pressured into making either good or bad decisions depending on your past actions.”

Maybe you have felt this if you ever verbally told your wife or spouse that you wanted to lose weight. That verbal “commitment” leads to a lot of pressure to hold up to your end of the “bargain.”

Sometimes, ending up disagreeing with yourself can be hard and almost impossible. Everyone has, at one point or another muttered the phrase, “I’m sorry, I changed my mind,” at least once in our lives. When we do, we hang our head in shame, our voice tones drop, and we sound sad. Why? We have just broken a commitment we made and we feel guilty for doing it.

Figure 6-2: Clearly defining your goals can help you to obtain an information commitment.



Even small, seemingly insignificant commitments can lead to exploitation. For example, a phone conversation often used by solicitors goes something like this:

“Hello, how are you today?”

You answer, “I am doing great.”

Now, prepare for the exploit: “That is good to hear, because some people who are not doing so great can use your help.”

You can’t go back on what you said now, because you are still doing great and committed to it.

This is not to say that you need to be so paranoid that you cannot even answer simple questions without the fear of exploitation, but being aware that one commitment does not mean you must commit to everything that follows is vital. I once worked with a guy who could literally get anyone to do the worst jobs and make them think it was their idea. Ensuring their commitment was one method he used.

If you committed to a path of agreeing with him on certain things, which was almost impossible not to do, because he got you to say “yes” upfront, then you had to continue to say “yes.” Those yeses lead down one path, and that path was right to where he wanted, agreeing to the job he needed to get done.

Being aware that it is okay to say “no” can save you from committing to something that could be disastrous. Yet sometimes we convince ourselves that saying “no” is some form of cardinal sin that needs many prayers to be forgiven.

In the earlier example of the frozen meat salesman, my wife is a very self-aware person. Knowing she might be manipulated by a “seemingly good deal” she came inside to get me because I am a “jerk.”

One of the best examples I have heard that really shows the power of commitment is a social experiment done by Dr. Thomas Moriarty in 1972. He sent an assistant to the beach as a “victim” with a portable radio. The victim sat in his chair listening to his radio for about 10 minutes, then he got up to go purchase a drink.

While he was gone, another assistant, the “criminal” who no one knew was working with him, came by to “steal” the radio. Only 4 out of 20 people—that’s only 20%—stopped the thief from taking the radio.

The researchers then upped the ante in the next round. Before the “victim” would leave to buy the drink he would ask one of the neighboring sunbathers to watch his radio for him. What do you think the change was?

Now a staggering 19 out of 20 stopped the thief, some even resorting to violence. Why the staggering difference? Commitment and consistency. The researcher obtained commitment from the neighboring sunbathers and that caused them to have to act consistently with that commitment. In my opinion, these are amazing statistics that show the power of this influence method.

A social engineer can effectively use this method of influence to get a target to commit to even a small act or small “yes” and use that commitment to escalate it into a larger set of actions.

Liking

People like people who like them. As tongue twisting as that phrase is, it is a very true statement. Understanding the full depth of that statement gets you much closer to mastering persuasion.

When I say understand the depth, I really mean that because that sentence has much more to it than meets the eye.

This statement isn’t saying that people who like you will respond well. Salespeople are often taught that people buy from people they like. That is true, but not the point. It also isn’t saying that people must like you—it is saying you must like people and then they will like you in return.

This task is not as easy as it sounds because liking someone cannot be faked. As discussed in Chapter 5, smiles and happiness are very hard to fake. You must go into the circumstance genuinely caring for the person who you are trying to influence. Caring for people and their feelings is not a standard practice of the malicious social engineer; therefore, they often rely on charm. Charm can work on a short-term basis, but in the long term, liking people is a practiced and learned skill.

Liking is used in marketing extensively. In 1990 Jonathan Frenzen and Harry Davis published a study entitled, “Purchasing Behavior in Embedded Markets” (www.jstor.org/pss/2626820) that examined why Tupperware parties are so successful. All of their research led to this principle of liking.

The researchers concluded that most people bought because they wanted the hostess to be happy, to help a friend, and to be liked. How embarrassing to go to a party like this and not buy anything! That fear of not being liked is what will drive most people to purchase at these parties and it has little to do with wanting more Tupperware.

Other surveys and studies have compared the trust that people have in receiving “tips or advice” from those they consider friends to the trust they have in complete strangers or worse, people they don’t like. A friend can give bad advice and one may be more prone to follow it than good advice from a person one doesn’t like.

From a social engineering aspect the concept of liking is a powerful tool. Not only do you have to be likeable and win their trust, but you also have to genuinely be interested in people. This concept goes back to the discussion of pretexting in Chapter 4. When you pretext, you are not merely acting out an idea or belief—you must become the person you are pretexting; that role is what your life is about. If you can do that then the step of liking can become easier. Your pretext will be truly interested in helping, liking, or assisting that person.

One last aspect of liking that is important for you as a social engineer is physical attractiveness. Humans tend to automatically “like” those who we find attractive. As vain as that sounds, it is the truth. Some serious psychological principles back up this idea.

What is beautiful is good. In 1972 Berscheid, Walster, and Dion performed a study entitled just that, “What Is Beautiful Is Good,” which unleashed some very profound findings. Participants were asked to rate photos of three individuals ranging from low, medium, and high attractiveness. Based on the photos alone they were to rate the people for personality traits, overall happiness, and career success.

They then compiled the ratings and averaged them and found that people who were deemed attractive were more socially desirable, had better occupations, were happier, and more successful. The study proved that people tend to link beauty with other successful qualities and it alters their opinions and ability to trust someone.

This study is an example of a phenomenon called the halo effect, where one particular trait influences or extends to the other qualities of the person. It has been proven to bias a person’s decisions with a tendency to focus on the good traits of the other person. I have archived a copy of this amazing study at www.social-engineer.org/wiki/archives/BlogPosts/BeautifulGood.pdf.

In other words, if someone views you as beautiful, then that good trait extends to other judgments that person makes about you. This halo effect is often used in marketing. Beautiful people are given products to drink, eat, and wear, and other people will automatically assume these things are good, possibly thinking, “Well it must be good if this beautiful person is using it.”

Recently I saw an ad on television that really hit this point home—the ad makes fun of marketing efforts but does it very intelligently. An attractive young female comes on the screen wearing beautiful clothing and says, “Hi, I am a believably attractive 18–24 year old female.”

Using an attractive female who is not overly attractive, but believably real, someone we normal people can look up to is marketing genius. We can’t really tell her age but her beauty can place her somewhere between the ages of 18–24.

“You can relate to me because I am racially ambiguous.”

Again, this is another marketing genius tip. She is not black, white, or Native American—we can’t tell, but she may be a mix, which may be attractive to many races and is non-offensive to most.

“I am in this commercial because market research shows girls like you love girls like me.”

Her beauty and self-assuredness makes us like her; she is well dressed, well spoken, and we want to know her.

The camera then pans to different shots of her doing things like kickboxing, cheerleading, and playing with flowers. By showing viewers she can do all these things while being as beautiful as she is, we perceive her as strong and powerful, and all the things she’s doing as good.

“Now I am going to tell you to buy something…”

She then goes on to sell tampons. This commercial is genius, because the advertiser actually outlines, uses, and educates the consumer on the methods used to make you want to buy. But despite all that, within this commercial lies this principle of liking and the halo effect.

Knowing all this about the importance of liking, what can you do? I have a hard enough time becoming an attractive male, let alone an attractive female. Because endless runs to my local plastic surgeon are out, is there anything a social engineer can do to capitalize on this principle?

Know your target. Know what is and isn’t acceptable to him or her. How does he dress, and what does he consider bad and good? Too much jewelry, makeup, or other aspect of dress can turn off a target. Suppose you are auditing a doctor’s office and your pretext is a drug sales representative. You know that most sales reps wear suits; have perfect hair; and look, smell, and act confident, a trait of many attractive people, so walking in with spiked hair and facial piercings would draw more attention to yourself than your goal.

You must know your target so you can successfully look the way the target would expect. Wear clothing, hairstyles, jewelry, and makeup that will not shock, surprise, or disgust the target. Putting her mind at ease can go a long way toward creating an atmosphere where she will like you, which will build trust and lead to success.

A social engineer can look for things to compliment a target on. When engaging a target, and when appropriate, starting the conversation with a simple complimentary question (such as “Those are nice shoes; where did you buy them?”) is useful. People like positive reinforcement. When one receives compliments from another, he tends to stay engaged in order to receive more positive reinforcement. These compliments tend to reinforce a target’s self image, making him feel as if you have a greater-than-normal understanding of him.

The University of Minnesota issued a paper (www.cehd.umn.edu/ceed/publications/tipsheets/preschoolbehaviortipsheets/posrein.pdf) about reinforcement which states that too much positive reinforcement can have a negative effect. They call it satiation, which means that when reinforcement is given too much it begins to lose its effectiveness. To combat this effect, you can positive reinforcement backed up by a question. This method reinforces positive behavior or attitudes but also makes people happy as they are asked about themselves.

Four steps can help you get people to like you:

1. Project a confident and positive attitude.

2. Establish rapport.

3. Synchronize, or get in tune with the target and surroundings using the methods mentioned earlier.

4. Effectively communicate.



In his book How to Make People Like You in 90 Seconds, Nicholas Boothman says that people decide whether they like someone in the first two seconds of meeting him or her. After an impression is made changing it can be hard. He promotes coming into an interaction with a good attitude. Having the ability to speak up and communicate effectively in many different situations can make you more likeable. What you project onto others is what they will feel. Your facial expressions, body language, dress, and so on must all project a good, positive attitude.

Boothman says some key things in his book about being likeable, including to ask lots of questions, actively listen, and be interested in what people are saying. Doing these things will help people like you.

A social engineer may need to practice it, but being likeable will go a long way toward succeeding in your audits.

Consensus or Social Proof

Social proof is a psychological phenomenon that occurs in social situations when people are unable to determine the appropriate mode of behavior. You can easily assume a behavior is appropriate if you see others acting or talking a certain way. Social influence in general can lead to conformity of large groups of individuals in either correct or mistaken choices. This behavior is common when people enter into unfamiliar situations and don’t have a frame of reference on how to deal with the situation; they mirror their behavior off of others whom they assume are more familiar and therefore better informed.

In his book, Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion, Dr. Robert Cialdini states, “Social proof—people will do things that they see other people are doing. For example, in one experiment, one or more confederates would look up into the sky; bystanders would then look up into the sky to see what they were seeing. At one point this experiment is aborted, as so many people were looking up that they stopped traffic.”

I will outline some excellent examples of social proof that will help you to see how powerful it is and if you have ever fallen for it.

Social proof is used heavily in marketing. Social proof is utilized in sales when high sales numbers are released, demonstrating to potential customers that the product is popular. Another example is when companies release shirts with logos or slogans printed on them, where the wearer then gives an implicit endorsement.

Social proof is not just influenced by large groups, but also by high-profile individuals. For instance, a single celebrity becoming associated with product will make others want to be associated with the celebrity’s positive traits, and they will then use the same product.

Many examples exist of celebrity endorsements, but in recent years the company that became a major supplier for berets was able to get Samuel L. Jackson to endorse its product, as shown in Figure 6-3.

Figure 6-3: Samuel L. Jackson endorsing a Kangol hat.



In its marketing efforts the company said its hats were some of the hottest on the market and the proof was that Mr. Jackson can be seen wearing them.

Advertisers often say things like, “largest selling” or “hottest product” to convince their audience that they have the backing of many of our peers in these claims.

In addition, the Media-Studies.ca website posted an article on influencing its targets using social proof (www.media-studies.ca/articles/influence_ch4.htm):

Experiments have found that the use of canned laughter causes an audience to laugh longer and more often when humorous material is presented and to rate the material as funnier. In addition, some evidence indicates that canned laughter is most effective for poor jokes.” The question is: why does it work, especially when the laugh track is often so obviously fake? To answer this question, Cialdini posits the principle of social proof: “One means we use to determine what is correct is to find out what other people think is correct…We view a behavior as more correct in a given situation to the degree that we see others performing it.”

As with the other “weapons of influence,” social proof is a shortcut that usually works well for us: if we conform to the behavior we see around us, we are less likely to make a social faux pas. The fact that canned laughter provokes an automatic response in audiences suggests that auditory cues are powerful stimuli because they influence us at a level of consciousness that is difficult to critique.

Other examples are how bartenders or other establishments will “salt the tip jar,” by placing a few bills in the jar. As a patron approaches to purchase food the implication is, “Many before you have tipped me, why don’t you?” And it works, too!

One of the most profound bits of research in this field that really stands out was done by Dr. K. D. Craig in 1978. Dr. Craig devoted his life to the study of pain and its effect on people. In 1978 he published a paper entitled “Social Modeling Influences on Sensory Decision Theory and Psychophysiological Indexes of Pain” (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/690805?dopt=Abstract), in which he did an experiment that he described as:

Subjects exposed to social models dissimulating tolerance or intolerance generally exhibit matching behavior in their verbal ratings of painful stimulation. It has been unclear, however, whether these changes reflect voluntary alteration of evidence or genuine changes in distress.

This study used alternative measures and controlled for methodological limitations of earlier studies by examining non-palmar skin potential in addition to palmar skin conductance and heart rate indexes of psycho-physiological response to electric shock, and by evaluating verbal expressions of pain with sensory decision theory methodology.

Several indexes of non-palmar skin potential and heart rate reactivity exhibited lower reactivity in the tolerant group. Tolerant modeling was also associated with decreases in subjective stress. The results were consistent with the position that changes in pain indexes associated with exposure to a tolerant model represented variations in fundamental characteristics of painful experiences as opposed to suppression of information.

To boil this down, what he basically did was shock people and ask them to rate their pain level. Then using similar but varying shocks did the same test in the presence of a person who was “tolerant” to the pain; it was as if a magical cloak was over the subject, because they were now more tolerant to pain.

This experiment points to the fact that part of the motivation to show, exhibit, or feel pain is related to how others around you act. The people in the study weren’t just acting like it hurt less: Their skin reactions and heart rate actually exhibited less pain reaction when a tolerant model was in place.

For a humorous example of the power of social proof, check out a video from the old television show Candid Camera at www.social-engineer.org/framework/Influence_Tactics:_Consensus_or_Social_Proof.

This video shows subjects being influenced to face different directions in an elevator, even at one point facing toward the back because everyone else is doing it. There were four to five participants in the elevator acting as patrons. At set intervals, the participants would all turn to the left, to the right, or face backwards. After a few seconds, a hidden camera would catch the unsuspecting subject complying and facing the same direction, removing a hat, or taking some other action.

Using social proof as a social engineer can be a deadly tool. This principle can be used to stimulate a person’s compliance with a request by informing him or her that many other individuals, perhaps some who are role models, took the action or behavior you are trying to get this person to do. Social proof can provide a shortcut for determining how to behave. But at the same time it can make targets vulnerable to the manipulations of others who seek to exploit such influence.

Social proof is most influential under two conditions:

Uncertainty: When people are unsure and the situation is ambiguous they are more likely to observe the behavior of others and to accept that behavior as correct.

Similarity: People are more inclined to follow the lead of others who are similar to themselves.



These conditions are where a social engineer can use social proof. Stating or even implying that many people before this target have taken a particular action can increase your chances of success.

In one social engineering situation where I was stopped by a leery security guard, I simply acted confused as to why I was stopped and said, “Yesterday, Jim let me in after checking all my credentials. I just figured I was still on record.”

The present security guard, hearing that Jim approved me, allowed me to pass without question. Social proof won’t always work so easily, but it is a very powerful force.

The principles outlined in this section are some of the deadliest influence tactics used today. These tactics can literally give a social engineer powers to motivate people, move them, and cause them to react in ways that will put them in the social engineer’s control.

Remember that influence and the art of persuasion is the process of getting someone else to want to do, react, think, or believe in the way you want them to. Creating this motivation within a target is a powerful force; it is a social engineer’s superpower. The principles outlined in this chapter can make that superpower a reality, but not without consequence and lots of work.

What do I mean by that? I have often found that after I practice a certain skill and become proficient at it, “turning it off” is very hard. This trait may sound attractive, but being cautious when it comes to who you are influencing, especially as a social engineer, is a good idea. To ingrain these skills into your personality, use them for helping others. For example, when you start to practice reading microexpressions and even using them to manipulate a target, the initial response might be to think you have some mystical power that allows you to almost read minds. This is where caution is wise. Practice the skill and work toward perfecting it, but don’t assume you know it all.

If you can influence someone to stop smoking, to start working out, or to be healthier, then you will learn to tap into these skills at will to benefit others, and using them in your social engineering practice is not a farfetched idea.

Many of these skills require you to actually be interested in people, care about them, and empathize with them. If these are not natural abilities for you, then you must work hard to obtain those skills. I urge you to take that time, because the skills in the preceding section can lead you to being a grand master social engineer.

Imagine you could alter what you think to the extent that gaining these skills could be easier. Imagine now, too, if you could alter the thinking of your targets so what they experience is exactly what you want them to experience. Literally altering the reality of those you interact with, including yourself, is the next topic, and it will just blow you away.





Altering Reality: Framing

Framing has been defined as information and experiences in life that alter the way one reacts to the decisions one must make. From a non–social engineer point of view, framing is your own personal experiences and the experiences of others that you allow into your conscious mind to alter the way you make decisions.

Grocery stores use framing by putting “75% lean” on a package of ground meat as opposed to “25% fat.” These terms mean the same thing (both have 25% fat content) but one sounds healthier and is more appealing to the buyer, and that is why stores use 75% lean as opposed to labeling the actual fat content.

The preceding example is simple, but it is also one that helps to show the power of framing. Simply presenting the facts in a different way can make something seem good that would normally be considered bad.

The following sections look at a few areas where framing is often used so you can see how powerful it is.

Politics

Framing has long been used in politics. Simply the way campaigns or messages are worded can make a huge difference in the way the public perceives a message.

Consider, for example, George Lakoff, a professional cognitive linguist. In an interesting observation on framing in politics, he states the difference in how people perceive the use of the phrases “Counterterrorism as law enforcement” versus “Counterterrorism as war.” When the 9/11 attacks occurred, Colin Powell argued that they should be treated as crimes. When the public demanded more action and stricter policies, then President Bush announced the “War on Terror” campaign.

Another example is the Social Security program in the United States. The name implies that this program can be relied upon to provide security for the future.

Yet another example is the difference in the terms bailout versus economic stimulus. Bailout met with lots of opposition because it can paint a word picture of bailing water out of a sinking boat. But economic stimulus paints the mental picture of helping the economy by stimulating the economy. Both programs did almost the same thing, but simple wording made the latter term more acceptable.

Judith Butler, Berkeley professor and author of the critically acclaimed book Frames of War, wrote about how framing is used especially in western cultures when it comes to political agendas and war. In her book she explores the media’s portrayal of state violence:

This portrayal has saturated our understanding of human life, and has led to the exploitation and abandonment of whole peoples, who are cast as existential threats rather than as living populations in need of protection. These people are framed as already lost, to imprisonment, unemployment, and starvation, and can easily be dismissed. In the twisted logic that rationalizes their deaths, the loss of such populations is deemed necessary to protect the lives of “the living.”

These are just a few examples where framing is used in politics.

Using Framing in Everyday Life

The term frame of reference is defined as a set of ideas, conditions, or assumptions that determine how something will be approached, perceived, or understood. This definition can be helpful in understanding how framing is used.

Anything that can alter people’s perceptions or the way they make decisions can be called framing. A friend tells you that last week she went to town and took a certain route that was backed up for 10 miles due to some construction. You might then take a longer route to avoid the potential delay, even though the news your friend shared is more than one week old.

Our minds are designed to not like “clutter” or chaos. When presented with things that are cluttered our brains will try to make order out of them. One interesting example of this is found in Figure 6-4.

Figure 6-4: Can you alter your reality frame to change what you see?



In your present frame, what is the background and what is the foreground? Your minds will insist on finding familiar patterns in things. We do it in clouds, space, and inanimate objects. Humans also tend to see faces in these things.

In Figure 6-4 can you alter your frame and change what is the image and what is the background? Try by focusing on the opposite of what you noticed first.

Another very interesting example of how human brains find order in chaos can be illustrated in an e-mail that circulated over the last few years that looked like this:

O lny srmat poelpe can raed tihs.

I cdnuolt blveiee taht I cluod aulaclty uesdnatnrd waht I was rdanieg. The phaonmneal pweor of the hmuan mnid, aoccdrnig to a rscheearch at Cmabrigde Uinervtisy, it deosn’t mttaer in waht oredr the ltteers in a wrod are, the olny iprmoatnt tihng is taht the frist and lsat ltteer be in the rghit pclae. The rset can be a taotl mses and you can sitll raed it wouthit a porbelm. Tihs is bcuseae the huamn mnid deos not raed ervey lteter by istlef, but the wrod as a wlohe. Amzanig huh? yaeh and I awlyas tghuhot slpeling was ipmorantt! if you can raed tihs psas it on !!

I am not sure whether this is actually Cambridge research, but the interesting part in that forwarded e-mail is how many of us who use English as our main language or are very proficient in reading English are probably able to read that paragraph without much effort, because our brains are very efficient at making order out of chaos.

Many times the framing is more subliminal. Companies use this in marketing in hopes that the subliminal messages will alter the target’s perception of their product. Many times companies will use subtle measures of framing to plant an idea.

For example, Figure 6-5 shows something you probably have seen many times.

Figure 6-5: Can you spot the frame?



After I show you this, you will never see the FedEx logo the same way again—there is an arrow in the FedEx logo. In an interview with the creator of the logo, he said he embedded the arrow in the logo to plant an idea about FedEx’s services. It is there to communicate movement, speed, and the dynamic nature of the company.

Did you find it yet? Look at Figure 6-6 where I outlined and circled the arrow.

Figure 6-6: The arrow indicates quality service that is always moving.



FedEx is not the only company that utilizes framing. For decades companies have been embedding messages into logos in an effort to frame the thinking of the viewer to remember, think, and view their company in the way they want. The next few figures show more examples.

Did you ever notice Amazon’s logo for its embedded framing message (see Figure 6-7)?

Figure 6-7: Do you see the smiling happy customer?



Amazon has two framed messages in its logo. One is the happiness you will feel as a customer, represented by the smile in the image, but the smile is also an arrow. That arrow points from A to Z, indicating the Amazon has everything from both points and in between.

Another great example is the Tostitos logo. This is a very social logo, as you can see in Figure 6-8.

Figure 6-8: Does this logo make you want to share a chip with someone?



The two T’s in the middle are people sharing a chip over a bowl of salsa. In 2004, Tostitos issued a press release that said, “Tostitos plays a role as a ‘social snack,’ helping to create connections between friends and families, whether it’s at a party, during the ‘big game,’ or at simple everyday get-togethers. The new logo brings to life this idea of making connections.”

These examples are just a small subset of how framing is used in marketing. Framing is not all about images; mostly it is about the value that the target perceives. The perception that the target has of an item can increase or decrease its value. Take an expensive clothing store—when you walk in everything is hung neatly, pressed, and perfect. The perception can be that the clothing is worth the exorbitant amount of the price tag. Yet, if you were to take one of the ties, shirts, or other pieces of clothing off the rack; bring it to a discount store; and throw it into a large bin full of other clothes marked, “Discount 75% off” your perception of the value of that item of clothing would go way down.

Marketing gurus play off this phenomenon in an effort to frame the public’s perception of value. Many companies have been successful at framing to such an extent that people actually have coined phrases to create a whole genre of words to describe products.

For example, everyone has probably said, “Will you make a Xerox of that?” even if the machine is not a Xerox but another brand. Xerox is the brand name, not the type of machine.

A more recent example is no matter what search engine you use, people often say, “Did you Google it?” because Google has become synonymous with searching on the Web. And people say, “Hand me a Kleenex please,” when really they want a tissue.

Others that you might not even be aware were brand names (unless you are of the generation in which they were introduced) include:

Aspirin is a trademarked product of Bayer.

Thermos is a product name of Thermos GmbH Company.

Band-Aid is a trademark of Johnson & Johnson.

Frisbee was a trademark of Wham-O.

