

All of those names became so popular that people’s frame of reference eventually encompassed any product similar to it. I never take aspirin—I usually use another brand—but I will always ask for “two aspirin,” be given the brand I use, and be happy.

Volumes of information exist about framing, but boiling down this information to some main principles you can use as a social engineer is necessary. The preceding information set a very detailed stage for what framing is and how it is used in different areas of life. Before moving to the social engineering arena, take a look at the different types of framing alignments.

Four Types of Frame Alignment

Two researchers, David Snow from the University of Arizona and Robert Benford from the University of Nebraska, wrote a paper entitled, “Clarifying the Relationship Between Framing and Ideology in the Study of Social Movements” (www.social-engineer.org/resources/book/SNOW_BED.pdf).

Snow and Benford argue that when individual frames become linked in congruency and complementariness, that frame alignment occurs, producing frame resonance, which is key to the process of a group transitioning from one frame to another. Snow and Benford then outline four conditions that affect framing efforts:

“The robustness, completeness, and thoroughness of the framing effort”: Snow and Benford identified three core framing tasks, and the degree to which these tasks are attended to will determine how much each participant gets involved.



The three steps are:

1. Diagnose the frame for problems.

2. Analyze it for solutions.

3. If successful, a call to action.



The more effort put into the frame the better chance the person has to call those he is framing into action.

“The relationship between the proposed frame and the larger belief system”: People tend to discount frames or proposed frames if a link does not exist to a core belief or a value of their belief system.



Trying to convince a person who holds a belief that eating meat is cruelty to animals to go to the steak place down the road that has a great special will certainly fail. The frame must fall with the core of a person’s beliefs to be successful (unless your goal is to use a frame to change his or her core beliefs); it is imperative to success.

A large-scale framing change attempt was made through the controversial anti-smoking commercials where volunteers pile up body bags in front of a tobacco industry building’s front door. The body bags represent how many people die every minute, hour, or day from smoking. The hope is to alter the frame of those who support smoking to think about the death toll for those who smoke.

“Relevance of the frame to the realities of the participants”: The frame must be relevant to the person (target). It must be creditable and testable as it relates to the target’s experience.



You can’t expect to use a marketing frame that will encourage people to take a luxury cruise in a land where people cannot afford food for the day. No matter how good you are at using framing in marketing, it just would fail. For the frame to align, it must not just be relevant but must also be provable in order to hold value, even if that proof is just in the mind of the target.

For example, in 2007 a very popular and trusted news source, Insight Magazine (which is owned by the same company as The Washington Times) reported that then-presidential candidate Obama had attended an all-Muslim school that was known for teaching a very radical and fundamental form of Islam. When this news report was released many believed it right away—why? It fit into the frame of their reality, it seemed credible, and it came from a “trusted” source.

CNN, another reputable source for news, sent out investigators, discovered that story was false, and reported its findings.

This is a good example of altering people’s frames on a matter using a very trusted source for “truth”—news media. People who wanted to believe that Obama was a radical Muslim ran with that story, and the news went wild. When research revealed the story to be false, many people’s thinking was altered again.

“Cycles of protest; the point at which the frame emerges on the timeline of the current era and existing preoccupations with social change”: What is happening in the world can affect a social frame. Think back a few years ago; if the idea of full body X-ray scans were proposed to companies in the U.S. or other Western cultures, the idea would have been thrown to the wind.



Activists for privacy would have fought against the idea and won, simply by using the idea of someone being able to see your private areas and potentially saving that picture to mock or sexually harass you. This argument would have outweighed the sales efforts of the creators of the machines. Yet, after the attacks in America on September 11 and the subsequent rise of terrorist activity, those machines are being installed at airports around the globe despite the cries by activists, even arguing with the power of child pornography laws on their side.

Why? The social frame of how to remain safe has been altered, allowing a new breed of decision to enter.

Snow and Benford propose that when proper frames are constructed as described in these four points, large-scale changes in society such as those necessary for social movement can be achieved through frame alignment. Their studies focus on society as a whole, but these same principles are effective when dealing on a smaller scale or even one-to-one.

The preceding discussion is just the process to frame alignment; actually four different types of alignment can occur after these four conditions are met. Although many of these aspects are geared towards framing groups as a whole, the following sections discuss these four framing alignments on a personal level that will show how you can use them on a smaller scale both as a social engineer and/or just as a person wanting to align frames with others. Imagine trying to align your goal of entry to a building with the frame of the security guard designed to stop you. Bringing his frame into alignment with your pretext can ensure success.

One thing to remember about frames is that they are never constructed from scratch. Frames are always drawn on already-existing cultural codes that involve the core of a person’s beliefs and experiences. Knowing this will affect how you use framing.

Frame Bridging

The Cathie Marsh Centre for Census and Survey Information defines frame bridging as the linkage of two or more ideologically congruent but structurally unconnected frames regarding a particular topic.

Bridging is not about tricking people into believing your frame as much as your understanding their frame so deeply that you find the connecting link. You then use that connecting link to bring a target into your frame.

The situation could be that you want to gain access to an area, building, or piece of information. Your frame is that you want that to happen. The frame of the person you are approaching is not necessarily to stop you; he may not even know what you are going to attempt. If you were to approach the situation in that frame you may alert him to a problem and thereby shut down your chances.

By understanding the target’s job, role, and mental outlook you can understand his frame of mind and maybe find a link that will make his transition into your frame much easier.

What is your pretext? How would the person you are about to approach treat a person in your pretext? A good social engineer must understand this to be successful. The “gatekeeper” will treat a sales guy differently from the soda delivery guy. Understanding the frame of the target means knowing how he will treat you—not you as a social engineer, but you as the pretext.

A more personal example may be to think of how you want others to view you— maybe as cool, “together,” intelligent, or confident. A professor wants to appear smart. A manager wants to appear in control. An athlete wants to appear calm and strong. A comedian wants the audience to view her as funny. All of these are frames that a person wants others to be in alignment with.

In the comedian’s case, what if there is a heckler—a person who doesn’t see her as cool, funny, intelligent, or confident? Because of the heckler’s frame they are angry, not happy, put off, or just not interested? If the comedian persists in his frame he may convert some people around him, but until he delves deep and try to understand where someone is coming from he will not be able to align their two frames and bring that person into his frame. The comedian who can handle a heckler is able to put aside her fears about her frame and use the heckler to her advantage.

The frame bridging alignment technique can be one of the most powerful used by a social engineer, but involves some preparation to make sure you get it right.

A social engineer can utilize this particular form of frame alignment by helping a target bridge the gap of what they see and what they need to believe through a proper pretext. Again, recall the example of trying to gain access to the building as a tech support rep. Your dress, tools, and language must match the frame that the target expects of a support rep. If they do, the bridge is created and alignment occurs.

Frame Amplification

Frame amplification, according to Snow, refers to “the clarification and invigoration of an interpretive frame that bears on a particular issue, problem, or set of events.” In other words, you will amplify, or focus on, the values or beliefs of the target. By focusing on those values you can find an area that will align your two frames, or at least drive the target to think there is alignment.

This form of alignment has been labeled as the most basic of the four because it is more of a maintenance method. It involves the accenting, augmenting, or punctuating of an event as being more important than others, which allows for this event to be linked with other events with greater ease.

An example of frame amplification can be revealed if we do further research into the earlier example about the full-body X-ray scanners. The scanners are being sold now as deterrents for terrorists. The frame that they are being sold under is how the recent terrorist activity caused a need for products like these, and here they are to fulfill that need. Yet research into these devices shows they were being built, marketed, and rejected long before the attacks of 9/11 and other recent attacks.

Using the events of 9/11 combined with the fear of flying many people have due to those attacks enables the scanner companies to link their frame with the frame of fear many people have, and thereby gain support for implementing these devices in airports around the globe.

One of the other strengths of frame amplification is that it can be successfully used to blur the frame and cause people with a certain belief to distance themselves from that belief. For example, many who believed in privacy and the freedom to choose how to be screened have been brought into a different frame by the x-ray scanner manufacturers focusing on certain aspects of other screening methods being unsafe or incomplete, and to prove their point they bring out stories like “the underwear bomber.” Such tactics amplify their frame that the new x-ray scanners are better and safer, using widely held beliefs regarding the lack of security of other methods.

A social engineer can utilize this alignment technique in a few different ways. For instance, a social engineer may want to convince a security guard to give him access to an onsite dumpster area. The pretext of working for a waste disposal contractor is good and it very well may work alone, but it would work even better if you presented the idea that there is damage to one of the dumpsters, which represents a security liability for the company. Amplifying that frame can bring you to an alignment with the security guard that the best solution is allowing you onsite to check it out.

Frame Extension

“Frame extensions are a movement’s effort to incorporate participants by extending the boundaries of the proposed frame to encompass the views, interests, and, more importantly, the sentiments of a group.” In other words, by extending your frame’s boundaries to encompass other subjects or interests of your target, you can bring them into alignment.

For example, the possibility exists that groups who support environmental or “green” initiatives will extend their frame to antinuclear movements, stating they are under the umbrella of a being concerned about the environmental risks.

However, a risk with using frame extensions is they can weaken the stance on the original frame and a certain level of appeal can be lost. This can be done by including too many frame extensions into a certain frame, eventually diluting the main frame and causing interest to be lost.

Even on a personal level, simple is best. When using this frame alignment tactic, keep it simple and easy to follow. Don’t make the connecting web so convoluted you lose the interest of the target.

A social engineer may utilize this frame alignment technique through the elicitation skills discussed in Chapter 3. When a social engineer approaches a target, she can gather information about the target or their company by not acting interested in that but utilizing chit-chat at a party, or with a pretext as a reporter. This will give the social engineer the “right” to ask for information that they would normally have to work very hard to get.

Frame Transformation

“Frame transformation is a process required when the proposed frames may not resonate with, and on occasion may even appear antithetical to, conventional lifestyles or rituals and extant interpretive frames.” In other words, a social engineer offers new arguments that point to why their frame is better in an effort to transform the thoughts or beliefs of a target from where they are to where the social engineer wants them to be.

When a frame transformation occurs, new values and new understandings are required to keep people involved and keep their support. This type of transformation was done on a large social level in the 1970s where the conservative movement was reframed or transformed into a more progressive environmentalist movement.

On a smaller, more personal scale, frame transformations occur every day through religious conversion, in which a person’s frame or whole belief system is altered, changed, and transformed to be aligned with a new frame of thought, that of the new religion.

Transforming someone’s frame is not easy; it is one of the most complicated alignment tactics to put into practice because it can take:

Time: Changing someone’s whole belief structure is not a quick process and can take the usage of other alignment techniques and lots of time to make it work.

Effort: Knowing where the target is coming from and where you want him to be are just the initial steps. What will be his objections and mental blocks? Finding out these things will take some work.

Education: Knowledge is power. You must help the target understand the new frame you want him to “convert” to.

Logic: The education must be logical and not all emotion. The target must be able to reason and rationalize the action he is about to take. The only way he can do that is with logic.

Deep emotional ties: Knowledge is what prepares a person for action, logic convinces him the action is good to take, but emotion is what makes the action happen. If you are emotional about your “cause” the target will feel that emotion. Just make sure the emotion you are expressing and feeling matches the pretext. If your pretext is a guidance counselor and you come in like a cheerleader you will offset the target’s ability to align.



Being able to align others to your frame and align yourself with theirs can give people incentive to do the things you ask. Although using any of the four framing methods is powerful, a social engineer who is successful in frame transformation has endless power.

Read on to find out how to apply these framing techniques as a social engineer.

Using Framing as a Social Engineer

Throughout this section I mentioned many ways a social engineer might use framing as a technique. Some of these methods are so powerful that perfecting them can turn you into a master influencer.

To truly use framing as a social engineer you must understand four things about framing. These four things will help you to understand clearly how framing works and how to use it as a social engineer.

Remember what a frame is. A frame is a conceptual structure that our minds use in thinking. This is a vital piece of information because your goal is either to create a new frame, align with a person’s frame, or bring the target into your frame.

One of those three goals needs to be outlined with the following four rules in order to master framing as a social engineer.

Rule 1: Everything You Say Will Evoke a Frame

People’s minds work by picturing things. This natural fact cannot be altered, but you can use it to your advantage.

If I start to talk to you about your boss, your mind will picture him. If I paint a picture with words about how he was outside on the cell phone and he was angry, your mind will start to picture his angry face, body language, and words. You will not be able to control this and that mental frame will cause emotions and reactions.

Painting a picture with words is a powerful way to use framing. By choosing your words carefully you can cause a target’s mind to picture things you want him to picture and start moving him to a frame you want.

Have you ever heard someone who you thought was a great storyteller? Why? What made her great? She was able to paint a mental picture, make you see things in your mind, which intrigues you and gets you involved. This skill is very important for a social engineer. It doesn’t mean you talk as if you are telling a great story all the time, but you want to keep in mind the words you choose because those words hold the power to paint pictures in the minds of the targets.

Here is a simple example: I can tell you that I had spaghetti for dinner last night. If you are not a foodie or not Italian, maybe the last time you had spaghetti it wasn’t that pleasurable. Your mental frame is not that strong and you might be turned off.

What if I told you that last night my wife made a sauce of vine-ripened tomatoes and basil she grew in the garden? It also had chunks of fresh garlic and oregano in it, as well as a hint of red wine flavors. She served it over a plate of perfectly cooked spaghetti noodles and with homemade garlic bread.

Whether or not you are a pasta fan, you are picturing a restaurant-quality dish. This is how you should plan your words with your targets. They should be descriptive, robust, and full of pictures. Yet the caution is not to be overly theatrical as a social engineer. Your goal should be to build a picture with your words, not to draw attention to yourself or your delivery.

Rule 2: Words That Are Defined Within a Frame Evoke the Mental Frame

You don’t have to use the exact words to make a person picture the frame you want. For example, what do you think of when you read the following sentence?

“I saw the insect struggle to get free from the web, but he could not. Moments later he was wrapped up in a cocoon and saved for dinner.”

Notice, I didn’t have to mention a spider to make you think of a spider. If I want to frame you into thinking about a spider, I can do it without having to mention the word spider. This powerful rule of influence and framing gives a social engineer the ability to control the target’s thoughts using indirect speech.

Toastmasters, the international organization focused on people’s speaking abilities, teaches its members to move people with their speech by getting their audience’s emotions involved. Delivering a story that causes the target to picture the frame you want while involving them emotionally will solidify your standing in leading that conversation.

Again, using this method of framing will take planning. A powerful aspect to this frame rule is that while a target’s brain is processing the information you are feeding it and generating the mental pictures you are painting, there is a time when you can plant thoughts or ideas. Unlike where I painted a direct picture of a beautiful pasta dish, this rule allows the target the freedom to picture something else.

I could have ended my earlier spaghetti dinner story with, “My wife then served it on a plate of perfectly cooked pasta. What kind of pasta? I am not telling you, you have to picture it,” and when your brain starts to picture it then I can say, “As I twirled it on my fork, the sauce was so thick and perfect it clung to each noodle.”

This description paints the mental picture of spaghetti. What other pasta do you twirl? (I know there are others, but you get the point.)

Rule 3: Negating the Frame

If I tell you to not picture a spider in a web, your brain has to picture the spider first to tell yourself to not picture it.

This technique of negating the frame is powerful. Telling a target to be careful, watch out, or be cautious about something automatically puts them in the frame you may want. This technique is often used by professional social engineers. In one interview I did with a panel of social engineers, everyone agreed that this technique works great.

During one audit, I dropped a few USB keys that were laden with malicious code that I wanted someone in the company to run without thinking. I approached one of the employees who I had gained the trust of and said, “John, I heard a memo was issued to be on the lookout for a few USB keys that have been dropped. They are looking for them now.”

It just so happens that you are in there as a janitor and you dropped the USB keys laden with malicious files, and now by telling people to look out for them, you are in essence planting the seed for them to do your bidding. This kind of a phrase negates the worry they may feel when finding a rogue USB key and cause them to plug it in to see whose it is.

Rule 4: Causing the Target to Think About the Frame Reinforces That Frame

Every time the brain focuses or thinks about something it is reinforced. The more you can make the target think about or picture the frame you want him in, the easier it will be to reinforce and move him to that frame.

Look back at Chapter 2 on communication modeling and analyze how the messages a social engineer will develop can have amazing effects on your targets.

I was once traveling in India. I don’t remember the exact incident in the news, but all I know is that President George W. Bush had lost favor with people in Europe. I was flipping through the news stations and saw how people in certain European countries where hanging dolls that looked like George W. Bush in the streets. After wrapping American flags around the dolls they were lighting them on fire.

It was a shocking scene and while I was on the phone with my wife that evening I said, “Wow that news story on what’s happening in Europe is crazy, huh?”

She hadn’t heard anything about it. Why? News media and news stations are masters when it comes to framing and manipulation.

A social engineer can learn a lot from looking at how media utilizes this skill. By using omissions, or leaving out details of a story or the whole story itself, the media can lead people to a conclusion that seems like their own, but really is the media’s.

Social engineers can do that, too. By omitting certain details and only “leaking” details that they want leaked, they can create the frame that they want the target to think or feel.

Labeling is another tactic used by the media. When they want to frame something positive they may say things like, “the strong defense of…” or “our healthy economy.” These phrases paint mental pictures of stability and health that can help draw positive conclusions. The same rules can apply for negative frames, too. Labels such as, “Islamic terrorists” or “conspiracy theories” paint a very negative picture.

You can utilize these skills to label things with descriptive words that will bring a target into the frame you want. Once, approaching a guard booth that I wanted to gain access to, I walked right through as if I belonged. I was instantly stopped abruptly. I looked at the guard in shock and apologetically I used a phrase like, “Oh, yesterday that extremely helpful security guard, Tom, checked out all my creds and let me pass. That is why I assumed I was still on the list.”

Labeling the previous guard as “extremely helpful” automatically puts the present guard in a frame I want. If he wants to receive such a prestigious label, he better be as “extremely helpful” as Tom was.

Framing is effective because it bends the truth but not so much that it becomes false, so it remains believable. A social engineer can create a desired impression without departing too far from the appearance of objectivity.

I read a white paper called “Status Quo Framing Increases Support for Torture,” written by Christian Crandall, Scott Eidelman, Linda Skitka, and Scott Morgan, all researchers from different universities. In the white paper they supplied a very interesting data set that intrigued me on this topic. In the U.S. it seems many people are against the use of torture in wartime as a tactic for gaining intelligence information. The purpose of this study was to see whether the researchers could get a subset of people to agree that torture is less disagreeable by framing the message differently.

They took a sample group of roughly 486 people and asked them to read two paragraphs.

The first one read:

The use of stress by U.S. forces when questioning suspects in the Middle East is in the news. This kind of stress interview is new; according to some reports, it is the first time it has been widely used by the U.S. military. American forces have used many different methods, including strapping detainees to a board and dunking them underwater, stuffing detainees face-first into a sleeping bag, and long periods of hanging detainees by ropes in painful positions. Detainees are also kept awake and alone for days at a time.

This paragraph paints the thought that these are new techniques being employed by the U.S. Government to obtain data.

The second paragraph read:

The use of stress by U.S. forces when questioning suspects in the Middle East is in the news. This kind of stress interview is not new; according to some reports, it has been used for more than 40 years by the U.S. military. American forces have used many different methods, including strapping detainees to a board and dunking them underwater, stuffing detainees face-first into a sleeping bag, and long periods of hanging detainees by ropes in painful positions. Detainees are also kept awake and alone for days at a time.

The status quo version of the paragraph was identical, except that the second sentence in the paragraph was replaced with “This kind of stress interview is not new; according to some reports, it has been used for more than 40 years by the U.S. military.”

What were the results in just changing one frame—a frame that these are brand-new methods or that these are tried-and-tested methods that have been used for decades?

The paper describes the researchers’ measures. Seven items formed the basic set of dependent variables. These items corresponded to a seven-point “button” scale, with the point labels of very much disagree, moderately disagree, slightly disagree, uncertain, slightly agree, moderately agree, and very much agree. All items were reverse scored so that higher scores reflected greater agreement with each item.

The conclusion? “The status quo manipulation had an effect on overall evaluation of torture—when described as a long-standing rather than new practice, torture was evaluated more positively; [m]aking torture appear to be the status quo for interrogations increased individual support and justifications for using it as a tactic.”

By changing just one little part of the frame the researchers were able to bring a sizeable group of people into alignment and make them agree (for the most part) that torture can be an acceptable policy.

That paper’s remarks continued, “They can apply across many, many domains, and can affect judgment, decision making, aesthetics, and policy preferences,” concluding with, “relatively modest changes in the way ethical choices and value dilemmas are presented, framed, or put in context can have profound effect on political choice and policy.”

This experiment proves how powerful framing is because it can change even core beliefs, judgments, and decisions that people may have had for years. As a social engineer that is not even the goal most of the time. You are not trying to convert people; you’re just trying to get them to take an action that with a little thought they would reason is not that good to take.

Applying the four framing rules and doing a lot of planning can make framing a devastating force to be reckoned with, which is why, unfortunately, malicious social engineers use this technique every day. In the U.S. and “westernized cultures,” especially, people are trained to accept being framed, to accept being told what to think and how to think it.

If I told you 15 years ago that almost every program on television would be about watching real people do real things, you might have laughed at me. Why? Because watching shows like that sounded boring and silly. Yet in 2006, the Los Angeles Times stated that the number of reality TV programs jumped up 128% (http://articles.latimes.com/2010/mar/31/business/la-fi-ct-onlocation31-2010mar31), and it hasn’t slowed down much since then, and it’s because watching them is what’s new and hip, and we are told that watching them is good and fun, and everyone does it. These shows are an example of how one thing can be made to look good that most people would have considered silly just a few years earlier.

Framing is definitely an art form that when mixed with the science of communication and influence can become a formidable force on a personal level in the hands of a skilled social engineer, through presenting information in a way that can make aligning with the social engineer “easy” for the target, can make him take action that will not leave him feeling guilty, and alter his perception of reality.

Framing and influence are key parts of social engineering, although another skill is often associated with the “dark corners” of social engineering. The book’s introduction mentioned peering into these corners; the following section presents the information that will alter the way you look at influence.





Manipulation: Controlling Your Target

Manipulation is considered by many to be a very dark topic, a topic that creates a sense of fear because of the way it is often portrayed.

Taking a look at a few definitions found on the Internet may help to explain:

“exerting shrewd or devious influence especially for one’s own advantage”

“influence or control shrewdly or deviously”

“control (others or oneself) or influence skillfully, usually to one’s advantage”



You can clearly see why many social engineers drool over this topic. Can you imagine being able to use your skills to control or influence someone to your advantage?

From something as dark as brainwashing to the subtle hints of a salesperson, manipulation tactics are something every social engineer should study and perfect. The aim of manipulation is to overcome the critical thinking and free will of their target. When the target loses his ability to make a decision based on informed processes, they can be fed the ideas, values, attitudes, or reasonings of the one manipulating them.

Manipulation is used in six ways that hold true whether the topic is brainwashing or something less insidious. I will quickly go through each one before we get into this very deep section.

Increasing the suggestibility of your target. At its most extreme, sleep or food deprivation increases a target’s suggestibility. On the lighter side, subtle hints that build in intensity over time to make your target more suggestible.

Gaining control over the target’s environment. This technique can involve everything from controlling the type and quantity of information to which a target has access to much subtler things like gaining access to a target’s social media websites. In a social engineering context, having access to social media allows you to view your target’s communications as well as exert control over the information he receives.

Creating doubt. Destabilizing and undermining your target’s belief system can go a long way toward manipulating your target to take an action you want. From a social engineering viewpoint, this must be done subtly. You can’t just barge in and start degrading your target; instead, questioning the rules they follow, their job, or their beliefs can affect the target’s ability to make rational decisions.

Creating a sense of powerlessness. This truly malicious technique is used in wartime interrogations to make a target feel a lack of confidence in their convictions. A social engineer can utilize this tactic by taking away the target’s agency by presenting the “facts” you received from someone with authority, thus creating a powerless feeling.

Creating strong emotional responses in the target. Strong emotional responses include everything from doubt to guilt to humiliation and more. If the feelings are intense enough, they can cause the target to alter their whole belief system. A social engineer must be careful not to create damaging negative emotions, but using tactics that create an emotional response based on fear of loss or punishment can prove beneficial to your SE goal.

Heavy intimidation. Fear of physical pain or other dire circumstances can be used to make a target crack under pressure. Again, most social engineers will not go this route unless they are using corporate espionage as a tactic, but in normal social engineering, this tactic utilizes perceived authority to build strong fear and feelings of potential loss.



Most times, however, manipulation is not so extreme. On its very basic level, imagine you’re in a crowded room and someone calls out your name. What is your reaction? Usually it is to turn around or respond with a “Yes?” You have been manipulated, but not necessarily in a bad way.

On a psychological level, being manipulated is even more profound. Notice what happens to make that preceding interaction happen: Your brain hears your name, and you automatically formulate an answer (“Yes?”). The connection between that answer and your vocal response is very short. Even if you made no vocal response or if the name-calling is not targeted to you personally, if a question is asked your mind will formulate an answer.

Just being in close proximity of two people conversing and overhearing a question will cause your mind to formulate an answer. The answer can be an image or sound in your mind. If a target overhears two people talking about what someone looks like his mind will form a mental picture. If you hear two people telling a joke about a chicken crossing the road, you may picture the chicken, the road, or the whole scene.

This type of manipulation is just the beginning of what you can do. Another manipulation tactic is that of conditioning.

People can be conditioned to connect certain sounds or actions with feelings and emotions. If every time something positive is mentioned a person hears a pen click, after a short time the target can be conditioned to associate a positive feeling with this sound.

One of the most classic examples of conditioning was Ivan Pavlov and what we call Pavlov’s dog, which was discussed in Chapter 5. The question then becomes whether you can use this type of conditioning on people. Although making targets salivate is not on most social engineers’ priority list (although it would be humorous), are there ways to condition a target to react to certain sets of input the way you want them to react?

To find the answer, read the following sections, which provide a few examples of manipulation in business and marketing to set a foundation for discussion and an analysis of how to use manipulation on a personal level.

To Recall or Not To Recall

In May 2010 The Washington Post reported an interesting story (www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/05/27/AR2010052705484.html). The maker of children’s Tylenol, Motrin, Benadryl, and Zyrtec, among other liquid over-the-counter medicines, discovered a defective batch of Motrin and didn’t want to perform a recall due to the costs of such an action. What was the company’s answer?

It used manipulation. The company hired a slew of contractors to go from store to store and buy back all the Motrin in the store, which would then be destroyed. Unfortunately, its plans were foiled when a contractor dropped a paper in one store that outlined the plot, which was then reported to the Federal Drug Administration (FDA).

On a side note, the FDA did make that company recall 136 million bottles in just one out of four recalls. Unfortunately, it was too late because 775 cases were reported of children and infants who had adverse reactions to this tainted batch, with 37 ending in death. The reports are not conclusive whether the deaths were a result of the bad Motrin or a reaction to the Motrin. That is not the focus here.

This is a very dark example of manipulation, or at least attempted manipulation. To protect this company’s image it was willing to forgo the proper procedures and the safety of children all over the world. It attempted to manipulate the system and in the process people lost their lives. The documentation that was dropped in the store discussed how the contractors were under orders to buy the product back and not mention “recall” at any point in time.

When the company was caught it deployed many interesting manipulation tactics. It deflected the situation by saying the reason for the action was its experts didn’t think a significant risk existed to children.

It followed this statement by a formal apology and the firing of six top executives. Then the real manipulation came in. While being questioned, the company stated that they were not trying to do a “phantom recall,” as it was being called. The company was testing the alleged damaged batch by having the contractors buy it back to be tested. If it was found faulty the company would have taken the proper procedures. This company attempted to use a manipulation technique called diversion, to divert attention from what they were really doing to make it seem better than it was. In addition, it used a cover-up technique to manipulate the thinking of those who disagreed with their actions by issuing statements that the company was trying to do testing to determine if there was need for a recall.

This type of manipulation is worth discussing because a diversion tactic can work on a much smaller scale in a personal setting, too. If you are caught in an area or place you should not be, then having a good cover story that is believable can go a long way toward manipulating the target to allow you safe passage. Diverting the target’s attention to something other than the problem at hand can give you enough time to redirect his or her concern. For example, if you are caught by a security guard, instead of getting nervous, you could simply look at him and say, “Do you know what I am doing here? Did you hear that some USB keys have been lost with very important data on them? It is imperative we find them before everyone comes in tomorrow. Do you want to check the bathrooms?”

Many of you probably never heard about the Motrin recall story, showing that the company did a good job of manipulating (so far) the media and justice system to keep the limelight off of it. Regardless, this situation outlines how diversion and cover-up can be used in manipulation.

Anxiety Cured at Last

In 1998 SmithKline Beecham, one the largest pharmaceutical companies in the world, launched an ad campaign designed to “educate” the masses about something it called “social anxiety disorder.” It planted 50 press stories and surveys with questions like, “Do you have social anxiety disorder?” These quizzes and surveys were geared to “educate” people on this disorder and how to tell whether they suffer from it.

Later that year it changed its marketing campaign copy in medical journals from “Paxil means peace…in depression, panic disorder, and OCD” to “Show them they can…the first and only approved treatment for social anxiety disorder.” This change cost the company about $1 million to make.

In 1999, a $30 million campaign was launched on print and television announcing that SmithKline Beecham found the cure for social anxiety disorder, and its name is Paxil. Using the data from the surveys and quizzes the company bought spots in some of the “hottest” television shows at that time and spouted statistics that 10 million Americans suffer from SAD (social anxiety disorder), and now there is hope.

By 2000, Paxil sales accounted for half of the increase in the entire market: The company “became number one in the U.S. selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor market for new retail prescriptions in 2000.’’ In 2001 it won FDA approval to market Paxil for both generalized anxiety disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder.

The 9/11 attacks resulted in a dramatic increase in prescriptions for all antidepressants and anxiety drugs. During this time Paxil’s advertising positioned it as an answer to the uncontrollable feelings of fear and helplessness that many people felt in the aftermath of the attacks.

I am not saying that these drugs do not work, or that the company’s motive is malicious, but I find this case particularly interesting in that the manipulation of the market started with education and ended with a massive increase in sales, while creating new disorders along the way.

This type of case-building manipulation is often used in marketing, but is also used in politics and even on a personal level, presenting a problem that is terrible, but then presenting “facts” that you have derived as proof of why what you say is true. On one episode of The Real Hustle, Paul Wilson set up a scenario where he had to extract a famous star they were using in a scam to steal some CDs from a store. The store clerk detained the star and waited for the cops to arrive. Paul walked in, identified himself as a cop, flashed his wallet with nothing more than a picture of his kids in it, and was able to “arrest” the star, take the CDs and the money in the cash register as evidence, and leave unquestioned. This story is an excellent example of this type of case-building manipulation. Paul had a problem (the thieving star) and presented himself as the solution (the cop) to the problem. Whatever the scenario, build the case for what a good person you are before presenting your request, and that case makes the request more palatable to the person you’re trying to manipulate.

You Can’t Make Me Buy That!

Kmart. I felt like just leaving this section at that, but I think I should explain more. Kmart developed an idea it called the planogram, which is a diagram that shows retailers how to display their products based on colors, sizes, and other criteria to manipulate their customers to want to buy and spend the most.

Planograms are designed to create optimal visual and commercial product placement.

The use of these planograms is a form of manipulation because researchers have studied how people shop, think, and buy. Understanding these things helped them develop mechanisms to control the visual input to increase shoppers’ desire to buy.

Software, as well as whole companies, are devoted to planning and executing these planograms for the maximum effect on keeping shoppers shopping.

Three different layouts are used to manipulate shoppers:

Horizontal product placement: To increase a customer’s concentration on a certain article, a multiple horizontal placement side by side of one product is applied. Some retailers found that a minimum placement range between 15 and 30 cm of a single product is necessary to achieve an increase in customer attentiveness (see Figure 6-9).

Vertical product placement: A different method used is the vertical product placement. Here one product is placed on more than one shelf level to achieve 15–30 cm placement space (see Figure 6-10).



Figure 6-9: Placing the same or similar articles in a horizontal row increases customer focus.



Figure 6-10: The same products are placed on more than one shelf.



Block placement: Products that have something in common are placed in a block (brands). This can be done side by side, on top of each other, centered, or using magnetized hangers (see Figure 6-11).



Figure 6-11: A block placement of similar products or brands.



Planograms are not the only method of manipulating shoppers. One test done involved a shopping mall running specifically designed music loops. The result was that those shoppers stayed in the mall an average of 18% longer than when the music was not running.

In the Journal of Business Research, Jean-Charles Chebat and Richard Michon published a study they performed in a Canadian shopping mall (www.ryerson.ca/~rmichon/Publications/Ambient%20odors.pdf). The researchers pumped specially designed aromas into the air that were supposed to trigger happiness and the desire to buy. The result there was that an average of $50 more per shopper was spent in that week-long study.

Your trips to the shopping malls and grocery stores will never be the same now. However, you can learn a lot from these methods and experiments. Knowing how people group things in their brains can affect how you organize your shelves to manipulate the feelings, emotions, and thoughts of your targets.

On the topic of colors, they are a major way to manipulate the emotions of a target. Many of the same principles apply to colors as they do to product placement. The colors you choose to wear or use can affect the target. A lot of research has been done on colors and their effects. The following is a short list of some ways a particular color could affect the thinking or emotions of another person:

White: White is often associated with purity, light, and cleanliness. It gives feelings of safety and neutrality as well as goodness and faith. This is why white is often used in weddings or as the color of surrender.

Black: Black often denotes power, elegance, mystery, and strength. It is used to denote authority, depth, and stability. Black gives the feeling of calmness and tranquility. Because it contrasts with other colors, it can also be used to enhance other colors.

Red: Red is associated with excitement and joy. It is a color filled with celebration, action, and energy. It can denote good health, speed, passion, desire, and love. Red can stimulate emotions as well as increase heart rate, respiration, and blood pressure.



Red can trigger strong emotions—use caution when using red. Even though it can denote power and impulsiveness, it can denote force, intimidation, and conquest, even violence and revenge. Be careful how you use red.

Orange: Orange gives warmth, enthusiasm, attraction, determination, strength, and endurance. It can stimulate a person to feel invigorated and even stimulate his or her appetite.



Orange is another color to be cautious with. Although using orange has many good benefits, like making the viewer feel warm and attracted to you or your product, too much or the wrong combination can create feelings of insecurity, ignorance, and sluggishness.

Gold: Gold is usually associated with illumination, wisdom, wealth, and prestige.

Yellow: Yellow is associated with energy and optimism, joy and cheerfulness, loyalty and freshness. It can cause a person to feel focused and attentive.



Yellow also has an impact on a person’s memory (why are so many sticky notes yellow?). Used in small amounts, it can trigger positive emotions, but too much can cause a target to lose focus or feel criticized.

Green: Green is often associated with nature, harmony, life, fertility, ambition, protection, and peace. It can produce a very calming effect, making someone feel safe.



Green is another power color but can also make one feel greedy, guilty, jealousy, and disordered if used in the wrong setting or used too much.

Blue: Blue is associated with the color of the sky and ocean. It can be linked to intelligence, intuition, truth, tranquility, health, power, and knowledge. It is very calming and cooling and has been known to slow down the metabolism.



Blue is the easiest color for the eyes to focus on. It can have many positive effects, but be careful not to make the target feel cold or depressed.

Purple: Purple is associated with royalty, nobility, luxury, creativity, and mystery.

Brown: Brown is associated with earth, reliability, approachability, convention, and order. It can create emotions of being rooted or connected, or having a sense of order.



How can you use all this information? I am not suggesting that with a simple blue outfit you can make someone feel calm enough to hand you her password. Yet you can use this information to plan your attack vectors, ensuring you have the best opportunity to succeed, which includes how you look and how you are dressed.

A social engineer would want to analyze the target they will be calling on and make sure the colors they choose to wear augment their ability to manipulate the target and not turn them off. For example, knowing that green may elicit feelings of greed or ambition can help a social engineer decide not to wear green to a meeting with a charity where it might conjure feelings and emotions contrary to the charity’s mission. Wearing something blue to a lawyer’s office, on the other hand, can have a calming effect, allowing the lawyer to open up more. Careful planning and sensible use of these tactics can help ensure the success of your social engineering audits.

Conditioning Targets to Respond Positively

Conditioning is used in everything from normal conversation to marketing to malicious manipulation. Just like Pavlov’s dog, people have been conditioned to respond to certain items. Human nature is often used to manipulate the majority of people to take actions the manipulators want.

When the majority of people think of babies they will smile, we will find talking animals “cute,” and we might even be manipulated to sing a jingle for a popular product in our head.

These tactics are so covert that many times we don’t even know they are working. Many times I find myself wondering what a scantily clad, bikini-wearing woman has to do with beer.

One example of how conditioning is used is Michelin Tires (see Figure 6-12). For years this company has used babies in its ads. Why? “Because so much is riding on your tires.” But these ads have more to them. You see a baby, you smile, and you are happy. That emotion triggers a positive response, and that response conditions you to be agreeable to what is told to you next. When you see the baby you smile; when you see it enough you are conditioned to think of warm, happy feelings when you see Michelin tires.

Figure 6-12: Aren’t babies cute?



Seeing the baby next to the tire makes you equate positive happy feelings with that brand. This is an example of classic manipulation.

Another advertisement (see Figure 6-13) that might have had many people wondering from Budweiser—remember those popular frogs belching out “Bud” “weis” and “er”? What do frogs have to do with beer? Along those same lines, think of the more recent Clydesdale horse and his gang of animal friends. These ads are catchy, even funny the first time, but not really explaining why you want to buy their beer.

Figure 6-13: Frogs selling lager.



This form of manipulation, conditioning, is subtle. You laugh at that commercial, and then later on you pull into your local beer distributor, see a cardboard cutout of the frogs or horse, and smile to yourself, which creates that positive feeling that makes you feel agreeable to buying the product.

These conditioning tactics are used often in the world of sales and marketing firms with the goal of manipulating the consumer to buy their products over the competition. Social engineers aren’t really selling a product, but they do want their targets to “buy” the lines they are selling, the pretext they are putting out there, and the actions they want the target to take. But why use manipulation? What are the incentives to utilizing this powerful form of control? The next section covers that very topic.

Manipulation Incentives

What are the incentives to manipulate someone? This question gets to the root of the methods, thinking, and tactics used in any manipulation. Not all manipulation is negative, but is related to the incentives behind it. But each incentive can be positive or negative.

What is an incentive? An incentive can be labeled as anything that motivates you to take an action. It can be money, love, success, or anything—even negative emotions like hatred, jealousy, and envy.

The main reasons why people chose to manipulate others can be broken down into three categories: financial, social, and ideological incentives. The following sections look at each of these incentives and how they apply to manipulation.

Financial Incentives

Financial incentives tend to be the most common, as in the cases mentioned earlier related to increasing sales. Many scams have a financial incentive behind their tactics.

How many people play the lottery every day with the hopes of getting that winning ticket? They may spend hundreds of dollars over time, and winning a $20 payoff makes them happy and keeps them coming back for more.

A non-malicious example of financial incentive is coupons. If you buy this particular product at this particular store you will get X dollars or cents off. If you are a thrifty shopper or want to try that product you will go to that store.

Many commercials that promote furthering your education, career, or skill set use financial incentives by painting a picture that your income will increase after their course or education.

The malicious attacker’s incentive for using manipulation is his own financial gain and therefore his motivation and his technique will reflect that. For example, if the malicious social engineer’s goal is to get his target to part with some of his hard-earned money, the social engineer will utilize pretexts that will be “allowed” to ask for money—pretexts like charity organizations are suitable in this scenario because asking for donations or financial information is not out of the ordinary.

Ideological Incentives

Ideological incentives are the most difficult to describe. Each person’s ideals are different and those ideals can affect the incentive. If your dream in life is to run a restaurant then that is your passion. You will work longer hours and put in more effort than any of your employees. You will also work for less money, because it is your dream or your motivation; for everyone else it is just a job.

Dreams and beliefs can be so ingrained in a person that separating them from the person can be almost impossible. When you hear the phrase, “I have a dream,” did you think of Martin Luther King? Some people’s dreams and goals are who they are, not what they think about.

People tend to be drawn to those with similar dreams and goals, which is why the phrase, “Birds of a feather flock together” applies so well in this discussion. But it is also why so many people can be manipulated.

Look at Christian televangelists, for example. People who have a faith and desire to believe in God flock together. Like-minded people can strengthen each other’s faith and desire to do the right thing, but a televangelist can use that ideology to convince people that God’s desire is for that particular church to prosper, therefore also lining the televangelist’ pockets with cash.

The televangelist gives a few motivating sermons and sheds some tears and suddenly people are sending in the checks. These televangelists use the tools of both financial and social ideals (see the following section, “Social Incentives”) to convert their listeners to their ideals so those people part with their hard-earned cash. What is interesting is that if you ask a follower how he feels about the preacher being way richer than he is, he believes it is God’s will. His ideal set has been changed or manipulated.

Ideological incentives can also be used for the good by educating people about morals, and even resorting to using fear as the incentive can have great effects on people. Ideological incentives are often taught to children through stories and fables that have meanings behind them. The Brothers Grimm are an excellent example of this type of incentive. Stories that often end in the bad characters suffering physical harm or even death and the good characters, persevering through all forms of hardship, getting a massive reward at the end builds on fear that being bad leads to death or some terrible punishment.

Ideological incentives are used in marketing, too, through placing ads where “like-minded” ideals often “meet.” For example, diaper companies market in family magazines, animal shelters market at zoos, athletic gear companies market at sporting events, and so on. This type of incentive gives a greater chance that the goods or services being advertised will be bought by those who share the same ideals.

Ideological incentives are used to bring one’s ideals in alignment with those of a like mind. Often, once people are sympathetic to a cause is when the manipulation tactics start. Again, not all manipulation is bad, but it has to be used in the proper way.

Social Incentives

Social incentives are probably the most widely used and the most complex set of incentives out there, especially when it comes to social engineering.

Humans are social by nature; it is what we do in normal daily life. Social incentives also encompass all the other types of incentives. The right relationship can enhance your financial needs and can also adjust, align, or augment your ideals. It could be argued that social incentives are stronger than the other two types of incentives.

The power that peer pressure holds over many people is easy to see. For young and old alike, the draw of conformity is powerful. Many times, that which is acceptable is directly linked to a social incentive. One’s outlook on life and self can be greatly affected by his or her social surroundings. In essence peer pressure can exist even in the absence of direct peers.

Am I good looking? Well, that depends. If I am in the United States where a supermodel is a size zero and the guys have muscles in places I didn’t know muscles existed, probably not. If I am in ancient Rome where maybe being larger meant I was rich and powerful, then I am. Your whole inner self is framed by your social view of the world.

In 1975, the U.S. Air Force ran a study entitled “Identification and Analysis of Social Incentives in Air Force Technical Training” to try to see the power of social incentives on creating leaders during its training drills. It ran four different scenarios with a group and analyzed what effects they had on the students.

The end results were that a certain social incentive, usually involving praise or positive reinforcement from peers or authority figures, created a strong bond between the students and instructors:

The major conclusion of this entire research effort is that the management of social incentives is a particularly difficult art. While social incentives can be identified and scaled with considerable ease, manipulation and management of the same incentives requires considerably greater effort. The scaling data show high attractiveness value for various social incentives. The results of the field experiment show the positive influence of the acquaintanceship and psychological contract exercise on attitudes toward fellow trainees. Both of these findings underline the importance of social factors.

In other words, increasing or decreasing the attractiveness of the social incentive is not too difficult once you know what motivates a person. This phenomenon is particularly evident in groups of teenagers. When they find out what bothers someone, it is often used as a weapon to force compliance. The larger the group that provides the pressure, the greater the chance the target will comply.

This is a powerful statement. I wonder how that research would have gone if the researchers had been able to use the plethora of social media sites that exist today. Peer pressure is a strong influence and everyone wants to fit in and be part of the crowd.

Social incentives work. In 2007 a group of researchers (Oriana Bandiera, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul) wrote a research paper entitled, “Social Incentives: The Causes and Consequences of Social Networks in the Workplace” (www.social-engineer.org/wiki/archives/Manipulation/Manipulation-Social-Incentivespdf.pdf).

The report is an interesting study along the lines of the Air Force study, but set in 2007. Basically the researchers analyzed how those who have “friends” at work handle their jobs when they work in groups with their friends. Their conclusion:

Our findings indicate there are social incentives—the presence of friends affects worker productivity, despite there being no externalities of worker effort onto their co-workers due to the production technology or compensation scheme in place. Due to social incentives, workers conform to a common norm when working together. The level of the norm is such that the presence of friends increases the productivity of workers who are less able than their friends and decreases the productivity of workers who are more able than their friends.

Social incentives are a quantitatively important determinant of a worker’s performance. As workers are paid piece rates based on individual productivity, the strength of social incentives is such that (i) workers who are more able than their friends are willing to forgo 10% of their earnings to conform to the norm; (ii) workers who have at least one friend who is more able than themselves are willing to increase productivity by 10% to meet the norm. Overall, the distribution of worker ability is such that the latter effect dominates so the net effect of social incentives on firm performance is positive.

The presence of friends meant that a person would actually work harder or less hard depending on their normal work level. Peer pressure with the absence of the actual pressure can affect people’s work. The pressure is perceived by what is standard. Why? Maybe if a person could work faster or better, she probably didn’t want to appear to be a know-it-all or brown-noser, as these people can be called. Maybe if he is normally more of a slacker, he didn’t want to appear lazy so he pushed up the pace a little. In either case their work ethic was affected by having friends.

A good point for management is to always put the hardest workers and natural leaders over the group. But there is so much to learn in this research.

This method is how social engineers use “tail-gating.” Being in a large crowd of people coming back from break or lunch and looking like one of the employees minimizes the chance that the security guard will stop you while you walk through the front doors.

It is also how whole groups of people can be manipulated into thinking a certain action or attitude is acceptable. You can see this in the entertainment industry as each year the standard of what is acceptable or moral seems to get lowered, yet this drop in standards is sold as “freedom.”

These three incentives are not the only types that are used. They can branch off into other aspects beyond the scope of this book, but the question still arises of how you can use them as a social engineer.





Manipulation in Social Engineering

Manipulation is less about making others think like you do and making them feel comfortable, and more about coercing them to do what you want.

Coercion is not a friendly word. It means “to force to act or think in a certain manner” or “to dominate, restrain, or control by force.”

Manipulation and coercion use psychological force to alter the ideology, beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors of the target. The key to using them is to make the steps so small they are almost invisible. The social engineer doesn’t want to alert the target he is being manipulated. Some of the following methods may be very controversial and downright horrible, but they are used each day by scammers, identity thieves, and the like. One of the goals of manipulation can be to create anxiety, stress, and undue social pressure. When a target feels that way he is more likely to take an action the social engineer is manipulating them to take.

With that in mind, you can see why manipulation is often thought of in a negative light, but it is used in social engineering and therefore must be discussed.

Increasing a Target’s Suggestibility

Increasing a target’s suggestibility can involve using the neurolinguistic programming (NLP) skills discussed in Chapter 5 or other visual cues. Earlier you read about conditioning people with the use of pen clicks or other noises or gestures that can elicit an emotion even when words are not spoken.

I once saw this in action when I was with a person who was manipulating a target. He used a pen click to indicate a positive thought. He would say something positive and then smile and click his pen. Literally, I saw the person begin to smile after about four or five times of hearing the pen click. He then brought up a very depressing subject and clicked his pen, and then the target smiled and felt instantly embarrassed. That embarrassment was the open door he needed to manipulate the target to do what he wanted.

Creating a situation where the other person feels susceptible to suggestion can be through repetition of ideas or other means that will soften the target to the ideas you are trying to present.

A social engineer can make sure the whole setup is geared towards this manipulation—the phrases used, the word pictures painted, the clothing colors chosen to wear. All of it can make the target more susceptible.

William Sargant, a controversial psychiatrist and author of the book Battle for the Mind, talks about the methods by which people are manipulated. According to Sargant, various types of beliefs can be implanted in people after the target has been disturbed by fear, anger, or excitement. These feelings cause heightened suggestibility and impaired judgment.

A social engineer can use this device to their advantage by offering the target a suggestion that causes fear or excitement and then offering a solution that turns into a suggestion.

For example, in the hit BBC TV show The Real Hustle, the cast ran a scam to show how this works when they set up a booth in a mall that allowed people to buy raffle tickets. People would buy a ticket for a chance to win three prizes worth much more than the ticket they just bought.

One woman bought the ticket, and, of course, she won the biggest prize. Her excitement was extreme because she had never won anything like this before. At this point, Paul Wilson gave the suggestion to manipulate her: At the height of excitement he told her she had to call a phone number and provide her bank info to claim her prize.

She did it without a second thought. The suggestion made sense, especially in the light of her excitement.

Knowing the target and his likes, dislikes, kids’ names, favorite teams, and favorite foods, and then using this to create an emotional environment will make creating a susceptible atmosphere so much easier.

Controlling the Target’s Environment

Controlling the target’s environment is often used in online social engineering, scams, and identity theft.

Becoming part of the same social networks and groups gives the attacker the chance to have “face time” to be able to manipulate targets into acting or thinking the way the attacker wants. Being able to use a target’s social networks to find out what triggers they have is also a powerful tool.

I used this method once when searching for an illegal scammer for a client who wanted to get the scammer’s contact details. I was able to gain an account on a forum he used to post his “achievements.” Using this tactic of getting into his environment, then befriending him, I was able to gain his trust, use his social networks to know what he was doing, and eventually get his contact info.

Any method used to control the environment of the target can be used in this manipulation technique. Controlling the environment can be as simple as approaching when you know you have the least chance of interruption, or allowing a target to see or not see something that will cause a reaction.

Of course, unless you plan on bringing your target to a dark closet, you can’t really control his whole environment, so controlling as much as you can will take planning and research. After you locate your target’s social circles, whether online or in the real world, you will need to spend time planning how you will get an in to control that environment. Once inside, what elements do you want to control? A good social engineer will not come in running for the “kill shot” but will take time to build a relationship and gather information before the final blow is administered.

Environment control is often used in police or war-time interrogations. The environment where the questioning will take place will have a certain atmosphere to make the target feel at ease, nervous, scared, anxious, or any other emotion the attacker (or lead officer) wants the target to feel.

Forcing the Target to Reevaluate

Undermining a target’s beliefs, awareness, or emotional control of a circumstance can have a very unsettling effect on him or her. This tactic is very negative because it is used to make a target doubt what he or she has been told to be true.

Cults use this tactic to prey upon those looking for guidance through life. Many times, people who feel lost or confused are convinced that their whole belief system needs to be reevaluated. When the cults have control they can be so convincing that the victims can be thoroughly convinced that their family and friends do not know what is best.

On a personal social engineering level you can make a person reevaluate the beliefs he has been taught about what is safe and what is not, or what is corporate policy and what is not.

Each day social engineers use similar tactics by presenting one well-thought-out question that can cause the target to reevaluate his stand on a topic and cause him to falter.

For example, in this economy, salespeople are hungry to make sales, and you could call the sales department of a company that happens to have a strict policy about downloading PDFs from the web without proper scans and precautions. Yet you can still place this call:

“Hi, I am with ABC Company and I want to place an order for your product that could be more than 10,000 pieces. My employer wants me to get three quotes to see whether we can do better. I have uploaded the quote package to our website; can I give you the URL? I am going to a meeting in two hours. Could you look over the package and get me a preliminary quote before then?”

Do think this tactic would work? Most likely the salesperson would download and execute that file with little to no thought. You have caused him to reevaluate the policy he has been taught.

Making the Target Feel Powerless

Making the target feel vulnerable or powerless is another very dark, but effective, tactic. It is often used in social engineering when the pretext is an angry executive or someone who should have power over the target. Angry by the lack of response or the inability of the target to give quick answers, the attacker berates or threatens the target, causing him to doubt his position and feel a loss of power.

Another more subtle way this is used is to undermine the belief system using social incentives. In one audit, I was stopped by a custodian while doing scans of the internal network. When she did the right thing for stopping me, I reacted with something like, “Did you know that each year this company deals with a constant battle against network breaches? I am trying to secure you, and you are trying to stop me from doing my job!”

My overpowering demeanor caused her to feel powerless and she backed down.

Giving a target the impression he has no time to think or there is serious urgency can also make him feel powerless. He cannot take the time to think about how to handle a problem and therefore must make a decision in a way he knows he shouldn’t.

This tactic was used after the recent earthquakes in Haiti. A website was launched that claimed to have information on loved ones who might have been lost. Because their claim was that no one was able to provide information on their loved ones but this group who set up the site, they could demand certain criteria be met to obtain this information. Many people, feeling hopeless and powerless, entered too much information and clicked things they knew they shouldn’t and in the end were damaged by it. The BBC issued a story about this and lists some tips to stay protected: http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/8469885.stm.

Dishing Out Nonphysical Punishment

Closely linked to making the target feel powerless is making them feel guilt, humiliation, anxiety, or loss of privilege. These feelings can be so strong that a target might possibly do anything to “regain favor.”

Guilt over not giving what was expected can cause humiliation and doubt, which can cause the target to react the way the attacker wants.

I don’t suggest using humiliation in most social engineering settings, but I have seen it used on a target in a team effort to open the door, and on another social engineering team member to soften the face of the target, making them more pliable to suggestion.

The first attacker approached the target in a public setting trying to get information; he was playing the role of someone important.

In the middle of the conversation an underling, who happened to be female (and on the team), came up and asked a question that angered the first attacker. He reacted by saying, “You have to be the dumbest person I have ever met.” In a fit of anger he walked away. The female attacker looked dejected and hurt and was quickly comforted by the target, who fed into her act. The target’s empathy allowed him to be manipulated to give out way more information than he wanted.

Intimidating a Target

Intimidation is not a tactic that you might think of using in a traditional sense in social engineering. You are not going to tie up your target and go all “Jack Bauer” on him, but you can use intimidation in subtle ways.

Suggesting that failure to comply can lead to being laid off or other adverse consequences can intimidate the target to react a certain way. Governments often use this tactic to manipulate society to believe that the economic system is collapsing. This way they can control the emotions of those they govern.

You can use it in a social engineering audit even by having an intimidating appearance. Looking busy, upset, and on a mission can intimidate many. Talking with very authoritative expressions can also intimidate people.

In business, sending things by certified mail or courier connotes a level of intimidation. Making the person sign for a package whose contents are unknown can make some people intimidated. The goal with this manipulation tactic is to make the target feel uneasy and anxious, which can cause him to react in a way he will later regret, but by then it is too late.

These darker manipulation techniques are used successfully by social engineers and professional auditors. Manipulating a person to feel completely helpless causes him or her to feel that giving in to the attacker makes sense.

That really is where manipulation differs in a social engineering practice from other forms of influence. With negative manipulation the social engineer leaves and doesn’t care how the target feels later on. Even if a target realizes he has been hacked, it doesn’t matter because the damage is done and the company or person is already infiltrated.

Other aspects of social engineering manipulation are just as powerful but not so dark.

Using Positive Manipulation

Positive manipulation has the same goals in mind as negative manipulation—in the end the target is in alignment with your thoughts and desires. The differences are in how you get there. But in positive manipulation, the target doesn’t need therapy when you are done.

Over my years of research, I have compiled some tips about how parents interact with their children to get them to comply with the parents’ wishes. A few of its points on positive manipulation are useful for social engineers. The following sections cover some of these positive techniques.

Disconnect Your Emotion from Their Behavior

Keeping your emotions separate from your target’s behavior is important. As soon as you let your emotions get involved the target is manipulating you. You can feel emotion, of course, but be in control of what you feel and how you display what you are feeling.

You do not want to be the one out of control. You also want to control the negative emotions as much as possible so you can remain in control at all times.

Disconnecting your emotions can also put people at ease. This doesn’t mean being devoid of emotion; that is not comforting to people. But if someone is really upset, showing the proper level of concern is good, but if your display of emotion is too much you can offset the target and ruin the gig.

Keep your emotions in alignment with the pretext you are trying to achieve. If you do not allow your emotions to get involved you can remain in control at all times. A good social engineer is able to do this despite the actions or attitudes displayed by the target. If the target is upset, mad, belligerent, rude, or if any other negative emotion is displayed, a good social engineer remains calm, cool, and collected.

Look for the Positive to Mention

Whenever you can, find something to make a joke about or compliment, but without being creepy. You don’t want to walk up to the security guard and say, “So two nuns walk into a bar….” This method probably won’t go over too well. At the same time you can’t walk into the front office and say to the girl behind the counter, “Wow, you’re pretty.”

Finding something positive to mention puts everyone at ease, but it must be balanced, controlled, and in good taste. Using the example of approaching a security guard, after introducing yourself, complimenting the picture of her children by saying something like, “Wow, she is really cute; how old, four or five? I have a little girl at home, too,” can go a long way toward opening the door.

Assume, Assume, Assume

You have probably heard what they say about people who assume, but in this case, assume it all. Assume that the target will act the way you want, assume he will answer the way you want, and assume he will grant you all your requests.

Assume with the questions you ask and the statements you make.

“When I come back from the server room…”

This statement assumes you belong there and you are already granted access. In the security guard situation mentioned earlier, after the compliment maybe offer a follow-up: “When I get back from checking the servers, I will show you a picture of my daughter.”

Assuming that what you want will occur is a strong point, too, because it affects your mental outlook. You must have the mental outlook that you are getting what you came for; that belief system will create a new body language and facial expressions that will feed your pretext.

If you go in expecting failure you will fail or at best it will affect your body language and facial expressions. If you have the mental outlook that this deal is done, the same will occur. A word of caution, though—don’t take this step so far you become arrogant.

For example, going in thinking, “Of course I have this in the bag because I am amazing and the best,” can affect the way you come off and turn off the target quickly.

Try Different Opening Lines

Starting a conversation with the standard why/what/when is common but try a different approach and see what happens. The research group that runs a popular dating site (www.okcupid.com) compiled data that shows the value of starting out with non-traditional openers.

Remember the discussion about compliments? Well, the OkCupid guys found that starting off with too “big” of a compliment had the reverse effect than what one would think. Words like sexy, beautiful, and hot had terrible effects on people, whereas words like cool, awesome, and fascinating had a better effect.

In usual greetings these guys found that saying things like “hi,” “hey,” and “hello” left the target feeling blah and unmotivated, whereas “How’s it going?,” “What’s up?,” “howdy,” and “hola” were strong openers to use.

Of course, these stats are about dating, but the point to be learned is that people react better to nontraditional greetings.

Similarly, in a social engineering situation, vary your approach and you may notice an increase in the way the target reacts to the message.

Use Past Tense

When you want to address anything negative that you do not want the target to repeat, put it in past tense. This technique puts the negative attitudes and actions in the past in his mind, presenting him with the new and improved “clean slate” on which to do good things for you. For example:

“When you said I couldn’t get in to meet with Mr. Smith…”

as opposed to: “When you say I can’t get in to meet Mr. Smith….

Only verb tense changed, but the effect is very important. It gives the impression that the negative statement is so far in the past, let’s move on to something new and improved. It also makes the target feel that you feel it is in the past.

Seek and Destroy

Identify, map, and plan how you will handle any disruptive or negative attitudes and actions. Imagine if your pretext is to be a tech support guy who will gain access to the server room. In your previous calls you knew that every day at 10 am a large group goes out for a smoke break. You decide this is a good time as people are shuffling in and out. You go all prepared, but as you enter the building the receptionist has just received some bad news and is an emotional mess. You should have a plan for handling this disruption.

If you wait to think about how you will handle potential conversation stoppers, or disruptive influences, until the first time you hear them you will most likely fail to handle them. That presents an interesting thought then. You have to sit back and think like the target: what objections would he raise? When a person he does not know calls or approaches him, what might he say? What objections might he raise? What attitudes would he portray? Thinking through these things can help you to make a game plan for these potential problems.

Write down your thoughts and the target’s potential objections and then role play. Have your spouse or friend play the mean gatekeeper or security guard. Of course, he or she cannot imitate elements such as facial expressions and so on. But you can give him or her a small list of conversation stoppers to choose from to test your comeback.

Practice until you feel comfortable, but not scripted. Remember the comeback is not to be structured so stiffly that you cannot alter it at all.

Positive manipulation can have a very strong effect on the target. Not only does it not leave him feeling violated but if done properly he can feel accomplished and as if he did something good for the day.





Summary

Manipulation is a key component to social engineering as well as influence. This chapter covered areas of human behavior that spanned decades of research from some of the smartest minds on earth.

Common reactions to the thought of manipulating others might be:

“I don’t want to manipulate people.”

“It feels wrong to be learning this.”



These comments represent the way most people think when they hear the word manipulation. Hopefully, you’re now convinced that manipulation isn’t always a dark art and can be used for good.

The world of influence has been dissected, researched, and analyzed by some of today’s brightest psychologists and researchers. This research served as the basis of my own research to develop the information in this chapter. The section on framing, for instance, can truly change the way you interact with people, and the concept of reciprocation can shape your thinking as a social engineer and how you utilize influence. Influence is such an amazing topic, though, that volumes of books are devoted to that topic alone.

Understanding what triggers a person to motivate him to want to do a certain action and then having that action seem good to the target—that is the power of influence.

This chapter illuminated the science and psychology of what makes people tick, and clarified how influence is used by social engineers.

Remember, influence and the art of persuasion are the processes of getting someone else to want to do, react, think, or believe in the way you want them to.

The power in this statement transcends social engineering and manipulation. It is the key to altering any frame, the key to unlocking any door of manipulation, and the pathway to becoming a master at influence.

Social engineers also use many physical tools, some of which might look like they were taken out of a page of a James Bond movie, and they are discussed in the next chapter.





