EVIL

Inside Human Violence

and Cruelty



Roy F. Baumeister





A W. H. Freeman / Holt Paperback

Henry Holt and Company New York





Begin Reading

Table of Contents

Copyright Page


Thank you for buying this

Henry Holt and Company ebook.

To receive special offers, bonus content,

and info on new releases and other great reads,

sign up for our newsletters.



Or visit us online at

us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup

For email updates on the author, click here.





The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your personal use only. You may not make this e-book publicly available in any way. Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy of this e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify the publisher at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.





Foreword



When I first saw Professor Baumeister’s book in a bookstore, I was immediately attracted to it. I knew I’d be in for a treat—a fresh approach to an overworked but underdeveloped problem. When I read his volume from cover to cover I thought “Here is a person who can present an original approach to complex concepts in language that the average curious reader, as well as the scholar, can understand and enjoy.”

More-or-less by coincidence, Roy Baumeister and I have written books on a topic that affects every person on the planet: “man’s inhumanity to man.” Although our approaches overlap a good deal, they also compliment each other. Here I will expand a bit on Baumeister’s ideas, to provide a broader context for the readers of this excellent book.

In trying to understand a topic as broad and complicated as anger, hostility, and violence, it is important to realize that there are different levels of analysis. To comprehend these phenomena more fully, the reader or scholar needs to have not only a grasp of these levels but also some idea of how they interact with one another. Take the example of the causation of war. This can be analyzed from the standpoint of the supranational system (competition, the security dilemma, balance of power) leading to preemptive strikes by a threatened or expansionist state. The precipitation of war can be analyzed in terms of individual states with their own idiosyncratic histories, attitudes and economics, social, and military power. Or the analysis can be directed to the psychology of the political elite with their own drives for power and prestige and the populace with its loyalty and dreams of glory.

Professor Baumeister has succeeded admirably in applying the tools of social psychology and history to understand the causes of evil behavior. My approach has focused more narrowly on the minds of those who make the decisions to wage war and of those who follow. In many wars, the decision-makers make what they consider rational choices in moving toward or avoiding armed conflict. Their followers—who make the sacrifices—are stirred by the highly charged, emotionalized beliefs, group empathy, and heroism that Baumeister describes (these positive merits fade in time when disillusionment replaces the illusions). The critical factor is their unlimited capacity to see the opposition as the Enemy, as all bad, and their own national state as righteous and all good. The various levels interact with one another. The chaotic supranational system, say, produces insecurity among the states. This leads the governments to engage in an arms race. The apparent threat to the national state filters down to the populace, who rally round the flag to protect the national honor. The interaction among the levels can go in both directions.

Just before the Spanish American War there was a great instability in the crumbling Spanish Empire. The rebellions, especially the suppression of the rebels in Cuba and in the Philippines, captured the imagination and sympathy of the American people. The populace and its representatives in Congress perceived the Spanish as the enemy, the Cubans and the Filipinos as the vulnerable underdogs, and the Americans as the champions of the oppressed. Thus, the people, as a result of their images, brought pressure on a reluctant President McKinley to go to war. The vivid imagery of the masses prevailed over the judgment of the statesmen.

In examining violent behavior it is also important to make a distinction between the predisposition to violence and the precipitation of violence. An appreciation of the difference can lead to quite different intervention strategies.

Consider domestic violence in terms of these two approaches. From the standpoint of predisposition, the predominant culture or community values may present the image of the macho male and the subservient female. This value may be translated into bold beliefs, perhaps that the wife should accede to her husband’s judgment and wishes. At the level of the family of origin, the beliefs communicated by the interaction between the parents may either reinforce or undermine this belief. Also the behavior of the father may communicate the notion that violence is the only way to silence a scolding wife. This belief may also originate with or be reinforced by the peer group. The next level is the adversarial relationship of husband and wife. A history of escalating arguments, increasing tension, verbal arguments and threats generally provides the prelude to physical violence. At the level of the violent husband, a number of beliefs (many filtered down from higher levels) may converge to “prepare” him for violent action. Among these: 1. A wife who continually pesters her husband is a shrew 2. Nagging at her husband is a sign of disregard 3. The only way to shut her up is to punch her in the mouth; and at a less conscious level, 4. “If I let her get away with it, I’m less of a man.”

The precipitation of an assault may be related to “higher level” events such as economic instability leading to job insecurity leading to a greater sense of vulnerability, worry, and anxiety. Overdosing on alcohol to salve the anxiety, coupled with one more argument, may activate all the aforementioned beliefs and thus precipitate the man beating his wife.

Labels like Evil and the Enemy are actually abstractions (which is the reason that I capitalize the first letters of these words). Assaulters, offenders, batterers, crusaders, perpetrators conjure up images of Evil and the Enemy they then project onto their opponent or antagonists—who are often weak and vulnerable. As Professor Baumeister points out: whoever opposes you or blocks your own good work is an Enemy of the Good and is therefore Evil.

Professor Baumeister also focuses sharply on the major causes of violence and cruelty, which he neatly organizes into three categories. The first is the desire for material gain (I would also include the lust for power and self-aggrandizement in this category). This instrumental cause has driven the great conquerors of history from Cyrus the Great to Hitler. Perhaps the most original of his ideas involves the following notion: When someone with an overblown sense of self-worth fears a threat to his self-esteem, a kind of reflexive hostility can result: “Stop the threat before it inflicts damage.” The person feels diminished in some way (rejected, devalued, exploited) and is driven to punish the offender. Examples range from a husband who beats his wife because she criticizes him, to a monarch like Louis Napoleon who was insulted by a note contrived by Bismarck and in retaliation declared war on Prussia. The third source of violence is idealism and utopianism, with examples that range from the lone anarchist or militant with a bomb, to religious movements like the Crusades, to genocides like the Holocaust, to mass murders in Mao’s China, Stalin’s Soviet Union, and Pol Pot’s Cambodia.

This book is exciting and presents many insights into human behavior at individual and collective levels. It also helps to dispel many myths, such as the notion that violence stems from low self-esteem. It points up, instead, the importance of the vulnerable self-image. Evil will not only enrich the minds of the general reader and the scholar but also open up numerous channels of inquiry for the specialist.

Aaron T. Beck, M.D.

University Professor of Psychiatry

University of Pennsylvania





Preface



Why is there evil? What motivates those who perpetrate it? How do they manage to reconcile their actions with a self-image that does not embrace evil? This book uses the very modern methods of social science to answer these ancient questions. Our efforts to understand evil are fraught with difficulties. One prominent one is that perpetrators tend to ignore or downplay the moral dimension of their actions—a dimension that is starkly salient to victims. As a result, any sincere effort to understand perpetrators will be somewhat insensitive to the victims. The danger in this is that it might lead us to condone the perpetrators’ actions. Moralistic thinking must not be canceled or forgotten but it has to be postponed for us to understand how the perpetrators view their world and their actions.

A consequence of this approach is that the considerable emotional, political, and ideological baggage that attends our cultural views of evil must be thrown overboard, at least temporarily, and the resulting analysis may offend people. This book cannot be “politically correct.” One scholar who read a draft of Evil commented that by the middle of the first chapter I will have probably outraged both the far left and the far right. I have not sought to be outrageous, but if I am successful at formulating an insider’s view of cruelty and violence, the results are likely to be upsetting. As you will see, our culturally-dominant view of evil is very different from the actual psychology of the perpetrators.

Evil: Inside Human Cruelty and Violence is based on an extensive survey of previous writings about the subject, but I suspect that some readers may find that their favorite theoretical works on evil have been neglected. In the social sciences, ideas are cheap but facts are precious. I sought to build a theory based on all the facts and findings I could gather, so I have not made a systematic effort to cover what theorists have had to say about evil. Some of my conclusions may have been anticipated by previous theories; others perhaps, are new. I hoped that staying scrupulously attentive and faithful to the mass of factual evidence would yield the most correct conclusions possible. Those who have addressed this topic in the past were undoubtedly able to reach some of these conclusions with less evidence; but a conclusion based on a mountain of evidence is different, and in important ways more useful, from one based on intuition, personal experience, or a small or unreliable amount of evidence.

There is another side to my emphasis on facts. I have, mostly, resisted the constant temptation to illustrate key points with episodes from literature, movies, and other fictional entertainments. Many books on evil are filled with such illustrations and some do not even seem to regard as meaningful the difference between, say, something said by Macbeth versus something said by Ted Bundy. I concluded fairly early in the project, however, that because our cultural ideas about evil are so powerful and so discrepant from the actual psychology of the perpetrators, fictional illustrations were often worse than useless. Therefore, I have used fictional examples only when discussing the constructed “myth” of evil. The rest of the book, which focuses on the actual psychology of the perpetrators, relies exclusively on true stories (and other facts) to illustrate its points. This made Evil considerably harder to write, because it is quite difficult to find factual examples instead of the easily available fictional ones, but it seemed essential to me.

The writing style of this book also deserves comment. Perpetrators tend to favor minimalist, distancing styles of thought. So, any effort to understand them must appreciate these linguistic tendencies, again, at the expense of downplaying the victims’ suffering. Indeed, that is probably the point: In most cases, perpetrators do not wish to dwell on the victims’ suffering; to do so would be disruptive to their work. At the same time, it is occasionally necessary to employ more vivid language to help one see evil where it is frequently overlooked.

My goal in writing this book was to encourage, seduce, and perhaps trick you into seeing events from the perspective of the perpetrators of evil. Of course, identifying with evil is the first step toward perpetrating it, so it is necessary to step back out of that role once one is in it! The hardest part in understanding the nature of evil is to first recognize that you or I could, under certain circumstances, commit many of the acts that the world has come to regard as evil. But as long as we continue to regard evildoers as a separate species, an alien category, or a wholly different type of human being, we cannot really claim to understand them. Our best hope of avoiding that fate is to learn to understand and recognize these reactions, so that we may be able to recognize them as evil before we commit them—this book is devoted to that hope.

I wish to thank the many people who have helped with this project, particularly by reading drafts and providing valuable advice and comments. These included John Darley, Richard Felson, Brad Bushman, Dianne Tice, Kristin Sommer, Donna Baumeister, and Julie Exline. The students in my Interdisciplinary Psychology class during the fall of 1995 read the full draft as well and gave valuable help and suggestions (usually egging me on to make the examples more explicit and vivid!). Laura Smart and Joe Boden worked with me on a journal manuscript that formed the basis for one of the chapters, and Lisa Macharoni provided considerable help in getting some of the scholarly chores done.

Institutional support was also quite welcome and helpful. Case Western Reserve University provided technical and library support as well as the time for scholarly work, including a sabbatical leave. The department of psychology, under the leadership of chairpersons Joe Fagan and Sandra Russ, has been supportive and helpful, and Dean John Bassett provided the funds to purchase the computer on which this book was written. The University of Virginia’s psychology department was also generous in its support as host of my sabbatical. A research grant from the National Institute of Mental Health (MH 51482) provided some support during the time period I worked on this book, and a sabbatical grant from the James McKeen Cattell Fund helped me get started.

Two debts of gratitude are especially large. The first is to my editor, Susan Finnemore Brennan, and her colleagues at W. H. Freeman and Company. Working with them was a pleasure, as well as being intellectually very satisfying and stimulating. The other is to my beloved wife, Dianne Tice, who provided considerable support, intellectual and otherwise, throughout the years of work on the project.





