CHAPTER

10

Dealing with Guilt “Guilt? It’s this mechanism we use to control people. It’s an illusion. It’s a kind of social control mechanism—and it’s very unhealthy. It does terrible things to our bodies. And there are much better ways to control our behavior than … guilt.” 1 These remarks illustrate a common opinion about guilt, that it is a wasteful and self-destructive emotion that does far more harm than good.

Then again, perhaps guilt has been unfairly stereotyped in our culture, which for historical and ideological reasons, may be reluctant to see any positive value in guilt. The statement just quoted was spoken by the notorious murderer Ted Bundy, who killed a number of pretty young women across the United States. If he had had a stronger sense of guilt, perhaps some of those women would be alive today.

Evil is the inflicting of harm or suffering on other human beings. Guilt is the distress that comes from hurting other human beings. Guilt is thus an inherent, perennial problem for evildoers. Those who perpetrate harm must find some way to free themselves of guilt, lest they end up feeling bad. Although there may be a few perpetrators who by some quirk are immune to guilt, most people are not. Most people would feel guilty about killing, harming, torturing, exploiting, or abusing someone.

It works best to deal with guilt in advance. Some people make the mistake of thinking that guilt is something that arises only after a person has committed a misdeed. Guilt is backward-looking in many cases because it focuses on what one has done wrong in the past. But guilt also has a strong anticipatory element. People often know well in advance what actions will make them feel guilty, and they try to avoid those actions. If you set out to rob, rape, cheat, or murder someone, you may well anticipate the possibility of feeling guilty. You will probably be looking for excuses and rationalizations to escape the guilt before you commit the act. If you cannot find any, you may refrain from causing harm. This is the valuable social function of guilt. It makes people avoid doing things that are wrong and that harm others. If guilt did not change behavior but merely made people miserable after the fact, it would be nothing more than a senseless form of self-torture.

The threat of guilt will often change the way people perform evil acts. Harm-doers take definite steps (or follow certain guidelines) to prevent guilt. Guilt thus shapes the reality of evil. Guilt may prompt evildoers to avoid certain kinds of harm even while inflicting other kinds. It may drive them to take certain precautions or perform certain rituals. It may shape the way they think about what they are doing, or it may prompt them to get drunk so they can’t think about what they are doing.

The broad view of evil presented in this book portrays a range of violent and oppressive impulses springing from several common and powerful roots and held back, most of the time, by such internal restraints as self-control. Guilt is one of the key emotional forces that drives self-control. People refrain from hurting others because they want to avoid feeling guilty. When guilty feelings are thwarted or submerged, harm can be done more easily.

Lame Rationalizations and Loopholes Before taking a systematic look at guilt and people’s strategies for dealing with it, it is instructive to consider some of the more extreme strategies. There are ways people rationalize guilt that seem so preposterous that one wonders how anyone could have believed them. Their very implausibility shows how hard people have to try to bring themselves to believe them.

The explanation for these bizarre rationalizations is probably twofold. First, the perpetrator wants very strongly to believe them. Second, they are superficially plausible enough that the person can accept them as long as he or she doesn’t think about them very carefully. The combination of some kernels of truth and an intense will to believe enables some perpetrators to get by with dubious justifications.

Such a combination is apparently necessary for biased thinking or self-deception in general. The research evidence shows that people cannot simply believe anything they want, and they cannot even draw preferred conclusions from any sort of evidence. 2 The scope for distortion is limited. But when there is some evidence that supports a preferred conclusion, people are willing to overlook its flaws and find ways to dismiss contrary evidence. The combination of desire and minimally plausible evidence is a powerful recipe for distorted conclusions.

The Crusades relied on several peculiar rationalizations. 3 At several points, the Christians in the Holy Land found themselves fighting a desperate war—and losing it. Despite the supposedly firm belief that the one true God could only be supporting the Christian side, the Christians lost battles, and many individuals surrendered to save their skins. Sometimes, even top Christian leaders became captives of the Muslims.

The Arabs, however, did not have enough places to put these captives. It was wrong to kill prisoners of war, but they could not feed and house them indefinitely. As a result, the Christians were able to persuade the Arabs to fall back on a traditional way of dealing with this problem: The prisoners would be released after swearing a sacred vow never to fight against the Arabs again. Over and over, Christians took the vow.

And over and over, they broke it. These Christian soldiers typically returned to their camp or city to find that the military situation was still desperate and their help was needed. They could not stand idly by while their comrades were defeated, their women and children enslaved, their new homes conquered, and their religion humiliated by the enemy. So despite their vows, they fought again.

How did they rationalize this? After all, the requirement to keep one’s vows is one of the Ten Commandments and had been repeatedly reaffirmed by medieval theologians who dealt with the Christian ethics of war. 4 The Christians developed a new principle: Vows made to heathens were not binding. It was not a sin to do the opposite of what one had sworn if the person to whom one had sworn was not a Christian. This rationalization does not really bear close examination. How can one swear an oath in the first place if it is not really an oath? But the principle was superficially satisfactory, and so people could use it as long as they did not examine it carefully. (Of course, if the same enemy captured you a second time and inquired about your oath, you might abruptly find yourself giving the matter some hard thinking!) Skipping ahead to the twentieth century, one can find some remarkable somersaults of justification. The major genocides produced several of these, in part because many ordinary and well-meaning citizens found themselves obliged to perform horrendous actions. The “most astonishing” of the rationalizations for shooting Jews given by the members of Reserve Police Battalion 101, according to scholar Christopher Browning, was that of a 35-year-old metalworker who said he got through the day by specializing in shooting children “because I reasoned with myself that after all without its mother the child could not live any longer. It was supposed to be, so to speak, soothing to my conscience to release children unable to live without their mothers.” 5 Browning pointed out that the policeman used the unusual word release (erlösen), which in German is also the religious word for redemption and salvation, which gave his act of shooting children the connotation of an act of grace.

Such a remark might be dismissed as a unique way of thinking peculiar to one bizarre man, but an almost identical sentiment was quoted in an Associated Press news story about the Rwandan genocide more than half a century later and half a world away. The perpetrator in this case was a woman named Jualiana Mukankwaya, herself a mother of six children. During the well-orchestrated killings of Tutsis, Jualiana and a group of other women rounded up children in their neighborhood. In the explicit language of the Associated Press, “With gruesome resolve, she said, they bludgeoned the stunned youngsters to death with large sticks.” She herself killed the son and daughter of people she had known for most of her life. Her explanation was given with a blank face and in a flat voice. “She was doing the children a favor, because they were orphans who faced a hard life. Their fathers had been butchered with machetes and their mothers had been taken away to be raped and killed, she said.” 6

Killing children is one of the most difficult and gut-wrenching things for adult men and women to do. Some readers might easily dismiss such rationalizing statements as the feebly absurd and hypocritical comments of thoroughly evil individuals, but that view is probably not correct. Whether the metalworker and the village woman thoroughly believed that they were doing children a favor by killing them is far from certain, but they were probably trying hard to believe it. The two key components of rationalization were both present: There was at least a vestige of plausibility in the argument that the children were doomed anyway, so that a quick death spared them further suffering, and the perpetrator had a powerful desire to believe that there was something good about what he or she was doing. A dispassionate observer would probably not agree that the killers were doing the children a favor, but the perpetrators themselves could hardly afford to be dispassionate, and if they tried hard enough to believe it, they could.

Thus, rationalizations that seem preposterous at first can be accepted gradually by people who are sufficiently motivated to accept them. Further examples of this pattern can be seen among the comments made by modern street gangs with regard to their violent actions. In general, these groups believe that their kind of people have been attacked and exploited by enemies, and so they are justified in fighting back. 7 In many cases there is a clear and direct basis for such beliefs, and the attacks are actually happening. More interesting, however, are cases in which the victim is irrelevant to the attack, so that people must convince themselves that they are justified in harming someone who has not wronged them.

In recent years, the most discussed instance of that pattern concerns black-on-black violence. It is quite clear that the white-run government of the United States has helped the white majority oppress and exploit black people, especially in the past. The argument that white people have exploited black people might conceivably justify violence against the exploiters, but how would it justify the most common crimes committed by black street criminals, whose victims are other black people?

Attempts at just such rationalization are not uncommon. Researcher Leon Bing described an interview with a south central Los Angeles gang member in his home. Bing specifically asked about the violence against other blacks, and the gang member explained, “The government plays a big part in why we kill our own kind.” 8 He went on to say that the government oppressed black people with job discrimination, making them want to attack each other for money. Another gang member Bing interviewed was just as blunt yet also just as vague about how the white establishment was responsible for the deadly gang war between the Crips and Bloods, the two giant networks of gangs who dominated Los Angeles. “My real enemy—the United States government. That’s who controls the Crips, the Bloods, and me.” 9

Black intellectuals have commented on the same pattern. Milton Morris, the vice president for research at the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, was quoted in Newsweek as saying, “When black young people slaughter other black young people on the street … they all come back to ‘Look what the white people make us do.’” 10 More broadly, the attitude that prevails in such groups was summarized by black author Ellis Cose as “a no-fault attitude, a conviction that ‘nothing I do is my fault, since the white man created the awful conditions in which I live.’” 11 Cose’s own appraisal of that attitude identified the same two components we have already seen in the other rationalizations: It has kernels of truth (Cose blamed white people for conditions in black ghettos), but it requires a strong will to believe to become usable as a justification for specific acts of violence against innocent black victims.

There seem to be two main ways that these criminals rationalize their exploitive violence against their fellows as being the fault of their racial enemies. One is to say that criminal violence is an affirmation of black nationalism, or at least a tool of black survival outside the white society, even if its victims are black. Nathan McCall described this rationalization in a poignant passage in his memoirs. He noted that he and his friends were robbing and hurting other black men and women, including some of the most vulnerable and victimized people in the entire country. He clearly recognized the possibility of feeling guilty over the fact that he, as a black man, would cause suffering to other black men and especially black women. (Actually, he was unwilling to use the word guilt, but at several points he said that brutalizing innocent people sometimes made him feel “weird,” and it seems reasonable to assume that the weird feeling was guilt.) Yet he said this was the only way that he and his friends could avoid having to get legitimate jobs, and it was essential to avoid that at all costs. To take such jobs would essentially mean supporting the society run by and for white people, who were the enemy. Anything that enabled him and his friends to survive without capitulating to the establishment was acceptable.

The other rationalization was even vaguer but corresponded even better to the everyday reality of these young men’s lives. This belief was that the enemy white society had somehow conspired to force black people to fight against each other. Although this internal war among blacks might be deplorable, there was nothing that could be done about it at the moment, because the mortal danger from the enemy blacks was so urgent that it consumed all one’s efforts. Sister Souljah, a black celebrity and musician, created a minor national stir recently when she proposed that blacks should stop killing one another and kill white people instead. But to most black street criminals and gang members, this was not a feasible solution, because their most dangerous and familiar enemies were other blacks.

The result of this second rationalization is that these young black people can go on killing and robbing other blacks while simply blaming all their own actions (as well as those of their enemies, perhaps) on the white society. These rationalizations are appealing and plausible enough that if you want to believe them you can, as long as you do not question them too deeply.

There are plenty of other, similar rationalizations that perpetrators use, but these examples are sufficient to illustrate the point. People will settle for any vaguely plausible argument when they want badly enough to believe that their hurtful actions are justified. Before taking a more systematic look at how evildoers maintain their justifications, it is necessary to explain the nature of guilt, because guilt is what the justifications are designed to prevent.

The Nature of Guilt On the surface, guilt is nothing more than an unpleasant emotion that comes from doing things that are wrong. This simple understanding is somewhat misleading, however, and it also conceals some complexities in the way guilt originates and is felt. There are several key points to understand about guilt. 12

Guilt is primarily a result of harming other people. Guilt does not attach equally to all actions that might be regarded as wrong; it is most commonly felt when one is responsible for interpersonal harm, such as causing someone to suffer. Because evil is a matter of causing people to suffer, guilt and evil will show up in many of the same places. Or, more precisely, the same circumstances may result in either evil or guilt, because guilt prevents evil.

Guilt is linked to relationships. Not all acts of harm cause equal guilt; the degree of guilt is often proportional to how much you care for the victim. Failing to return a phone call to your mother brings more guilt than failing to return a phone call to a stranger or an insurance agent. Cheating on your spouse causes more guilt than cheating on the IRS. People do sometimes feel guilty toward strangers, but they feel much stronger guilt when people they care about are involved. When people are asked to describe something that made them feel guilty, for example, the vast majority of their responses involve family, romantic partners, and close friends. 13 Guilt seems to grow amid the strong emotional bonds between people who care about one another.

The interpersonal nature of guilt brings up the issue of its roots. Guilt seems to originate in two basic emotional patterns. The first is empathy. People feel upset when they have empathy with someone who is suffering, and this empathic distress forms a basis for feeling guilty. He or she feels bad, so you feel bad to see his or her suffering. The other root of guilt is fear of losing a relationship. When people hurt those who care about them, they increase the risk that the victim will withdraw from the relationship. People inherently want to maintain and prolong their social attachments, and so they become upset at the prospect of someone withdrawing from them. 14

These considerations point to the crucial interpersonal functions of guilt. Guilt makes people treat their relationship partners better. Guilt motivates people to be kind and attentive to others who care about them, to live up to their expectations, to refrain from harming them, and so forth. Guilt is thus fundamentally prosocial: It helps to strengthen the bonds between people.

Although guilt begins with emotional responses such as fear of being abandoned and distress upon seeing someone suffer, it evolves into something more complex and sophisticated. Adults have elaborate notions of personal responsibility, intentions, mitigating circumstances, and other factors that determine whether they ought to feel guilty or not. Thus, the best way to understand guilt is as a gut reaction that gets filtered through an elaborate conceptual system about rules and responsibility.

The system is far from perfect. Sometimes people feel guilty when they presumably should not. For example, some people who made it through the concentration camps or the atomic bombings ended up feeling guilty for having survived when their family members died. 15 In a modern parallel, when corporations go through mass layoffs, some of those who keep their jobs feel guilty toward those who were fired. Meanwhile, some people seem to be free of guilt even when inflicting serious harm or death on others. 16 Still, these imperfections should not be enough to condemn a system that by and large works quite well. Guilt deters people from committing evil, criminal acts and makes them treat those they care about well.

Guilt is unfairly stigmatized and despised in our society, yet there is a method to the unfairness. Guilt does have costs to the self, in that it makes us feel bad. Its costs are obvious, whereas its benefits are harder to see. Each person’s guilt brings benefits to everyone else except that person. Psychopaths, in particular, seem almost entirely free of guilt feelings, and they do not seem to be greatly handicapped by this (except when they are caught and imprisoned for committing crimes). In contrast, everyone associated with a psychopath has to pay the price for the psychopath’s lack of guilt. Psychopaths see no point in contributing to the general good or in refraining from taking advantage of somebody who cares about them.

Viewed in this way, guilt is the opposite of self-esteem. High self-esteem brings advantages to the self, particularly in that it makes us feel good, but its costs (such as violence) are borne by those around us. In other words, high self-esteem benefits the individual at the expense of the group, including relationship partners. Guilt, in contrast, benefits the group at the expense of the individual. It makes us feel bad, but to avoid these feelings we do things that are better for our relationship partners and fellow group members.

The relationships of guilt and self-esteem to evil fit this analysis. As we have seen, high self-esteem is an important cause of evil. People who think highly of themselves will exploit others and will attack someone who does not show them the respect they think they deserve. In contrast, guilt is a counterforce that restrains evil, violent, aggressive impulses. Guilt prevents people from just doing whatever they might like to do or might benefit them, if it would involve hurting someone else.

The individualism of modern American society leads directly to worship of self-esteem and contempt for guilt. For better or worse, Americans place more importance on the individual than on the group or community. Self-esteem is better for the individual and worse for the community, and so Americans prize self-esteem. Guilt is better for the community and worse for the individual, and so they detest guilt. The American attitude that values the rights of the individual above the community’s best interest apparently contributes to high levels of happiness. 17 It contributes to individual freedom and deters tyranny. 18 But it also promotes violence, along with oppression and individual forms of evil.

In any case, guilt is a crucial emotion for restraining violence. Indeed, in Chapter 7, I proposed that the path to sadism is available to almost everyone, but most people are kept off it by guilt. Guilt prevents people from discovering or admitting to themselves that they can get pleasure out of hurting others. More generally, people avoid a broad assortment of acts that would harm others because they want to avoid feeling guilty. Perpetrators want to minimize guilt.

Not One of Us One strategy for avoiding guilt feelings is based on the interpersonal nature of guilt. People feel guilty when they hurt people with whom they share some kind of social bond. Therefore, to hurt people without guilt, make sure that your victims do not share any bond with you. The lower the fellow-feeling, the less guilt.

The strategy of distancing oneself from one’s victims is implicit in the common device of labeling them as subhuman creatures. One shares a community with all other human beings and should feel guilty about hurting any of them, and so one can avoid guilt by ejecting the victims from this broad human community. To kill a human being is wrong; to kill a fly or a rat is acceptable and perhaps even praiseworthy. Perpetrators often denounce their victims as vermin, as slime or filth, as a disease or the carriers of a disease, and so forth. Such remarks are insulting, of course, but they are more than mere insults. They are important devices for securing legitimacy. They justify killing and reduce guilt, because they rule out any human connection between perpetrator and victim.

Another version of this strategy is to see the victims as utterly foreign enemies who deserve their fate. It is not surprising that so much bitter violence arises between groups that regard each other as different. Many racial, ethnic, and religious groups see themselves as close, important communities—and see anyone who is different as outside that community.

We have seen that otherness is a core aspect of the myth of pure evil. There is a certain validity to the myth, in the sense that people feel less empathy toward those who belong to other groups. No empathy, no guilt. 19 The lack of empathy makes violence toward outsiders easier, because it undermines the restraining power of guilt.

A defining statement of this guilt-avoidance strategy was spoken by a minor official in Stalin’s purges. In central Russia, men had been sent to a labor camp where the conditions were brutal and frequently lethal: working outdoors in freezing weather with inadequate food and clothing. At great risk to himself, a local man went to protest at the camp, but the camp administrators were unmoved. Finally, after trying more diplomatic ways of phrasing things, the local man pointed to the conditions under which the unfortunates were working and bluntly said, “These people might die!” The camp administrator replied, “What people? These are enemies of the people.” 20

That response precisely articulates the key point. The victims are not like us and do not belong to our community, even our very broad community of “the people.” There is no need to feel sympathy for their suffering or even to feel guilty about causing them to die.

Although I have emphasized perpetrators and victims, evil can also arise when an empathic connection between leaders and followers is absent. An important and fascinating study by John Mayer has analyzed the characteristics of dangerous leaders, and foremost among them is the lack of an empathic bond with their followers. 21 Leaders who lack such an emotional bond can be cold and cynical about using their followers to further their ends, and any suffering that ensues is merely a means to an end.

The modern era has furnished plenty of examples of leaders who felt no guilt about causing their followers to suffer. Napoleon’s march into historical greatness required many small and not-so-small sacrifices by the men who fought for him, but he took their suffering in stride. “Soldiers are meant to be killed,” he said, in one of the classic statements of leaderly detachment. Hitler and Stalin repeatedly sacrificed great numbers of their loyal followers, even condemning them to death out of hand, without any apparent signs of guilt. Not only were these millions of deaths unhelpful to the country, they were positively harmful. Stalin nearly destroyed the Red Army with his purges and vendettas, which left his country almost defenseless for a time. Hitler’s final orders before his suicide entailed the destruction of the country’s remaining infrastructure and would have made Germany uninhabitable. When he saw that the war was lost, he commanded people to destroy all the power and water plants, which would have left the wartime survivors even more at the mercy of the elements than they were.

In our own time, Saddam Hussein provides another vivid example of a leader whose lack of empathic bond with his own Iraqi people causes them to suffer. He has not hesitated to involve them in ruinous wars for the sake of his own territorial ambitions, first a long and bloody war against Iran, and then the invasion of Kuwait that resulted in the spectacular defeat by the United Nations. Later, during the international boycott, he refused deals that would have brought much-needed food and medicine to his people, because he was using the suffering of his people as a bargaining chip for his own ends. 22

Two of the roots of evil are especially relevant to this strategy of denying guilt. One is egotism. There is a strong sense of superiority implicit in the pattern of categorizing one’s enemies as subhuman vermin. It is all right to kill them, because they are so low and worthless in comparison with the needs and wants of the perpetrators.

The other is idealism. Idealists can best avoid guilt if they are convinced that they are fighting against evil, and they feel the least guilty when their enemies resemble the myth of pure evil. Two prominent features of that myth are the fundamental otherness and innate wickedness of the enemy. Evil people commit bad actions for their own sake and therefore initiate many conflicts and problems. If we are fighting against such people, there is no reason to feel guilty about hurting or killing them. Being evil, they must have started the battle, and we are doing good by defeating them. Moreover, they are fundamentally different from us and belong to a totally different category of being, so we need feel no empathy with them.

Language as Smoke Screen Language exists to express and communicate, but perpetrators reluctant to face up to their guilt often find ways to use language to conceal, confuse, and mislead. Often this process begins with the words themselves. Perpetrators play endless games with words, and one point of these games is to present the shocking and horrific as mundane and ordinary. Institutional campaigns of oppression and murder have used such seemingly innocent terms as ethnic cleansing (Bosnia), final solution and special handling (Nazi Holocaust), relax (Spanish Inquisition), and bush clearing (Rwanda) to disguise their brutality. 23 Studies of torturers have revealed a highly specialized vocabulary built of euphemisms referring to methods of torture, such as tea party, dance, birthday party, the telephone, the submarine, the swallow, the airplane, and so forth. 24 Even the list of ordinary slang terms for killing reveals by its length the importance of concealing the blunt meanings of violence: to waste or off someone; to order a hit; to have someone whacked; to rub him out; to push the button on him; to wipe them out; to take care of somebody, to snuff out or pop someone; to liquidate, exterminate, or terminate someone; to knock him off.

Two sets of metaphors for killing deserve special mention because many different groups have found them appealing. The first involves extermination. To say that the enemy must be exterminated is to reduce the enemy to the status of subhuman vermin and to present killing as a matter of getting rid of worthless, troublesome pests.

The second common metaphor is a medical one. Medical metaphors have been generally popular in the twentieth century, which is perhaps not surprising given the high prestige of the medical profession and the great advances that link modernity and technology with medical interventions. The analogy of amputation was popular with leaders of the Terror following the French Revolution, the Nazis, the Stalinist cadres in the Soviet Union, the Argentinean military oppressors, the Colombian death squads, and many others. By cutting off a diseased limb, amputation saves the rest of the body, and this metaphor has proved appealing to executioners everywhere.

The medical metaphor also helps to depict the victims as deserving of their fate. They are the carriers of disease who pose the risk of infecting the rest of the societal body. They may look like ordinary human beings, but in fact they are dangerous.

Although innocuous terms may be the most obvious means of concealing evil, styles of phrasing do just as well. A linguistically skilled perpetrator or apologist can mold a few grains of truth into a solid wall of justification, enough to keep guilt and accusations at bay.

A compelling illustration of this technique was provided in Ryszard Kapuscinski’s interviews with the ministers and other leading figures in Ethiopia during the student protests that eventually culminated in the revolution. These ministers remained loyal to the emperor even after he had been dethroned, and from long habit they spoke in ways that constantly praised his wisdom and goodness while blaming troubles on outsiders and others. The manner of speech is very revealing of the patterns of thought in the former, doomed government, which was badly out of touch with the people.

At one point during the emperor’s rule, the government was shocked by a local uprising. After it was forcibly suppressed, the government wanted to stage a student demonstration to show support for the emperor. The minister described how the government’s plan failed: “When the march of [the emperor’s] supporters, composed of policemen disguised as students, started, a great and rebellious mass of real students joined in, this ominous rabble started rolling toward the Palace, and there was no other solution but to bring out the army …” 25 The minister went on to regret the “irony” that several policemen were killed during the army crackdown, “And yet were they not completely innocent?” 26 He passed over the fact that no real students could be found to demonstrate in support of the emperor and that the government was seeking legitimacy by staging a fraud, with policemen pretending to be students. He thought it inappropriate that the “ominous rabble” of real students joined the mock demonstration. He felt sorry for the “completely innocent” policemen who were killed along with the students. This seemed to him an unfortunate accident, and in a sense it was, but then one must consider the fact that the government first sent the policemen there (as bogus students) and then sent the troops in to shoot them. Still, the minister saw no fault in the government’s actions.

The next day, a public funeral was held for the real students who had been killed, including their leader, and not surprisingly a new demonstration erupted spontaneously at the funeral. The emperor again called in the army, including tanks, and called for order to be restored. “As a result more than twenty students perished and countless others were wounded and arrested.” The end of the story is the most remarkably phrased part: “His Highness ordered that the university be closed for a year, thus saving the lives of many young people. Because if they had been studying, demonstrating, and storming the Palace, the Emperor would have had to respond again by clubbing, shooting, and spilling blood.” 27

To be sure, the students were being troublesome, but the government repression seems brutal and excessive. To the minister, though, the fault lay entirely with the students. The government had no choice but to send in the army. “There was no other solution,” he said. Instead of saying that orders were given to shoot the students and quell the demonstration forcefully, he says only that the emperor commanded that order be restored, and “as a result” some students “perished” while others “were wounded and arrested.” The passive voice thus hides any active role taken by the government and presents the students’ sufferings as a misfortune that came upon them as an inevitable result of their own actions. Finally, and most bizarrely, the emperor’s closing of the university is described as an act of kindness to the students instead of a punitive strike to silence dissent. In the end, the minister’s way of speaking transforms the emperor into the student’s savior instead of the one who gave the orders to kill them.

Do euphemisms and other innocuous phrasings succeed in concealing crimes or deflecting guilt? Undoubtedly, most large-scale evils have involved some degree of concealment, and the manipulation of language is part of it. For example, reading through Kapuscinski’s interviews with Ethiopian officials, one is repeatedly struck with how sincere and thorough their belief was in the basic, innocent goodness of the emperor and his fallen government. Yet mostly they were describing events in which they did not actually participate; their speech may have reflected the way these events were discussed at court rather than their personal experience. It is difficult to believe that someone who actually rapes and kills people would be misled by the harmlessness of such terms as ethnic cleansing.

One possibility is that such terms are used as flagrant hypocrisy. Even as perpetrators knowingly inflict harm on someone, they may use misleading words to conceal their guilt or deny the extent of their actions.

A more likely possibility, though, is that perpetrators simply find it unpleasant to speak frankly of their deeds. To use the literal, blunt, ugly terms for their actions would be upsetting and stressful. It is necessary to appreciate that group perpetrators of atrocities have the same need to discuss their tasks as any other sort of work group. Almost no team, crew, or other group doing any sort of work can perform its task without talking about it. Groups of evildoers are thus presented with the problem of how to talk about what they are doing among themselves. To use strongly evocative language might well be counterproductive, because it would upset the members of the group or distract them from their tasks. There is also the possibility that blunt speech might evoke enough guilt to cause members of the group to refuse to do their tasks. Of course, this is what victims and humanitarian bystanders hope will happen, but the leaders of the group do not want a dissenter or objector popping up unexpectedly while the group is trying to get its job done.

Imagine the chief administrator of any of our century’s death camps saying to a member of his staff, “I’m putting you in charge of mass murder group #2. We’re having lots of innocent victims coming in this week, so I need you to slaughter them as fast as possible. And don’t leave any bloody corpses lying all over the place, because that stench is sickening.” It seems wildly implausible that two people who are actually engaged in mass executions would speak in those terms, if only because it would make the job harder on them both. Yet the conversation must be held and the assignment must be made, at least within the context of the operation of the camp.

And so the chief is more likely to say something like this: “I’m putting you in charge of operations group #2. We have an unusually large number of units coming this week, so you’ll need to process them as efficiently as possible. But be sure that the workers follow through on proper cleaning and disposal procedures afterward, so the work area remains presentable.” The message would be the same, but it sounds more like a normal workplace discussion of administrative procedures and less like a plan for evil—and, in the perpetrators’ views, it is an administrative matter that they are discussing. Hence, such language is likely to facilitate the smooth and effective operation of the camp. The immediate problem being discussed is a pragmatic one, and talking about it as such (instead of in the morally evocative terms of the previous paragraph) makes it easier to address.

There is one additional reason that perpetrators use more innocuous words than victims or dispassionate bystanders would use: the magnitude gap. Of course it is shocking to the victims that the people who are killing them one after another would speak of them as “units” to be “processed.” But that is because so incredibly much is at stake for the victim. Being killed means the end of everything: no more waking up on a sunny morning, falling in love, having successes and failures at work, enjoying a fine meal or good glass of wine, talking and laughing with a friend, having sex, helping others, sitting spellbound through a great performance, going shopping.

For the perpetrator, in contrast, very little is at stake. Whether he kills 35 or 40 people on a particular day will make little difference in his own life and feelings and what he will experience in the coming weeks. Even if he is later caught and prosecuted for crimes against humanity, the difference between 35 and 40 victims on a particular day will probably not matter much. Although perpetrators sometimes do use minimizing language to conceal their guilt, they may also use such language because ultimately the acts are relatively trivial (to the perpetrators, at least).

I Had No Choice: Justification through Necessity The Ethiopian official’s account of the violent suppression of the student demonstration contained several phrases that are worth a second look because they exemplify one of the most popular justifications of evil: the appeal to necessity. The government staged a phony student demonstration, and real students joined in and changed the tone of it, at which point “there was no other solution but to bring out the army to enforce the restoration of order.” 28 The important implication of this statement is the necessity of responding in this way because of a lack of alternatives. The official does not say that the government reviewed various options, such as ignoring the demonstration, negotiating with the students, or setting up an investigation to hear complaints. Instead, he says that there were no options except violence.

The potential logical power of such a claim is enormous. We have understood guilt as a gut feeling that gradually becomes enmeshed in a web of complex meanings. Foremost among these meanings is responsibility. Guilt is supposed to occur only when the person recognizes that he or she is responsible for the misdeed. Responsibility is typically understood as involving freely chosen behavior. But if there were no options to choose among, then there was no choice, and hence no responsibility. Even if the perpetrator still feels a few nagging guilt pangs, these can be put aside if he or she can say with certainty that there was no other possible response.

Pointing to external necessity is therefore a popular strategy of perpetrators. “I couldn’t help it,” they say, “I had no choice.” To the extent that this is true, their responsibility is eliminated.

We saw early in this book that pointing to external necessity is part of the way perpetrators think in general. In the study that compared victim and perpetrator accounts of minor interpersonal conflicts, perpetrators were much more likely to describe external factors that caused their actions. Furthermore, it is probably wrong to propose that perpetrators only start thinking that way after the fact, when they are trying to make excuses for their heinous actions. More likely, they embrace such beliefs while they are doing their evil deeds or even beforehand. Moral doubts or scruples might inhibit them from inflicting harm in the first place, but if they can persuade themselves that they have no choice, then they can put such doubts aside and perform their tasks more efficiently and with less distress.

The most famous and familiar version of the “I can’t help it” defense involves following orders. As we noted, St. Augustine and many other thinkers have believed that followers have a moral obligation to obey commands of legitimate authorities. This means that one cannot refuse an order without questioning the entire legitimacy of the authority figure, which in many cases would be unthinkable, and which certainly is something that one would do only after careful thought and consideration. To say that one is following orders is to say that one had no choice.

Milgram’s studies of obedience likewise used the phrase “You have no choice” in order to pressure doubtful individuals to continue giving (supposedly) painful electric shocks to a confederate. 29 Thus, the procedure for the study involved the initial instructions to deliver a higher shock every time the other fellow made a mistake, and if at any point the subject hesitated or refused, the experimenter responded with a standard series of comments. The comment “You have no choice” was literally and patently absurd, because the subject obviously did have a choice, and indeed the whole point of the experiment was to learn about what choices people made in that situation. But hearing the authority figure say that you have no choice was enough to conceal the fact of choice and to get people to continue giving shocks. The reason, presumably, is that the subjects in the experiment did not want to believe they had a choice. They wanted to complete their assigned tasks without getting into an argument with the experimenter who was supervising them. To believe that they were responsible for their own decisions would have forced them to make moral calculations and difficult decisions on very short notice. It was better to accept the authority figure’s word that they had no choice.

Part of the reason for this finding is the way that people understand nearly all their actions. One of social psychology’s most influential theories of the 1970s held that observers think that other people do things because of the kind of people they are and for other internal reasons, but that they see their own actions as responding to the situation. 30 The actor-observer discrepancy arises in part because of what people pay attention to. Observers pay attention to actors, whereas actors pay attention to their surroundings. In this respect, perpetrators follow the same pattern in understanding their behavior that everyone does: “I was only responding to the situation.”

The actor-observer effect is likely to be much stronger in perpetrators of harm and other morally questionable actions, because they want to avoid blame. To see oneself as responding to external circumstances is to reduce one’s responsibility.

The “I was only following orders” justification became a cliché of Nazis and other Germans who were implicated in killing Jews. The U.S. military now has an explicit policy that soldiers should not follow illegal or immoral orders. But how valid was this justification when used by the Germans?

Nearly all works on the Holocaust deal with the question of moral responsibility or justification based on following orders. Many Germans who used this excuse elaborated on it by saying that they would have been shot themselves if they refused orders, including orders to shoot Jews. As they often put it, they did not want to kill civilians, but they were compelled to by military duty and by the mortal danger of immediate execution if they refused.

My reading of the literature points to several conclusions. First, some Germans did refuse to take part in killing Jews, and these Germans were not shot. I found only one alleged exception, a story in which a group of soldiers was preparing to shoot and one of them raised his hand to say he could not, so he moved over to line up with the victims and was shot by his former comrades. 31 The story is anonymous and quite possibly apocryphal; it may have been nothing more than a false rumor. For the most part, those who refused were simply transferred elsewhere or assigned to other duties. They did seem to be penalized by a lack of career advancement afterward. Still, such a penalty is obviously a much weaker justification than execution.

Hence, most scholars have rejected the soldiers’ claim that they had to take part in killings of Jewish civilians, because the evidence does not show that soldiers who did refuse were executed. On the other hand, as we have seen in this chapter, many justifications do not depend primarily on factual reality. All that is required is a will to believe and some kernels of truth. And the kernels of truth were quite adequate in those cases. Instead of asking, “Were those who refused executed?” we should ask “Could soldiers have believed that they would have been executed for refusing?” The answer appears to be yes.

Thus, although those who refused to shoot civilians were not executed themselves, they were often threatened with execution. Many an officer’s first response to the men who asked to be excused from shooting civilians was to deny their request with the comment that if they could not do their duty they should take their place among the victims. 32 The rumor quoted above may not have been true, but it may well have circulated through the German forces because it buttressed the belief that one had to comply with orders. More generally, the entire code of the German military, and especially the SS, emphasized complete, unquestioning obedience. In fact the Germans did execute their own soldiers during World War II at an exceptionally high rate, more than a thousand times the rate of executions by Germany’s military in World War I. 33 Apparently, the commanders quietly kept a distinction between disobeying normal orders and disobeying orders to shoot civilians, but this distinction would not have been widely publicized, especially to the troops.

Judged by objective criteria, the excuse of following orders was probably not a valid justification for participating in shooting civilians. But subjectively it was plausible. There were enough kernels of truth that those who wanted to believe it could do so. And the will to believe it was undoubtedly strong once one had crossed the line and participated in the killing of civilians. As we have seen, the situational pressures to go along at the first moment were probably strong, because it was difficult to refuse the order on moral principle immediately. Once one has started killing, then, one might well want to rationalize one’s actions by believing that refusal would lead to one’s own death, and there were enough cues available to support this belief, even though it was false.

The “I couldn’t help it” defense has added a new dimension lately, which is based on the notion of irresistible impulses. In a highly publicized trial, Lorena Bobbitt recently managed to persuade a jury that she couldn’t stop herself from going to the kitchen to get a knife and then using it to mutilate her husband. Alcoholic husbands often assert that they cannot keep themselves from beating their wives when they get angry. Contrary to such assertions, the weight of the research evidence suggests that irresistible impulses are in fact few and far between. 34 The belief in irresistible impulses, despite evidence to the contrary, is probably due to the appeal of the notion: It enables perpetrators to escape responsibility for their actions. They can believe they had no choice.

The notion of following orders brings up the issue of how groups can facilitate evil by shifting responsibility around. Let us turn now to consider some of these group strategies for spreading guilt around until it seems to disappear.

Group Evil and Individual Guilt We have already seen that operating as part of a group facilitates evil, particularly because people lose a strong sense of individual responsibility for their actions. The loss of responsibility reduces the power of guilt and self-control to prevent harmful actions. Let us briefly reconsider the four main ways that groups accomplish this effect.

The first is the principle of diffusion of responsibility, 35 The responsibility for the group’s actions is divided up among all the members of the group. Even when one person acts, he (or she) may regard his own actions as being done for the group, so that other members of the group share the responsibility. The sharing of responsibility probably increases confidence that the actions are right and proper, because surely it seems that the entire group could not be making a major moral blunder. Moreover, there is less apparent need for any one person to feel guilty, because the individual’s responsibility is greatly reduced.

The second principle is deindividuation. 36 One effect of being part of a group is that people lose awareness of themselves as individuals and cease to evaluate their own actions thoughtfully. Because self-awareness and self-scrutiny constitute a central, integral aspect of self-control, 37 the normal restraints and inhibitions tend to be reduced when people blend into a group, and the group may end up doing wilder or more harmful things than the sum of individual members would lead one to expect.

The third principle is division of labor, which has been one of the essential functional advantages of groups throughout history. This was the aspect of the Nazi killing system that so impressed many commentators. The death of one person was the result of dozens of individual actions by different people, no one of whom felt anything more than a slight responsibility for the lethal outcome. Each person could say something like “I just drove the train, I didn’t kill anybody.” Even the one who did administer the poison gas knew it was hardly his fault. The people had been selected, brought here, stripped naked, and lined up in the bogus showers for death, without any doing of his. His own role was that of a technician, and his responsibility was a mere formality.

The fourth principle is separation of the decision-makers from those who carry out the acts. If people are to be killed, then someone must eventually flip the switch or pull the trigger. That person is the one most likely to have moral qualms or to feel potentially responsible (and hence not to want to kill until the moral questions have been resolved with high certainty). To minimize such doubts (and hence to facilitate evil), it is most effective to make that person believe that full responsibility rests elsewhere. By the same token, those who must decide to send people to their deaths will find their job easier if they are far removed from the actual victims and killings. To single a person out from a group and then shoot her would be stressful and difficult. It is much easier to select a stranger’s name from a list while sitting in an office and never expecting to meet the person or hear about the actual death.

The gulf between decision-maker and executioner is often very wide in successful evil. For example, the Spanish Inquisition institutionalized the split by having the Church decide who would die, and then turning the victim over to the secular authorities. The Church could debate someone’s faith and fate in relatively abstract terms, without having to involve clergymen in actual bloodshed. And the secular authorities could carry out the executions without any moral qualms or questions, because the supreme moral authority had marked these people for death.

Once responsible authority is effectively separated from carrying out the acts, it becomes very difficult to thwart a group’s evil project. If someone balks at carrying out harmful actions, another can say straight out that the decision and responsibility lie elsewhere and so it is wrong to question or hesitate. The Nazi doctors interviewed by Lifton could often cite specific conversations in which they were told bluntly that the decisions were not their responsibility and that the absent, higher-up decision-makers would be fully responsible. 38 The soldiers who carried out the killings of civilians were often told precisely the same thing.

The same blunt response can be found in corporate America. The notorious Dalkon Shield intrauterine contraceptive device is known to have resulted in the deaths of at least 18 American women and caused serious infections, often resulting in permanent infertility, in tens of thousands of women around the world. 39 Before the calamity, at one of the factories that was producing the devices, the quality control supervisor became concerned about potential safety and conducted a series of tests on his own that showed a serious danger that infectious bacteria would be introduced into women’s bodies by wicking along the device’s string. When he reported these concerns to his superior, however, the superior told him bluntly that the string was not his responsibility. He was told to do his job and not interfere in areas that were the responsibility of others. 40

For Their Own Good If guilt arises from harming others, another possible way to ward off guilt would be to claim that the victims actually benefited from what one did to them. There are relatively few events that have completely one-sided outcomes, and often it is possible to point to some kind of ben-efit that the victim or the victim’s group received. Indeed, one of the greatest calamities of European history was the bubonic plague, which killed large segments of the population, yet historians have come to conclude that there were some positive results: increased freedom; a scarcity of labor that enabled the poorest workers to command higher wages and exercise control over their fate; and an increased availability of farms, which allowed some serfs to escape from feudal control. If even the bubonic plague can be seen as producing positive outcomes, we should not be surprised that clever and motivated perpetrators can claim that their victims derived some benefit from the harm the perpetrators caused.

We have already seen a couple of extreme examples of this strategy in the justifications for killing children proposed by the German man and the Rwandese woman who said they regarded killing the children as merciful acts because the youngsters would not be able to survive on their own, now that their parents had been killed. These arguments have the usual grain of truth: It is indeed difficult for a child to get by without its parents, and the odds are that the children would have suffered and eventually died had they been spared on that particular day.

At the opposite extreme, a recent study of minor interpersonal transgressions found that some perpetrators sought to excuse themselves by proposing that the victim had derived some benefit. One person promised to take a friend to a concert but then reneged when the chance arose to go with someone more desirable. The first friend was therefore deprived of the concert, but the perpetrator added that the concert turned out to be not very good, which implies that the friend who missed it was actually somewhat better off. A group teased one person and made her very upset, but afterward they reflected that she gained insight into herself from the experience.

Throughout history, similar arguments have been used to justify oppressive and unequal relationships. Early in the nineteenth century, for example, the American South tended to speak of slavery as a “necessary evil” and an unfortunate institution, but when the antislavery rhetoric of the abolitionist Northerners became more strident, some Southerners began to speak of slavery as a positive good—even for the slave. Slavery was “a great moral, social, and political blessing—a blessing to the slave, and a blessing to the master,” as a senator from Mississippi said. 41 Slaveowners saw themselves as heads of extended families that included both black and white members, and so they idealized their mastery as a parental nurturance of their slaves. Slavery was also credited with bringing religious enlightenment to heathens. On the eve of the Civil War, slavery’s apologists insisted that slaves were better off than the unskilled wage-earners of the North, because slaves were fed and housed for life whereas Northern hirelings would be fired for not working and abandoned when too old or sick to produce. 42

Individual criminals are also sometimes willing to justify their crimes on the basis of supposed benefits to victims. Some burglars and thieves say that they are doing their victims no harm and possibly helping them, because of insurance. One criminal phrased this bluntly: “Sure I stole the stuff. But, hey! Those folks were insured up the kazoo…. In fact, I’m doing them a favor by giving them a chance to collect insurance. They’ll put in for more than that junk was worth, you know. They always do.” 43

In some cases, there may be enough ambiguity for the perpetrator to believe that the victims’ benefits justified the perpetrators’ actions. The grain of truth might be large enough to be plausible. But there are also cases that stretch credulity. One researcher quoted a rapist who said his victims benefited because they got their names in the paper! 44 An extreme example emerged from the Ethiopian famine, which will be discussed in greater detail in the next chapter. One official sought to justify the government’s actions that made the famine worse by saying that the great famine was actually beneficial to many Ethiopians because they needed to lose weight. He was in earnest, and he supported his contention by citing Scripture on the benefits of humility and the spiritual benefits of fasting. 45 The government was helping the common people succeed at their diets.

Robert Hare, an expert on psychopaths, has interviewed hundreds of these remorseless criminals and studied many additional ones indirectly, and in the course of this work he has certainly listened to accounts of many hair-raising acts and preposterous rationalizations. Yet he said that one in particular “dumbfounded” him. A convicted criminal said that his victim had benefited by having learned “a hard lesson about life.” 46 I suppose that in many crimes the possibility that the victim learns something would be a final, minimal sort of benefit, although hardly enough to justify the crime. In this case, though, the crime was murder. The experience of being murdered cannot possibly teach one anything worth knowing, because there is no opportunity to use that knowledge.

The benefits of being killed are obviously scarce, but even virtuous men with high principles have occasionally proposed that they exist. The Christian theologians debated at length over some of the cruder aspects of the Crusades, especially the use of apparently unfair tactics by the knights. Yet some theologians argued that such brutality benefited even the victims, because it kept them from living out their lives in sinful opposition to the Christian cause and faith. 47 The argument held that since everything a non-Christian does is sinful, that person is better off dead, because longer life would entail greater sins.

Thus, benefits to the victim have been cited in many contexts as one justification for violence. Most events have both good and bad outcomes, and especially if one includes the broad class of “lessons learned,” one can see some positive value in most experiences. The perpetrator can often find a genuine grain of truth upon which to build this justification. Because the victim’s benefit usually has little relevance to the perpetrator’s actual motive, the argument must be regarded as a rationalization, but by minimizing the victim’s suffering while highlighting the victim’s benefit, the perpetrator can reduce his or her own blame.

The extremity of some of these defenses and the lameness of others raises the broader issue of whether perpetrators actually believe them. Let us consider that issue directly.

Empty Excuses or Sincere Self-Deceptions?

“In defending myself against the Jews, I am acting for the Lord.” Thus spoke Adolf Hitler, and he made similar comments on other occasions to the effect that killing Jews was justified by the highest moral authority in the universe. It is difficult to know whether he really believed this or was merely making hypocritical statements to defend indefensible acts. Actually, it is even difficult to say which would be worse: that he actually believed he was doing the Lord’s work, or that he was casually lying.

Are the many self-justifying statements made by perpetrators sincere or disingenuous? This question continues to plague anyone who wades through all the evidence about how people rationalize their evil deeds. Do the people who torture, rape, maim, and kill in the name of some cause really believe that it is their sacred right and duty to do so, or are they merely acting out of baser motives and trying to cover their wickedness with fancy phrases?

The difference affects how these individuals are judged. One may condemn their crimes in either case, but many judges would be inclined to be more lenient with perpetrators who were acting out of a sincere (but presumably misguided) idealism. If their justifications were empty, disingenuous excuses all along, one would judge them more harshly. The difference boils down to whether one views the perpetrators as evil or merely stupid. Are they evil enough to knowingly commit horrible crimes and then lie about it with feeble rationalizations? Or are they gullible enough to believe those justifications?

Undoubtedly, there are cases in which the rationalizations are transparent hypocrisy. Early in this century, anti-Jewish sentiment was inflamed by the publication of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, a book in which Jews purportedly explained their secret plan to conquer the world. The book was a forgery, of course, although many people believed it. Still, those who participated in the forgery or who exploited it for propaganda purposes while knowing it was fake were obviously insincere in using it to justify anti-Jewish actions.

Another famous example of transparent, preposterous rationalization involved Lenin. Soon after the Russian Revolution, national elections were held and a Constituent Assembly was convened. Although the Bolshevists styled themselves the party of the people, in fact the voters elected only a small minority of Bolshevist candidates (amounting to about one-fourth of the Assembly). Lenin had held power since the Revolution and was not about to concede it to an elected assembly that the Bolshevists could not control, and so after a single day he dispersed the assembly. It might seem difficult to justify such a blatant power-grabbing rejection of an assembly that was elected by the people, but Lenin was up to the task. He explained: The People wanted to convene the Constituent Assembly, and so we convened it. But the People at once sensed what this notorious assembly represented. So now we have carried out the will of the people. 48

Of course this was preposterous. No population has ever repudiated its entire elected assembly in a single day, let alone in backward Russia where mass communication media were scarce and the people could hardly have known what the Assembly might have been discussing before it was canceled. The very idea that the will of the people would demand a cancellation of democracy and a rejection of their ballots is absurd. Lenin’s comments can hardly be anything except hypocritical rationalization.

Yet such clear-cut cases are rare. Moreover, I think they are rare not just in the clarity of the evidence but also in that the perpetrators seem to be so shamelessly mendacious. It seems far more plausible to conclude that the majority of perpetrators do believe their justifications. They may recognize that they have done wrong, but they emphasize the external causes and mitigating factors and believe sincerely that their actions are not as bad as others, particularly victims, assert. 49

To understand the perpetrator’s point of view, we must recognize one crucial fact: Most perpetrators want very much to believe the justifications. To dismiss them as either blatant hypocrites or deluded fools is to miss the point. A justification for killing may seem feeble in retrospect, but that judgment is made with the benefit of hindsight and dispassionate objectivity that can expose the holes in the argument. The perpetrator does not want to see through the holes in his justifications. To do so would require him to recognize the full evil horror of what he is doing.

Self-deception is an iffy business. People cannot convince themselves of anything that they might want to believe. 50 In fact, the margin for self-deception is often rather small: People can only stretch the facts and the evidence to a limited degree. Groups, however, have several advantages in this regard, because they can support each other’s beliefs. When one is surrounded by people who all believe the same thing, any contrary belief gradually seems less and less plausible. It is not hard for us as outsiders to knock holes in the self-justifying reasoning of perpetrators, but such an exercise is misleading. Perpetrators often find themselves in groups where no one would think to raise objections and everyone would agree with even flimsy arguments that support their side.

Great evil can be perpetrated by small groups when the members strive to think alike and support the prevailing views. Unfortunately, power tends to produce just such situations, because the most powerful men (and presumably women) tend to surround themselves with like-minded associates, who become reluctant to challenge the prevailing views. Whether the group is a small religious cult, a set of corporate executives, or a ruling clique in a large country, the justifications expressed by everyone in the group will tend to gain force.

The communication patterns increase this force. Committees and other small groups tend to focus on what everyone believes and knows in common. Private opinions and extraneous facts are kept to oneself. We saw this in the chapter on idealistic evil (Chapter 6). Many individuals might have doubts and qualms but are reluctant to express them, so that everything said publicly in the group conforms to the party line. When the moral acceptability of some violent action is at issue, everyone keeps silent about his reservations and objections, and everyone repeats the overt justifications and rationalizations. As a result, everyone gets the impression that everyone else believes those justifications and that his own doubts are an anomaly. One may even feel guilty about having doubts; everyone else seems so certain.

One of the most remarkable phenomena of the twentieth century is the speed with which countries have abandoned their totalitarian beliefs, despite having advocated them with apparently minimal dissent for long periods of time or at great cost. All the Germans seemed to be behind Hitler, but immediately after the war, the Allies could find hardly anyone who professed to have believed sincerely in the Nazi world view. Likewise, the nations of Eastern Europe apparently supported their Communist governments with little criticism or dissent, and then in 1989 they abruptly abandoned Communism wholesale and embraced an entirely different approach to politics and economics.

Such rapid and radical conversions begin to make sense if one accepts the view of self-deception we have developed here. People want to believe what the government tells them. They want to believe that what their society is doing is the right thing. To help themselves believe, they suspend criticism and questioning, and they go along with others in expressing the preferred views. But when circumstances discredit the ruling view, they suddenly acknowledge all the problems and fallacies they had avoided, and they can say with reasonable honesty that they did not sincerely believe it after all. Their desire to believe makes a great deal of difference when the facts are ambiguous.

Changing the Dance, Not the Tune Many people think that guilt is something one feels mainly after one has done something wrong—especially if the wrong was intentional. The scientific community was therefore quite surprised when a major study of guilt by Kathleen McGraw 51 found that people reported more frequent guilt over unintentional actions than intentional ones.

There is an important reason for these results, as McGraw explained. When people intend to do something that might be wrong, they know well in advance that they might feel guilty. Accordingly, they change their actions to ward off guilt. They start their rationalizations well in advance, and they make certain that the actions themselves remain consistent with these rationalizations. Thus, they do not end up feeling guilty. In contrast, when people hurt someone by accident, they have not had time to marshal their rationalizations or minimize the blameworthy aspects, and so they feel guilty afterward.

A classic example of how harm-doing procedures are adapted to soothe the consciences of the perpetrators is the Requirement, used by the Spanish during the conquest of the New World. 52 The royal court back in Spain was troubled by reports of massacres of natives and other atrocities and wanted to ensure that the activities of the conquistadors remained within the bounds of the Christian faith. The royal lawyers consulted with church officials and eventually came up with a procedure that would satisfy everyone, or at least everyone who had a say.

The procedure was based on the principle that Spanish activities in the New World were guided by the high motive of bringing Christian enlightenment to the benighted peoples there. Violence was acceptable only when it was necessary to further this admirable goal. Accordingly, the Requirement was a document that explained to the natives the importance of converting to Christianity and warned them that if they failed to embrace the true faith right away, they could be subjected to stern treatment, including even being killed or enslaved.

The activities of the conquistadors were modified to include the reading of the Requirement before mounting a devastating attack on a native village. Some scholars believe that the men in the field regarded the Requirement as “bureaucratic nonsense” 53 and few took it seriously, but they did make sure to read it before the intended victims and have the reading witnessed by a notary. Even if the conquistadors themselves treated it as a trivial waste of time, it must be acknowledged that the intentions of the Spanish court were probably earnest and sincerely moral.

The point is that the moral danger was recognized, and the procedures for dealing with the natives were modified to make them fit the justifications. The official justification was that the Spanish were benefiting the natives by bringing them Christianity. It would have belied this justification to shoot and loot innocent victims merely to take their gold and other valuables. But to inform them in advance that they ought to adopt Christianity and would be subject to violent conquest if they refused enabled the Spanish to believe that they were doing morally and religiously valuable work. That way, they only attacked people who had obstinately refused the Lord’s truth.

One of the most Kafkaesque stories to emerge from the Holocaust involved the trial and execution of Karl Koch, the commandant of the Lublin and Buchenwald concentration camps, for the murder of two Jews. 54 Thousands of Jews were being killed every day in such places, but when reports of illegal killings came to light by accident, an investigation was initiated.

One must be curious about the thoughts of Konrad Morgen, the man in charge of the investigation that eventually sentenced about 200 concentration camp staff members to various penalties (and Koch to death) for killing Jews in a place where Jews were being killed constantly and in a society whose rulers were pursuing a policy of complete genocide. When a historian asked Morgen about this years later, he explained that there were three types of killing going on. First there were the mass killings of Jews, which were based on official decrees originating in Hitler’s Chancellery and about which, therefore, nothing could be done. Second were the euthanasia killings of incurably ill or incapacitated individuals, and this too was official policy and therefore untouchable. Finally, there were arbitrary, capricious, and therefore unauthorized killings of individual prisoners. Only the third kind was illegal, and thus only the third kind came under the authority of his investigation. 55 He was working within the system to stop whatever killings could be stopped according to policy.

The point, though, is that it was crucial to maintain the view that Jews and other victims were being executed only in a legal, orderly fashion according to proper procedures. To kill them casually or recklessly violated the official story that the mass killings were part of lawful, orderly procedures. That official policy meant little to the victims. To the perpetrators, however, it was decisive and powerfully meaningful. If they abandoned it, they would be admitting that they were brutal and evil killers, no better than ordinary murderers. Sacrificing a few of their own to maintain their claim on being agents of the law was presumably worth it.

The twentieth century’s most dramatic example of how procedures are sometimes altered to maintain justifications was probably the show trials conducted during Stalin’s purges, which were briefly mentioned earlier in this chapter. During the 1930s, the paranoid ruthlessness of the Soviet regime turned from the class enemies (who by then had mostly been exterminated anyway) to the cadres themselves. Even many of the oldest and most distinguished Bolshevists were singled out by Stalin and his group for elimination. Indeed, their very eminence and distinction made them seem all the more dangerous to Stalin, and in his eagerness to eliminate any possible rivals, he executed many of the Soviet regime’s best and brightest. 56

Mass execution of top government officials attracts international attention, and of a most unflattering sort. Although Stalin had been able to have millions of peasants and other ordinary citizens killed with relative impunity, it was more difficult to eliminate top Communists who were internationally known. The solution was to conduct trials that could be covered by the international press. These trials were carefully managed to establish the appearance of perfidy and guilt of the defendants—and of course of the scrupulous legality of the subsequent killings. In most cases, the victims confessed to many acts of treason, and independent evidence of guilt was also supplied. Not all went according to plan, of course. Sometimes the victims recanted their confessions in court, saying that their prior confession had been the result of torture, and so the courts found it necessary to suspend proceedings and send the defendants back for more torture to elicit a more durable confession. In a couple of cases, the legal absurdity and weakness in the prosecution’s case would cause a judge to find the defendant not guilty, and then it was necessary to find a new judge (possibly by arresting the previous one as a collaborator in counterrevolutionary activity) and start over, until the requisite guilty verdict could be obtained. Still, for the most part the proceedings went approximately according to script.

The purpose of a trial is normally to establish the guilt or innocence of the defendant. Judged by that purpose, the show trials were a complete waste of time. They were in fact just scripted performances designed to furnish a plausible public pretext for executing men (and occasionally women) whose death had been preordained. The fact that innocent verdicts were systematically thrown out, often with the indignant arrest of the judge, shows that there was no willingness to let the light of truth lead the courts away from their appointed path. What the show trials did prove, however, was that even the most powerful men in the world could not get away with simply killing their enemies and rivals without explanation. It was necessary to furnish a veneer of legality and due process.

A sad story from Castro’s Cuba shows the importance of maintaining the legal pretext, however slim. In March 1959, not long after the revolution, a Red military tribunal conducted a trial of 43 pilots and mechanics from the defeated (Batista) air force. These men had not betrayed their country; their only real crime was that they had been in uniform on the losing side. It had not occurred to them to consider themselves traitors, and indeed they had not even tried to flee the country. The Communist tribunal agreed and acquitted them all. Castro, however, was outraged, because he wanted them convicted and punished. Instead of simply ordering that they be killed, however, he changed the constitution to give prosecutors the right of appeal, which had never existed in Cuba (or indeed almost anywhere else). A new trial was duly conducted and the men were all convicted and sentenced to 30 years in prison. “Revolutionary justice is not based on legal precepts, but on moral conviction,” explained Castro. 57 Nonetheless, it is obvious that he wanted the legality as well.

Or Just to Escape So far, we have considered the many ways that people seek to evade guilt by justifying their actions. There is another, very different, strategy for avoiding guilt: One can escape it. One can use mental tricks to keep oneself from recognizing the moral issues surrounding one’s actions.

Any reader of the Holocaust literature is sure to find vivid images stamped into his or her memory, and one that lingers for many readers is the image that of the horseback rides of Rudolph Höss. He was the commandant of Auschwitz and presided over the operation of the camp, which killed thousands of men, women, and children every day. He found the work unpleasant, especially the “heartbreaking scenes” such as when a woman would try to push her children out through the closing doors of the gas chambers, shouting and pleading, “At least let my precious children live!” 58 He felt he must not let any doubts or other troubling feelings show, however, because he was the leader and any signs of weakness on his part would spread through the ranks and undermine morale. He knew that everyone watched him, and his frequent doubts and questions had to be concealed.

He tried to keep busy with other aspects of camp administration, such as the building and logistical problems (which were enormous). Still, he could not avoid the killings entirely, and indeed his desire to do his duty as a good Nazi meant that he could not even allow himself to neglect the killing operation. A trooper in the woods might let a victim escape or ask to be excused from shooting civilians, but a camp commander had to supervise the entire operation.

And so he needed some way to cope. He had had a strong affection for animals since childhood. At Auschwitz, When something upset me very much and it was impossible for me to go home to my family, I would climb onto my horse and ride until I chased the horrible pictures away. I often went into the horse stables during the night, and there found peace among my beloved animals. 59

Riding the horse was obviously no source of justification, and it had no logical power to convince him that gassing all those helpless naked civilians was the morally correct thing to do. But it was a response to feelings of guilt, and by his own account it was a reasonably successful one. It did get rid of the feelings.

And so one pictures Rudolph heading off on his horse, early in the evening, his head full of images of the pathetic, humiliated, defenseless strangers whose lives he had helped snuff out that day. From his writings and by all other indications, he was not a man given to strong emotions, and so his upset feelings probably took the form of feeling depressed and sordid, most likely with some unpleasant tension throughout his body, a clenched jaw, an upset stomach. And then one pictures him riding back to the stable later, covered with light sweat, his body tired and relaxed, his mind calm again, ready to spend a quiet evening with his family like any other career man in the world. No more need to think about work until tomorrow morning.

The primary mental trick used to escape guilt feelings can be called low-level thinking. The term is based on an influential theory put forward by psychologists Robin Vallacher and Daniel Wegner. 60 They began by borrowing a standard argument of the philosophy of action, which is that most actions can be described in multiple ways that differ in their level of meaning. Thus, one can speak equally well of raising one’s arm, throwing a bottle, making a protest, or participating in violent revolution to bring about a new government and social organization. It is not that one level is more correct than the others, because all are accurate descriptions of the same action. They differ, however, in their implications. Raising one’s arm carries no emotional or moral weight, whereas performing a symbolic revolutionary act carries extensive and heavy weight.

Hence, if one wants to be free of guilt, including both its emotional side and its aspect of responsibility and principles, it is better to focus one’s mind at lower levels. One attends to the details and procedures rather than the broader context and meanings. There is some evidence that this is what criminals typically do. 61 When burglarizing a house, for example, they are not reflecting on how their actions violate the principles of private ownership of property, or will cause distress and anguish to the victims, or will undermine the economic scheme of the broader society. Rather, they focus very narrowly on procedural details: fingerprints, window locks, alarm systems, hiding places, dogs. Not only does this way of thinking help them perform more effectively, but it also prevents any feelings of guilt.

The power of low-level thinking to keep one’s mind off guilt is a major reason for the apparent fascination with details that has marked many killing operations. Lenin was constantly looking into minor administrative details. One of his biographers, Dmitri Volkogonov, remarked how ironic it was that the Soviet Union preserved a view of Lenin as a great philosopher, when in fact his writings tended to be quite pedestrian. Most of his papers were more worthy of an accountant than a philosopher, according to Volkogonov. But by focusing on procedures, he could avoid facing up to the enormity of the murder campaign he was setting in motion.

The low-level thinking spread through the entire Communist apparatus. Arthur Koestler recalled two slogans that he heard over and over during his days in the Communist party in Germany. One expressed the inexpediency and inappropriateness of meaningful theorizing in combat: “The front line is no place for discussions.” The other defined the appropriate attitude and orientation of each individual Communist: “Wherever a Communist happens to be, he is always in the front line.” In combination, the two slogans required Koestler and his comrades to avoid deep thoughts, abstract principles, and broad questions entirely. The front line is a place for only narrow, concrete, here-and-now thinking.

Similar observations have often been made about the Nazis. Social scientists and other outsiders have routinely professed horror at the way that these men and women seemed to understand their jobs as merely checking lists, driving vehicles, flipping switches, giving instructions, and the like. The horror is that these people seemed to act as if this were ordinary bureaucratic activity—that they failed to see the monstrous evil of mass murder that their jobs involved. But perhaps that was precisely the point. It would be agonizing for any sensitive person to work for a mass murder machine. To become less sensitive it is better to reduce the work to mere red tape. To get up each morning to face a day’s work of killing people is probably a crushing, demoralizing way of life. To get up each morning for a day of checking lists is far more manageable. One may know, of course, that the lists have something to do with people being deported and possibly executed, but it is too awful to think about that. Thinking about doing a good job with the lists is far more tolerable.

The low-level focus is also apparent in the self-criticism notes of the Khmer Rouge torturers at the infamous Tuol Sleng prison, which were briefly mentioned earlier. Like Communists everywhere, the torturers were supposed to engage in self-criticism. What did they reproach themselves with, these people who tortured others for months and then killed them? “In these records, the interrogators discuss such mundane problems as lying down on the job while questioning prisoners, not sharpening pencils, smudging papers, and the like.” 62 These tasks are certainly low level, as well as trivial. Not sharpening pencils is about as unabstract a problem one can imagine.

Even more revealing, though, was what was said when the topic of the prisoners’ fate did intrude into the torturers’ self-criticism: The major problem discussed in the interrogators’ notes, however, was that prisoners were dying under torture (‘croaking’ is the exact translation, used in the Khmer language to refer to animal rather than human death) before their ‘confessions’ were complete. 63

Thus, torturers did occasionally reproach themselves for killing someone, but this was done only as a technical or professional failure, not as a moral problem.

Keeping one’s thoughts on the low level of procedures and details is a potentially effective way to avoid guilt. It does not justify one’s wrong actions, but it accomplishes the same goal that fancy justifications would, which is to enable one to avoid the feelings of guilt. It conceals the wrongness of the actions. Wrongness is largely a high-level judgment that requires evaluating the higher meaning of actions according to broad, meaningful principles. If one can avoid thinking at that level, the wrongness does not appear.

Erasing Guilt with Alcohol The drawback of low-level thinking is that it is sometimes difficult to do. The human mind seems naturally inclined to move toward integrative, meaningful thought. This tendency is often helpful, creative, and valuable, but not when one is trying to avoid meaningful thought. Accordingly, people sometimes resort to artificial aids to help keep their minds free from broad principles and deep moral questions. Undoubtedly, the most widely-used of these aids is alcohol.

Alcohol is probably the most universally familiar method of escaping the guilt and other inhibitions that might hold people back from inflicting harm. Although alcohol has certainly brought much pleasure to many human beings, it is also a useful tool for escaping from unwanted emotional states. That makes it a useful tool for performing evil.

No one will be surprised that alcohol is involved in many acts of violence. What is perhaps surprising is how pervasive and even systematic the use of alcohol appears to be. Indeed, in some cases, alcohol use becomes official policy. Before battle, for example, soldiers in many wars and in many countries have been given a strong dose of alcohol to pluck up their courage and reduce their inhibitions about shedding blood. 64

Alcohol played a central role in the Holocaust. The guards and officers at concentration camps were very often drunk. Some of the physicians interviewed by Lifton mentioned the heavy alcohol use as an occupational hazard or difficulty of concentration camp work, as if it were unthinkable that one might remain sober under those circumstances. And perhaps it was unthinkable: To stand for hours amid frightened, disoriented people, looking closely at their worried faces and haggard bodies to select a few fit ones for work, while the rest were marched off to immediate death—that sort of work is undoubtedly stressful, especially for an idealistic young doctor who had thought that his profession would involve curing the sick and helping people. Apparently, it became a part of the routine that when your turn came to perform selection duty, you got seriously drunk beforehand and brought along a bottle to sustain that state until the task was over.

During the phase of mass shootings of civilians, the German troops likewise tended to become and remain drunk, and in some cases the drunkenness interfered with effective performance. A story in Browning’s book 65 on German police would be comical were it not for the horror of mass murder. The Germans had recruited some local volunteers to help execute the local population of Jews and handed over the unpleasant duty of the actual shooting to the locals. The local volunteers arrived late, which was already aggravating to the German police because they were having to stand guard very uncomfortably over a large number of people who were going to be shot, and because Germans in general emphasize punctuality. The reason for the lateness was quickly apparent: The local helpers turned out to be drunk, having taken full advantage of the liquor ration that was provided for shooters.

The Germans had prepared a killing site and an orderly procedure by which the victims would walk in single file to designated positions along a freshly dug pit in order to be shot, but the drunken locals began shooting willy-nilly without allowing the victims to get in proper position. There began to be corpses all over the place.

After a while, the alcohol caught up with the shooters and they began to pass out and sleep it off. The massacre then had to be delayed for a couple of hours. The Germans bickered among themselves as to whether they ought to shoot the Jews themselves. Finally, after a two-hour nap, the drunken shooters began to wake up and the killings resumed.

Other sources from other massacres make similar comments about alcohol. Stories from the Spanish Civil War tell of mass shootings of civilians, in the course of which the shooters often got drunk. This was especially remarkable because the killings were often conducted very early in the morning, so the volunteers had to get themselves out of bed, eat a quick breakfast, and get drunk before dawn. The authorities who supervised the executions were also drawn to drink. One of the most famous was Diaz Criado, a colonel whose job it was to make out the daily lists of political prisoners and others to be executed. He did his work in a cafe and was almost never seen in a sober state. 66

Torturers are likewise people whose jobs do not lend themselves to deep moral thinking, and the use of alcohol is also common among them. Indeed, some torture victims have noted that their tormentors seemed “almost always drunk.” 67

Alcohol is useful for escaping from guilt because of two related effects. First, it seems to produce low-level thinking. When people get drunk, their thinking becomes narrow, rigid, and concrete, and this focus minimizes thoughts of grand principles (such as morals) and the emotions that accompany them. Second, alcohol tends to deflect thinking away from the self, and so one does not dwell on issues of identity and responsibility.

Getting drunk may seem like one of the feeblest ways to deal with guilt, because alcohol operates directly on one’s immediate mental and emotional state rather than allowing one to reframe or justify one’s actions. Despite its crudeness, however, alcohol appears to be quite effective (at least for a short period of time). Whether any of the methods of dealing with guilt are really good enough to sustain perpetrators for the rest of their lives is open to question, and probably most perpetrators who have any conscience have uneasy memories for the rest of their lives. But there are plenty of ways, from fancy rationalizations to simple drunkenness, that can suspend guilt long enough to permit people to perform evil acts. That is what is crucial. How the perpetrator deals with guilt after the fact is of little importance to the victims, because the evil has already occurred.





