CHAPTER

11

Ambivalence and Fellow Travelers In 1995, a single father checked into a New York hospital complaining of “bad lungs,” and he soon died of lung cancer. His beloved young daughter, Elisa, was returned to the custody of her mother, despite objections that the mother was unemployed, had five other children to feed, and had been accused of beating the girl during weekend visits. The mother became convinced that the child was possessed by the Devil and began punishing and torturing her repeatedly. Finally, one day the mother sent Elisa crashing headfirst into a concrete wall. Two days later, the mother asked a neighbor to call for help. The authorities arrived to find a dead girl with injuries all over her body, some old, some new. The police lieutenant called it “the worst case of child abuse I have ever seen.” 1

One sad feature of little Elisa’s story is that there were many complaints of abuse over many years and involving many different social agencies. It seems that the system should have been able to save her. In retrospect, at least, there were ample warning signs, and a number of people who knew the girl had pointed them out very strongly long before she died. Yet the system failed her and left her at the mercy of her mother. “We’re all accountable,” said New York’s mayor, Rudolph Giuliani. 2 His point was that the community could have and should have prevented this death.

The same sentiment was expressed by the secretary-general of the United Nations, Boutros Ghali, in response to the genocide in Rwanda that claimed about 800,000 lives, more than 10 percent of that nation’s population. Referring to the failure of the world to intervene, Boutros Ghali said, “We are all to be held accountable for this failure, all of us, the great powers, African countries, the NGOs [nongovernmental organizations], the international community.” 3

The roles and responsibilities of bystanders is one of the more thorny and vexing aspects of the dilemma of evil. In a simple analysis, one can blame the perpetrators of violence and leave the bystanders out of it. Yet the actions—or inactions—of bystanders often play a crucial role. The New York welfare system did not kill the little girl, but it apparently could have saved her, and in that sense Giuliani’s comment is apt. The international community could probably not have saved all 800,000 Rwandese, but it could have saved some of them.

It is appealing but misleading to sort history into perpetrators and victims. Often there are more bystanders present than either perpetrators or victims, and the bystanders have the power to alter the outcome, whether they realize it or not. Furthermore, perpetrators may depend on bystanders in a number of ways, many of which are not directly related to the crime but are nonetheless essential. In the case of Elisa’s mother, for example, the system supported her economically because she had no job and her husband was in prison. Taxpayers paid for the apartment where Elisa was killed. In other cases, as we will see, perpetrators of violence depend on others for food, shelter, and other things, without which they could not pursue their violent acts.

People Who Switch Sides We have seen repeatedly that when individuals do evil, they often harbor some doubts or ambivalence. This ambivalence also occurs in groups. When groups perform violent or evil acts, there are often people who resist or object. Moreover, when one group oppresses another, there are usually members of both groups who work with or for the other side.

Large-scale evil rarely fits the pattern of a united, cooperative group of perpetrators oppressing a united group of victims. First, there are usually people in the perpetrator group who object to what the group is doing and who may work in various ways to prevent it. Second, there are often people in the victim group who collaborate with the enemy and assist in the defeat of their group.

The history of the British Empire in South Africa provides a valuable case study, in part because the defectors on both sides played decisive roles. 4 Viewed from a great distance, it is easy to simplify the history of southern Africa into a simple story of white European invaders defeating and oppressing native black Africans. The familiar story is based on conflict of one group against another, with lines clearly drawn in black and white. And there were plenty of people in that turbulent region who played just those roles. I have already talked about Lord Milner, whose policy of “sacrificing the nigger absolutely” was an overt and explicit plan to bring peace to the white factions (British and Boer) at the expense of the native blacks. And of course the major battles were fought in just those terms: the white British army, armed with rifles and Gatling guns, against the spear-carrying Zulus. Despite one extraordinary Zulu victory, in the end their army was destroyed, their empire conquered, and their emperor taken prisoner.

Let us look at the conflict again, this time focusing not on the obvious participants but on those who deviated from their racially dictated sides. Among the black natives of South Africa were thousands who helped the white British invaders. If the conflict had been a simple matter of white against black, the outcome would almost certainly have been different. Many thousands of black Africans worked directly for the British forces, doing the indispensable menial work that an army requires. Blacks guided the white soldiers around the unknown, mapless country, and they worked as domestic and farm servants in the white settlements. There were even some black soldiers who fought against the Zulus.

The reliance on blacks was apparent to the white people there at the time. After the shocking Zulu victory at the battle of Isandhlwana, there was widespread fear that the white settlements were undefended and at the mercy of the blacks who lived there. If all the blacks had rebelled and attacked the whites, it seems possible that every white person in South Africa might have been killed. The loyalty of many black people to the white cause was decisive in enabling the British to prevail in the end.

Yet there was no greater consensus among the white British than among the black Africans. During the entire episode, there were protests back in England against the oppression of the natives and the attack on the peaceful Zulus. Indeed, the very war that destroyed the Zulu empire had to be created with a dishonest ultimatum and a bogus provocation, because no just or honorable cause existed for the war. There had been some minor territorial disagreements, which some of the British had hoped to fan into a major confrontation. Incredibly, the Zulus agreed to settle the matter in a British court, and just as incredibly, the British judge ruled almost completely in the Zulus’ favor. This should have ended the problem and provided a basis for the Zulus and British to live peacefully in neighboring territories for many decades to come. The official who communicated the ruling to the Zulus took it upon himself to add a series of demands and stipulations, deliberately including some that would be impossible for the Zulus to accept. This provided a pretext to report that the Zulus had violated the settlement, and thereby furnished the British with an excuse to invade.

After the defeat at Isandhlwana, the British nation briefly came together to support the war effort, but as the second invasion began to succeed, the protests were again heard. The war was criticized as unjust. The rights of the Zulus to enjoy their own territory peacefully were asserted—again, by white British citizens back in England. The military effort and the protest reached their climax almost together. The great irony of the Zulu war was that England effectively renounced its victory. The Zulu land was left to govern itself with only minimal British authority. The defeated Zulu emperor traveled to England as a royal guest and was treated as a celebrity. British popular sympathy for his people and his lost cause ran high.

The division on the British side was thus just as decisive as the division among the African natives. The British army won the war only with the help of black workers and troops. Then the British protest against their own nation’s imperialistic aggression pressured the country into renouncing its victory and giving up any gain from the battles that their soldiers had died to win.

The case of the British in South Africa is hardly unique. In fact, I would regard it as typical. There are some examples that are closer to home and thus are perhaps more difficult for American citizens to appreciate objectively. Most obviously, the Vietnam War showed the same pattern of deep collective ambivalence on both sides. Many Vietnamese regarded the American troops as imperialistic invaders trying to thwart their nation’s bid for liberty, but many others worked for and with the Americans and in some cases formed lasting personal friendships. Meanwhile, the American collective ambivalence about the Vietnam War was overwhelming. Back in the heartland of the United States, people met, marched, campaigned, and otherwise demonstrated on both sides. Some supported the war and the American military; others were passionately opposed to it.

Vietnam may be an excellent example of collective ambivalence, but it is not likely to be convincing because many people regard it as an aberration. The timing of the war was wrong, they say, or it was really based on false premises. Therefore, it is worth looking at other American wars of aggression that had much more of the national interest at stake.

The most important of such wars were those fought against the native American peoples, who were collectively referred to as Indians as a result of a geographical mistake dating back to Christopher Columbus. Most of today’s United States had to be conquered from the Indians who lived here before the white Europeans arrived and took over.

Collective ambivalence played a crucial role in the conquest of the Americas right from the start. Indeed, Cortez’s conquest of Mexico would almost certainly have been impossible if the natives had united against the invaders. But the huge Aztec empire had made bitter enemies among both the conquered peoples and its neighbors and rivals. In one of the worst misjudgments of all time, many of these groups believed that the Aztecs were a more important and dangerous enemy than the handful of Spanish troops, and they looked upon the Spanish as a minor ally that might be potentially useful to win a brief edge over the Aztecs. They shared their homes and food with the Spanish, helped them understand the local languages, guided them through the utterly foreign and uncharted territory, and fought beside them against the Aztecs. Their help made all the difference in the Spanish victory. Their reward, sadly, was to be decimated by the diseases the Spanish brought and then to be subjugated by force and either massacred or enslaved by the victorious conquistadors.

Up north, the British and other settlers likewise benefited from the Indians. The celebration of Thanksgiving today is partly a recognition that the early settlers owed their very survival to the natives who shared their food with them and taught them how to grow the New World’s best crops. Later, during the Indian wars, some Indians again allied themselves with the white invaders against their traditional enemies. Unlike the initial conquests of the Aztecs or the Zulus, the white victory in the Indian wars was probably inevitable, given the eventual mismatch in population and military technology, but it would have been much more difficult if many Indians had not helped the whites.

The division among the Indians lasted until the end of their independence. Indeed, the last great Indian leader, Sitting Bull, was killed by other Indians (specifically, Indian reservation police who had been sent to arrest him). 5 The Indian police were responsible for keeping order and enforcing the laws on the Indian reservations. One can see them as collaborators with the oppressors; they worked for the white government and army. Yet to stigmatize them in that way is not entirely fair. No doubt many Indians felt it was better for Indians to police themselves than to have all weapons and authority vested in white occupation troops. Even the killing of Sitting Bull was most likely the unfortunate act of nervous young men on a dangerous nighttime mission under difficult, ambiguous circumstances.

Meanwhile, the attitude of white settlers toward the Indians was ambivalent, too. “The only good Injun is a dead Injun” was a line presumably spoken by men near the frontier who had suffered at the hands of Indians and fought them. But it was hardly the only view; indeed, the sentence itself suggests that it was said as a response to someone else who was seeking to distinguish “good” Indians from “bad” ones. A moment ago I mentioned that some Indians worked with and befriended whites, and there is no reason to think that these positive bonds were not equally welcome and important to the whites, too.

There was also significant popular outcry against the military conquest of the Indians. People wrote letters protesting their mistreatment; and some individuals went to great lengths to form bonds with the Indians to help them get along better and avoid fatal conflicts with the authorities. 6

One can go on listing examples. Over and over, victim groups seem to have provided invaluable assistance to their oppressors, without which the oppression could not have succeeded to anywhere near the same degree. The Chinese invasion of Tibet was greatly helped at crucial points by divisions among the Tibetans, who essentially let in the army that was to destroy their culture. 7 Mid-twentieth-century European Jews cooperated with the Nazis, forming small puppet governments that operated the ghettos in accordance with Nazi rules, and, they even organized deportations to the death camps. According to Hannah Arendt, the Holocaust would have been vastly less successful had the Jews failed to cooperate. (Some dispute her conclusion; my reading supports it. 8) The Crusaders were aided by Arab allies who sometimes fought alongside them and in other cases allowed them access to cities that had held out successfully against the best sieges the invaders could mount.

Over and over, one finds that many members of the perpetrator group objected, protested, or in some cases actively tried to thwart the efforts of their own side. The Chinese had occasional doubts about the correctness of their oppression of Tibet, and there were periodic efforts to undo the damage and make their policies less destructive. Many Germans objected to the Nazi murder campaign, and some risked their lives to save Jews from death. Some Crusaders protested the atrocities and tried to stop or punish the most brutal offenders. Closer to home, some of Sherman’s Union soldiers on the famous march through South Carolina went wild burning and destroying property, but others tried to control them and actively protected Southern homes and civilians from their wilder comrades.

It is sad that the idealistic efforts of those who campaigned to stop wrongdoing by their own group are often forgotten or downplayed by history. Thus, we are familiar with the fact that Jews suffered persecution for many centuries in Europe, but we are less often told of the efforts by other European Christians to protect the Jews. The medieval massacres of Jews were often strongly opposed by the authorities, including both the local aristocracy and the Church officials, and some made vigorous and successful efforts to save Jews from the violent antagonism of the Christian mobs. 9 Liberal protest against unfair treatment of the Jews became “clichés of eighteenth-century rhetoric.” 10 Later, the Dreyfus Affair, in which a Jewish officer in the French army was falsely prosecuted for treason, elicited passionate protests and defenses by leading intellectuals from the European mainstream. Indeed, had the protest never occurred, the Dreyfus case would have been simply another lost and forgotten incident among the many imperfect and biased results of military justice. What made the case remarkable was the immense outcry among non-Jewish leaders to support a Jewish victim of discrimination.

One might wonder whether the general principle of collective ambivalence has at least found an exception on the victims’ side of slavery. (The perpetrators’ side, at least in white antebellum America, was thoroughly divided to the point of civil war.) It is difficult to propose that slaves would ever cooperate to preserve slavery. For a conquered people to go to work with their conquerors may be a matter of realistically accepting the status quo and pursuing their own best chance under the circumstances. But slavery seems to be so complete an oppression that it is difficult to imagine that slaves would condone and aid it.

Slavery may offer less evidence of collective ambivalence than other sources, but there is some. In Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, author Linda Brent described her efforts to escape from slavery, and she emphasized how vulnerable she was because many other slaves would have willingly turned her in to the slavemasters to gain favor, money, or other advantages. 11 Like downtrodden people everywhere, slaves seemed to divide their loyalties between their fellows and those who had power over them.

The view of slavery as a white oppression against blacks does not entirely fit the historical evidence about Africa, either. Probably there were some cases in which whites landed on the shores of Africa and captured blacks to force them into slavery, but the more common approach was to purchase slaves from African slave traders, many of whom were black. One of the most successful slave traders was Tippu Tip, who made a famous remark about the easy profits to be made by enslaving other black people: “Slaves cost nothing. They only have to be gathered.” 12 On another occasion, he is said to have watched a boatload of women and children swept over a waterfall and to have commented, “What a pity! It was a fine canoe.” 13 Still, he regarded himself as more sensitive and compassionate than some of the other slave traders he knew.

Indeed, one of the ironies of nineteenth-century history occurred in the Egyptian uprising led by Muhammad Ali (the original leader of that name, not the boxing champion). Ali sought independence from Great Britain, which along with France had ruled Egypt after the Egyptian government had proved itself unable to pay the debts owed to European financiers. Ali recognized that the Egyptian economy was in shambles, and one of his plans to put it on a sounder footing was to revive the slave trade. The British had outlawed slavery throughout their empire and were passionately opposed to any slave trade in Egypt. Thus was fought one of the great interracial wars over African slavery: Black Africans fought to revive slavery, while white Europeans fought to eradicate it. 14

The civil rights movement during the middle of the twentieth century brought about enormous changes in race relations in the United States, but it, too, proceeded with division on both sides, despite the news reports showing white mobs attacking black demonstrators. The old white men on the Supreme Court and in Congress were crucial to ending segregation and discrimination and increasing the scope of rights and opportunities black citizens enjoyed. Meanwhile, although black people hardly fought against the civil rights movement, some had far less interest than others. For example, many black citizens did not want to take part in the Nashville boycott, and the organizers of the boycott had to form “education committees” to pressure them into participating by administering minor physical harassment. 15

The Question of Motives What are the motives that produce such divisions in both oppressor and oppressed groups? The motives of protesters in the oppressor group are relatively easy to fathom. In general, the dissenters are guided by strong ideals that condemn the violent or oppressive acts of their fellows. In addition, they may have vivid personal feelings of empathy toward the victims. The white antislavery movement was marked by both motives. Many people participated in the campaign against slavery out of principle, without having had much personal contact with slaves. (By the same token, most Americans who protested the Vietnam War had never been to Vietnam or met any of its citizens.) Others were moved by personal feelings of empathy and sympathy for the suffering of the slaves.

Even among principled protestors, however, personal self-interest may play a role. For example, it is likely that many young men protested the Vietnam War in part because they themselves could end up risking life and limb in combat.

The motives of collaborators in the oppressed group are more difficult to characterize. One factor might be disaffection with their own group. For example, people who have not done well in their group might well collaborate with a conquering enemy. Another is personal advantage. To collaborate with a victorious enemy brings power and benefits. Many of the Jews who collaborated with the Nazis were motivated by such benefits. The Nazis granted exemptions from deportation to the members of the Judenrat (Jewish Council) and their families. Sometimes, council members even got a few extra exemptions, which meant that they had the power to choose a few individuals to keep alive.

The chance to settle old scores or gain power over some particular disliked person is another possible motivation. If the Chinese took over your city, executed all the authorities, and offered you an influential position, you might be tempted if it meant that you could punish your enemies within the city. Indeed, you might be especially tempted if your refusal would enable your local enemies to gain those positions and harass you. If you had no enemies, you would probably be less tempted.

As we’ve seen, most people reserve their greatest animosities for people they know well. Thus, when a foreign power takes over, they may see an opportunity to punish those they hate. We have seen that animosity toward the ruling Aztecs was a major factor in driving some of their rivals to help the invading Spanish, and similar animosities shaped the reactions of many local Arab and Muslim powers to the invading Crusaders.

One of the most remarkable observations in Rudolf Höss’s memoirs concerns a pattern that he claimed to have observed on several occasions while presiding over executions at Auschwitz. He said that occasionally a Jew on his or her way to the gas chamber would give him the address of some other Jews who were presumably hiding from the authorities. 16 At first, one can scarcely believe that Jews would betray fellow Jews to the people who were killing them. But it seems unlikely that Höss would have fabricated this story, especially given his admissions and other observations in his memoirs.

Certainly, he did not claim that such behavior was typical. But if it did happen, what might have motivated it? Possibly, some Jews may have thought they could save themselves by betraying others. Still, Höss said that this explanation was not sufficient, and he spoke of naked Jews shouting out names and addresses from the very gas chambers while the doors were being locked on them. Others thrust slips of paper with such information into his hands while they filed onward toward their death. Thus, the last act of these people was to betray others to a similar fate.

The most likely motivation in these cases was personal animosity. In retrospect, the Nazis were the enemies of the Jews and all Jews should have united against them at every turn. In practice, however, it is inevitable that the personal enmities and antagonisms of most Jews would be directed toward other Jews, because those were the people with whom they had most contact. If you knew you and your family were headed for an unjust death while the person you most despised in the world had evaded capture and might survive, you might just be tempted to reveal his hiding place. Or at least you could understand how one person out of a great many might do so. Among the many thousands of people whom Höss watched on their way to death, it is plausible that a handful of them acted this way.

Those Jews were about to die, but for most people life is going to continue after a conquest, and so collaborating with the victorious enemy may be the only realistic thing to do. The Indian police are a relevant example. One might cling to a romantic notion of heroic resistance until the bitter end, but that would not accomplish anything. The white Europeans and their descendants were going to end up in charge of most of North America. Perhaps the best way for native Americans to have a normal life was to accept that fact and make their own lives within that framework. Throughout history, there has often been a split between those who favored relentless, heroic resistance against superior odds and those who accepted the new terms realistically and went on with their lives. Survivors are disproportionately in the latter group. Indeed, that is the essence of being a survivor: You adapt to the world and proceed on its terms, instead of going down with a lost cause.

Most people want to survive. Although from a distance we imagine that people living in historically interesting times must have been caught up in the grand sweeping events, the majority probably were not. Rather, many people want to live their own lives with as little interference from the grand sociopolitical developments as possible. Getting a job, finding a place to live, falling in love, raising children, and similar concerns continue to dominate the daily lives of most people even during war and revolution. Even if political prisoners are being tortured and killed, young people still want to date one another, parents still need to make sure their sons and daughters do their schoolwork, people still want to get a fair deal when buying or selling or renting a home, and a good meal is better than a bad one. Regardless of one’s attitude toward the evil that is going on around you, one has one’s own life to live.

Passive Companions As this book was being written, a brutal civil war raged in the territories carved out of what was once Yugoslavia. The Balkan enmities shocked and stymied the rest of the Western powers. Europe was entering a phase of increased unity, and at first it sent a clear message to the United States to keep out of the way and let Europe handle its own problems. Soon the Western European powers realized that they could scarcely agree among themselves about what might be done, let alone actually do it, and so the United States was invited to play a role. The Americans were not eager for military involvement in a seemingly unsolvable conflict with no apparent national interests at stake. They had recently elected a new president, Bill Clinton, who lacked much experience with foreign policy and whose appointees were also new to their jobs. The Americans made public statements condemning the violence, sent airplanes flying over the disputed areas, and tried to induce the various parties in the conflict to find a peaceful settlement, but for a long time these efforts led to nothing.

The ironic thing to me was that the various victims in the conflict then began to blame the United States. One day an artillery shell landed in a city street, killing and injuring a dozen civilians, and the bystanders reportedly shouted, “Thank you, Clinton” in bitter sarcasm. Many Americans thought that such blame was absurdly unfair. After all, the Serbs and Croats were killing each other while we were on the other side of the planet, and it was very doubtful that there was anything we could have done to stop them from killing each other. President Clinton had in no way helped fire that artillery shell, and in fact his statements and efforts were all strongly opposed to the violence. Yet they still blamed him.

There is a sense in which the remark is understandable, though. The victims on that street could not stop the violence themselves, nor could they hold much realistic hope that the actual perpetrators—those up in the hills firing the cannons into their neighborhood—could be persuaded to abandon their military advantage and embrace peace. At that point, the European community had proved itself clueless and feckless at peacemaking, and indeed the earlier part of the century had seen several wars start in Europe and end only with American intervention.

Thus, it is quite plausible that the victims believed that American intervention was their only hope. To them, perhaps, their suffering was fated to continue unless and until the United States sent troops to disarm the warring parties and impose peace. It still seems a stretch to blame President Clinton for a particular artillery bombardment, but it is less of a stretch to complain that the lack of American intervention permitted the horrors to continue. The way they saw it, the unfortunate residents of the battered cities of what had been Yugoslavia would continue to endure deprivation, suffering, and death until America finally took action, and so every day of American inaction meant another day of suffering for them.

This incident brings up the moral role of uninvolved bystanders in evil. At first glance, it seems that they have no role, moral or otherwise. If they are uninvolved, then by definition they have no responsibility for what happens. Yet the lack of response by bystanders is often a crucial factor in the promotion of evil, and victims at least can recognize this fact. Whether the bystanders deserve to be blamed is another matter, perhaps, but their action or inaction does have a causal role. The scientific, causal analysis is clearer than the moral one.

I said earlier that violence can be produced without doing anything positive to promote it. All that is necessary is to weaken the internal forces that stop it. In the same way, bystanders do not have to provide active support to the perpetrators of evil and violence. If they merely do nothing, and in particular if they fail to protest or object, then evil and violence are likely to flourish.

Ervin Staub emphasized the role of bystanders in The Roots of Evil. 17 His book was devoted to genocide, and he concluded that the lack of international outcry and pressure was a key factor in each of the four major instances of genocide he covered. For example, at each major step in the Nazi Holocaust, Hitler’s men would pause to gauge world reaction. Staub says that Hitler’s group was encouraged by the lack of international outcry over its incipient persecution of the Jews. The Nazis concluded from the world’s silence that everyone else approved and desired the destruction of the Jews but were not brave and resolute enough to pursue it actively themselves. 18

The century’s first genocide was the Turkish massacre of the Armenians, and the response of international bystanders was crucial. There had been one prior incident, a Bulgarian revolt in 1876, which the Turks had suppressed with brutality that extended to multiple massacres. Great Britain had influence with the Turks at that time, but was more concerned with staying on good terms with Turkey (a valued ally in a strategic location near traditional enemy Russia) than with Bulgaria, and no formal protest or sanctions materialized. Around the turn of the century, a few warm-up massacres of Armenians likewise elicited only individual letters of protest rather than any formal diplomatic punishments, and the top Turks began to realize that they could get away with almost anything within their own borders.

The actual genocide was attempted on a large scale in the midst of World War I. By this time, Turkey was at war and allied with Germany, and Germany at least could have exerted considerable influence to stop the killings. Individual Germans wrote and spoke at length in protest against the massacres of Armenians, but the government took no action. Probably it, too, felt that its alliance with the Turkish government was more important than the lives of Armenian citizens. Later, as the world became more sensitized to the issue of genocide, Turkey began to deny officially that the mass killings had taken place, and in 1982 the U.S. State Department—again influenced by the importance of its alliance with Turkey, an important bulwark against the Soviet Union as well as Middle Eastern enemies—declared that the Armenian genocide was not conclusively proved. (After some outcry over this, Congress did reassert that Turkey had indeed attempted genocide against the Armenians. 19) Thus, the inaction of bystanders implies moral approval even if the bystander could not have stopped the evil. This is particularly important given the many ambiguities and gray areas that characterize evil. If a perpetrator is doing something that he or she knows for certain is evil, then the reactions or nonreactions of bystanders have little importance. But more often perpetrators see themselves ambiguously; perhaps they are using questionable means toward acceptable ends or responding to a prior grievance with an inappropriate measure of violence. In such cases, the perpetrator might be sensitive to the moral judgments of bystanders. If bystanders say nothing, the perpetrator may believe that they did not see anything to criticize. Objectively, one might argue that the silent bystanders did not actually express approval—but perpetrators are hardly objective. They want very much to believe that what they are doing is not evil, and they are willing to take silence as approval.

Research by anthropologist Jill Korbin on child mistreatment 20 provided a chilling illustration of how abusive mothers can manipulate other people into silence, which then can be interpreted as implicit approval. A typical mother in Korbin’s sample would beat and torment her child on many occasions, and sometimes this would result in physical injury. The woman would take the child to a hospital and say that the child had had an accident but remain vague and evasive about precisely what had happened. Meanwhile, she waited in great suspense to see whether or not the physician—culturally defined as a godlike figure who knows all and makes wise, profound judgments about people—would condemn her. The woman was probably not fully convinced that she was an evil person who beat her child. Rather, she was a well-meaning mother (in her own mind) who occasionally got carried away in response to exasperating misbehavior by a difficult child.

Usually, the physician would concentrate on treating the child’s injuries and not make any accusations. This did not literally signify any direct or true approval of what the woman had done, but often she reacted as if it did. Korbin reported that such a woman said she felt relieved when no one criticized her or reported her to the authorities.

Of course, there are good reasons that the physician did not criticize the woman. Of particular importance was the fact that the woman would typically use a different hospital on each occasion, which prevented any of the physicians from seeing a pattern of repeated injuries to the same child. A single incident could well be an accident, and it makes sense for physicians to concentrate on cases of repeated abuse if they are to suspect and investigate abuse at all. To the woman, the fact of consulting different physicians on different occasions was not seen as a devious ploy she used to fool the system. To her it signified that not just one but several different physicians had seen her child’s various injuries and yet not a single one of them had accused her of anything. In her mind, she had passed multiple tests and was still entitled to regard herself as a good mother.

The ambiguity and the relief at the absence of criticism were even more dramatically apparent in the few cases in which one of these abusive mothers would confess to someone what she had done. Typically, the woman would call her own mother or a trusted friend. She would be full of remorse and would manage to say that she had injured her child. The other’s response was typically to be sympathetic. Yes, children are difficult at times and it is impossible for any normal human being to live up to the idealized standards of motherly perfection every single minute. The confidante would insist that this must never happen again, but she would not call the woman a child abuser or report her to the authorities. This again was enough to reassure the woman. Of course, at that moment she was convinced that she would never let herself lose control to that degree again. Her future was clear, and her past contained this one sin—but the confidante had told her that such things happen to normal mothers and could be forgiven.

Do such things happen to normal mothers? We can’t tell from Korbin’s sample, because she was studying women who ended up killing their children, which is an extreme rarity in statistical terms. Each killing had come at the end of a long sequence of escalating abuse. Along the way, however, the woman had managed to forgive herself and escape any recognition of herself as an evil person or chronic child abuser. It is easy to label her that way in retrospect, and with considerable justification, but it was not apparent to the woman herself at the time. After all, she had taken her child to be examined by several responsible, expert physicians, and none had said anything. And then she had even confessed her misdeed and her self-doubts to someone whom she could trust; but even her confession had not elicited a response that she was anything but a normal mother struggling to cope with a difficult child under stressful circumstances.

It is quite apparent that perpetrators are very sensitive to silence by other people and that they often overinterpret such silence as implicit approval. Yet our focus here is not on the perpetrators. How do the bystanders figure into this?

People sometimes just want to live their lives and deal with their own problems, without being called upon to pass judgment upon strangers or take responsibility for the misdeeds of others. Why should Americans have to spend their tax dollars and sacrifice the lives of their sons and daughters to force people on the other side of the planet to stop killing each other? Why should a physician or friend have to take responsibility for stopping a woman from injuring her child?

The system offers plenty of danger, but few rewards, for bystanders who get involved. For example, before the crisis in the former Yugoslavia, America had sent troops to Somalia in “Operation Restore Hope”—an apparent opportunity to do good deeds with little risk. Yet the troops had become stuck amid hostile factions and local warlords. Although some Somalians were grateful for the American help, others protested and resented the interference, and the American soldiers became targets of violent attacks. Eventually, the Americans had to withdraw in embarrassment.

Consider the physician in the emergency room who chooses to treat a child’s injuries without reporting the mother to the authorities. Most physicians in emergency rooms are overworked, and strictly speaking their job is to take care of physical injuries, not to investigate suspected crimes. More important, there are considerable legal and financial risks involved in accusing parents of abusing their children. If the physician is wrong, he or she could be subject to lawsuits and official censure, as well as having problems with the hospital authorities.

In some cases, the penalties for taking action are even stronger. During the periods of government terror in Argentina, Chile, Nazi Germany, and Soviet Russia, to speak out carried a mortal risk. Of course one does not always know how serious the risk is. Suppose you see your neighbors being arrested, or you know simply that they have “disappeared” as a result of some apparently official action. Should you complain to the authorities, who arrested them? They might arrest you, too, as a possible accomplice. There is always the possibility that your neighbor really was involved in some kind of spy work or subversive group, and so to stand up for such a person would betray your country. Should you voice objections to the newspapers or to foreigners? Again, the local authorities are likely to find out, and you will be at their mercy. You might disappear, too. At the very least, you would invite suspicion upon yourself by speaking out on behalf of imprisoned traitors.

Among the very few who managed to stage public protests amid government repression were the mothers of some of the victims. In Argentina, a group of women began to gather each Thursday, marching with signs around a small square. They called on the government to release their children who had been arrested. Ironically, the very defenselessness of these women may have made it possible for them to protest, and the strong tie to their children may have made them willing to take the risk. Of course, a military regime can easily break up a protest by a group of older women. Then again, to crack down on mothers who mourn their children is to admit that one has gone to extremes. The mothers clearly pose no security risk, and one would have to be absurdly paranoid to propose that a handful of mothers is working with some kind of international subversive organization. Moreover, who would take responsibility for arresting a group of mothers who miss their children? To do so would require an extreme moral callousness that would not square well with the regime’s views of itself as the defender of the good. There were some subtle attempts to deal with the mothers. A couple of them were kidnapped, and some of their relatives as well. But there was no overt crackdown on the group, and the mothers continued to march and protest.

My own sympathies lie very strongly with the inactive bystanders. I recall my student days, during which many students were extremely involved in politics and the effort to promote revolution. I did not share their views, especially during the year of foreign study in which I encountered many radical Marxists among the students at Heidelberg, Germany. What aggravated me most of all was their insistence that no one could remain neutral. “Not taking a position is still taking a position,” they would say, which corresponded roughly to the American student activist slogans of “If you’re not part of the solution, then you’re part of the problem” or “Whoever is not with us is against us.” I was hoping to do well in my classes, possibly learn some interesting ideas, and ideally find a girl with whom to fall in love. Getting involved in the Marxist world revolution looked like a pie-in-the-sky waste of time to me. More generally, I thought politics was a boring, frivolous charade. I deeply resented being told that I was involved in politics one way or another, or that failing to march with the revolutionaries was tantamount to supporting the Establishment.

Despite that bias, however, I must admit that I have been persuaded that it is sometimes indeed morally impossible to remain neutral. Bystanders do have a responsibility to protest evil, because it will grow unchecked if they do not. Whatever the press of one’s own concerns or the appeal of minding one’s own business, it is nonetheless true that the victims of evil and violence depend on bystanders to bear witness to what is happening and take a stand against it. It is the only way.

The Uninvolved Authorities In addition to bystanders who are truly uninvolved, there are passive bystanders who have both the authority and the power to prevent evil but fail to use it. The actions and inactions of these bystanders—leaders, governments, police, reporters—can be of paramount importance.

Police are an important example. When the police cease to intervene, victims are suddenly much more helpless and perpetrators have much greater liberty to take violent or oppressive actions. One recent focus of debate in the United States is police intervention in domestic conflicts. Although the evidence about the long-term effects of arresting wife beaters is inconclusive, it does appear that when the police do nothing, the victims feel especially helpless. 21

Police inaction has also been a source of complaint in some other crimes. Although things may have improved recently, homosexuals have long believed that police would not intervene on their behalf. Groups of young heterosexual men (often athletes) might believe that beating up homosexuals was fair game and good sport, and police would be reluctant to protect the homosexuals against the athletes. Inevitably, the inaction of the police would encourage other young men to regard homosexuals as safe targets for assault. Likewise, in some times and places the police have been slow to intervene in crimes against black people, and all-white juries would refuse to convict white perpetrators for violent crimes against black citizens.

Governments also can play an important role in contributing to evil by simply remaining aloof. Some notable cases of collective brutality occurred when a government tacitly encouraged violent acts by its citizens and showed that it would not intervene on behalf of the victims. The German police did not intervene to help Jews on Kristallnacht, the night on which local roughnecks smashed and damaged Jewish business properties and beat up Jews. The Maoist government sent ambiguous encouragement to teenagers to turn against adults who did not conform to certain Communist ideals and then largely stood by and watched while many innocent people were beaten, robbed, and killed during the Cultural Revolution. The Rwandese authorities likewise showed that they were not about to step in to protect Tutsi victims from their Hutu neighbors during the beatings and massacres that preceded the systematic genocide.

The difference that official passivity makes can be appreciated by considering how victorious armies handle the problem of their soldiers raping women in conquered areas. Indeed, at the end of World War II, Germany was invaded from several sides by different armies, and the girls and women who had survived the bombardments fared very differently depending on which army occupied their town. The American army was strictly opposed to rape, and any American soldiers who were caught raping German girls were subject to prosecution and even the death penalty. In contrast, the Russians did not punish their soldiers for such misdeeds, and the lack of punishment came across to the soldiers as an implicit approval of rape. It is not that the Russian high command issued general orders to rape every female that could be found. Rather, the understanding gradually spread through the Russian ranks that one could do anything one wanted with the women in the occupied towns.

One of the most dramatic cases in which a government’s deliberate inaction ended up increasing evil was the Ethiopian government’s response to international food donations during the famine of 1973–1974. Ethiopia is a small and poor country, and everyone important tried to remain close to the emperor. The famine in outlying regions did not have much chance of capturing the attention of the royal court. As one official later said, “Death from hunger had existed in our Empire for hundreds of years, an everyday, natural thing, and it never occurred to anyone to make any noise about it…. Since this was eternal and normal, none of the dignitaries would dare to bother His Most Exalted Highness with the news that in such and such a province a given person had died of hunger.” 22 The emperor did occasionally travel around his country, but he tended not to stop in the poor regions, and in any case wherever he went the people put on a fine show for him rather than complaining about bad conditions. When the foreign press caught wind of the famine by virtue of a British documentary, they asked insistent questions about it, and the minister of information professed to have no knowledge about any famine.

A large contingent of the international press then came to Ethiopia to learn about the famine. The government refused to let them visit the poor areas, because it regarded such press inquiries as intrusive interference into Ethiopia’s internal affairs. Thus, the government’s egotism—in this case, concern with looking good in the international press—caused them to pretend that the famine did not exist. Ethiopian university students, however, sent people north to get pictures of the famine and passed these along to the foreign reporters. When they waved the photos in front of the government spokesman and asked what was being done, the official was willing to say only that “His Most Supreme Majesty has attached the utmost importance to this matter,” and he later thought it an outrage that the “devilish rabble” of journalists were unsatisfied with this answer and demanded to know what specific actions were being taken. 23

After the journalists left, the Ethiopians debated how to handle the matter. Some favored continuing to deny that there was any famine, but the minister of information had said that the emperor attached utmost importance to it, so it could not be denied. The government then decided to admit that the problem existed and ask for help.

The international community sent aid in the form of food shipments and medical assistants, but the Ethiopian government was not altogether thrilled about all the foreign interference and especially the loss of face that it suffered. “It’s never good to let so many foreigners in, since they are amazed at everything and they criticize everything,” commented one minister later. 24 He said that the foreigners began to make loud criticisms of the situation they found: “Thousands dying of hunger right next door to markets and stores full of food.” 25 The foreigners thought that Ethiopia should simply give their food to the peasants who, because of the smaller harvest, had had nothing left after they had paid the rich landowners. The landowners had raised the price of food in response to the shortage, which is a standard economic response, although in this case a rather heartless one.

To the government, these foreigners’ suggestions were absurd, partly because the rich landowners were important people at the royal court who were considered immune from criticism as long as they enjoyed the emperor’s favor. It was well understood that a certain amount of corruption was tolerated as one of the perks of the royal court. To accuse “the official representatives of His Well-Beloved Highness” 26 of being speculators who caused the famine would be unacceptable. Indeed, the emperor made a point of bestowing extra favors and promotions on the individuals whose profiteering had caused the famine, “to prove that they were innocent and to curb the foreign gossip and slander.” 27

The next event was most extraordinary and can be appreciated in the actual remarks of another government official: Everything seemed to be moving along well, developing favorably and successfully and most loyally; the Empire was growing and even, as His Supreme Highness stressed, blossoming—when suddenly reports came in that those overseas benefactors who had taken upon themselves the trouble of feeding our ever-insatiable people had rebelled and were suspending shipments because our Finance Minister, Mr. Yelma Deresa, wanting to enrich the Imperial Treasury, had ordered the benefactors to pay high customs fees on the aid. “You want to help?” the minister asked. “Please do, but you must pay.” And they said, “What do you mean, pay? We give help! And we’re supposed to pay?” “Yes,” says the minister, “those are the regulations. Do you want to help in such a way that our Empire gains nothing by it?” 28

Thus, aid was suspended. The Ethiopians put out official statements blaming the West for causing their people to starve by cutting off food shipments, and the members of the court agreed that this response was successful. Yelma Deresa, the finance minister whose customs charges had caused the food shipments to be suspended, was treated very favorably by the emperor, who was relieved to be rid of all that foreign interference and criticism.

The government of Ethiopia did not cause the famine, nor did it particularly wish it to happen or to continue. But its own priorities of egotism, prestige, and greed were much more important to it than the famine, and so the government ended up following a course of action that let people starve (and even prevented aid from reaching them). To the international community, the plight of the victims was paramount, and from that perspective the government’s position was morally repugnant. But the Ethiopian government saw matters differently. Issues of threatened egotism were central to its concerns. It could not crack down on the rich landowners whose speculative activities had kept the food from the people and set off the famine, because those landowners were prominent members of the government and representatives of the emperor, and to accuse them would disgrace the government. And the government resented the foreign donations because they came with a large amount of highly unfavorable publicity. The emperor and his group had worked long and hard, in their view, to create an image of their nation as a modern, successful, up-and-coming country deserving of international respect. They hated to see the fruits of their labor destroyed by disloyal students and the noisy rabble of foreign journalists making a big deal out of something that was, in their view, a natural and normal phenomenon: starvation in the poor outer regions of their land.

Indirect Help There is another, indirect way in which unprotesting bystanders contribute to evil. Satan himself may have the unlimited budget and endless free time necessary to devote himself fully to causing trouble, but actual perpetrators of evil are people (or groups, organizations, or countries) who depend on commerce and social exchange for their very survival. They do not necessarily need the assistance or approval of others for their violent, oppressive acts, but they do need the cooperation of others to go on living and to achieve reasonable levels of security and comfort.

This dependency gives bystanders more leverage than they may assume they have. They may be powerless to stop a particular act of violence, but if they translate their protest into some form of refusal to cooperate in other spheres, the perpetrators may feel the pressure.

International boycotts are based on this principle. Given international law, countries are extremely reluctant to intervene in the internal affairs of other countries, even when they disapprove of them very strongly. Thus, Americans were willing to send troops to fight Iraq when it invaded Kuwait, but when Iraq later waged a brutal war against the Kurds living in Iraq, the international community did not see any basis for intervening. Disapproval of such acts does sometimes result in a boycott, however, and Iraq was subjected to a severe one for several years. Similar boycotts put pressure on South Africa to end its policies of racial apartheid, and on various other countries that have oppressed minorities or restricted human rights.

Regrettably, boycotts are an imprecise instrument. News reports have consistently indicated that the boycott of Iraq did not have the desired effect. The military rulers responsible for the internal terror campaigns continued to live well because of their wealth and power. In Iraq, as elsewhere, the common people suffered most from the shortages and deprivations caused by the boycott.

Although boycotts and similar forms of pressure do not always produce the intended effects, they are sometimes very influential. Countries are interdependent to some degree, and most countries need many of the goods that come from trading with the broader community. On a smaller scale, the violent youth gangs in the United States need many goods and services that their community provides, and the equivalent of a community boycott could mean the end of many gangs.

The influence of the bystander community was a central point of Martin Sanchez Jankowski’s book about urban gangs. 29 Jankowski largely rejected the media stereotype of gangs preying on the community in which they live and keeping neighbors too terrified of reprisals to report criminal acts to the police. On the contrary, he said, most gangs are heavily dependent on the good will of their community. If they are going to perpetrate violence and other crimes, they will generally go to other neighborhoods rather than victimize their own. The gang needs its community. If it loses the support of its community, it is extremely vulnerable. After all, the local community has to provide the gang members with food and shelter (including places to meet and to hang out). If the neighbors start reporting the gang’s whereabouts and activities to the police, the gang will find it very difficult to operate effectively.

Why would communities tolerate gangs? Often the gang is seen as a reliable and trustworthy form of neighborhood defense. Many poor communities do not trust the police to protect them, for various reasons including slowness of response, lack of personal ties to police officers, and past history of oppression and discrimination by the police. Indeed, we noted earlier that the United States has a history of police failing to intervene to help black citizens, and it is not surprising that in some places black neighbors might put more trust for their own safety in the neighborhood boys than in the police.

The gang, however, is usually available because the members of the gang live in the neighborhood, too. The boys in the gang are known to the neighbors personally. Moreover, the community often has a substantial need for protection. As researchers have pointed out, a gang will generally go elsewhere to commit its violent crimes, which means that one’s neighborhood is subject to periodic invasions and incursions from other neighborhoods’ gangs. One’s own gang is thus needed to protect the community against the outsiders. Therefore, the relationship may be mutually beneficial. The neighborhood supports the gang and provides it with food and housing, and the gang provides the neighborhood with protection.

Thus, the gang does not need the community to assist it in criminal activity, but it does need the support structure. Jankowski concluded emphatically from his 10 years of living among gangs that when relations between the gang and the community turn sour, the breakup of the gang is imminent. Although individual residents may feel helpless at the mercy of their local gangs, in fact the gang is more dependent on the community than vice versa. The gang needs to stay on good terms with the community to survive.

Even organized crime requires the assistance of people who are not directly involved in crime. As mafioso Nicky Caramandi told author George Anastasia, even the most dangerous and deadly operations of the Mafia involved people who are not in the Mafia themselves. “We borrowed their cars, they held guns for us in their houses, they took all kinds of chances. We made ‘em do different things. We would go to a person’s house to change clothes after a shooting. See, after you fire a gun, you have to wash down with vinegar and take a shower so the gunpowder doesn’t stay on you. And you have to get rid of your clothes.” He added that these relationships to people outside the organization “are the strength and backbone of the mob.” 30

Similar factors hold true with terrorists. Again, the stereotype is of vicious, deadly groups of revolutionaries invading the community and committing acts of mayhem against defenseless individuals. In fact, terrorists require a substantial amount of community support. They need safe houses in which to hide. They need money. They need food and shelter. They need places to meet, to store their weapons and other gear. True, a couple of terrorists can travel to many places in the world rather easily and plant a bomb. But terrorist campaigns of any duration require a strong network of support in the community.

The Irish Republican Army is a good example. Their campaign of bombings and shootings was able to last for years only because they had many supporters in Ireland who wanted to help the cause of Irish independence. Most jobs won’t let you take a month off for a bombing mission, and even if you could do the deed in a week, your absence from work would be noticed. Still, somebody has to buy the food and pay the bills, and so somebody has to have a job. If the ordinary working people had all turned their backs on the IRA, they could not have carried on their activities for long.

Keeping Them Happy So far, we have argued that the perpetrators of long-term evil require at least the passive cooperation of uninvolved bystanders. Apart from the few obvious cases (such as gangs that protect the neighborhood), how do the perpetrators manage to secure this cooperation? Presumably, it must be difficult to induce people to remain silent and cooperative in the face of ongoing evil. Most people undoubtedly prefer to believe that they would take a stand against evil if it were happening in their community. If your state government began arresting and killing innocent members of minority groups, would you protest? Of course I would, say most people. But it is easy to be virtuous in such hypothetical dilemmas. In fact, when such things happen, most people do not protest. How can we understand their silence?

One crucial factor is that repressive governments usually balance their oppression of certain groups with positive accomplishments that the majority will appreciate. Or, at least, they promise to provide major improvements, and people trust them until it is too late. Fascist and military governments often accomplish positive things for their countries. The Nazis restored prosperity, urban peace, and hope to a country that had fallen helplessly into chaos and disaster for a decade. The Argentineans likewise stopped the downward slide that had taken their country from one of the world’s richest to a disintegrating chaos.

At the other end of the political spectrum, hopes were even higher, if less thoroughly fulfilled in Russia. The Communists promised that the nation would enjoy land reform (which is nearly always one of the biggest and most controversial issues in a country where most people are impoverished peasant farmers), justice, equality, and national pride. Even the brutal Khmer Rouge was welcomed by many people in Cambodia, not because of any specific promises, but because the current government was so corrupt and ineffective that many people believed the Communist patriots would try to make life better. The reality was apparent by a few days after the takeover, but by then it was too late.

When these governments do deliver, there is a gratitude factor that will sustain support for them even through some questionable actions. Suppose you were out at sea with your family, and your boat sank. Then someone came by and saved all of your lives, fishing you out of the waters and wrapping you in warm blankets for the ride to shore. On the ride, your savior happens to make a few derogatory remarks about people of another ethnic group. You disagree with those sentiments, but do you call him a bigot? Certainly you are unlikely to insist that he stop the boat and put your family back in the water. Probably you say nothing. In fact, when the man makes those bigoted remarks, suppose he acts as if he assumes you agree, by catching your eye and smiling in a knowing way. He has saved your life; you smile back and nod, at least. People who live under some authoritarian governments are in a similar situation. Except that the boat will take years to reach the shore.

Pride is also a contributing factor. Most people want to take pride in their country. Strong governments usually provide a solid basis for national pride, and often they restore a pride that has been damaged or lost. Whatever the shortcomings and failures of Soviet Communism, it at least enabled Russians to feel pride in their great country, with its vast empire, mighty army, and Olympic sports triumphs. The abandonment of Communism in 1989 has been traumatic in part because the Russians had to cope with the diminished prestige and status of being a second-rate power. The loss of pride is one source of nostalgic support for Communism in that country. (These days when I watch the Olympics, I always hope the Russians will do well, because the cause of world peace will probably be best served if the Russians see that they can still achieve symbolic greatness and success under democracy!) People may also derive individual benefits under oppressive regimes that would discourage them from protesting too strongly when the regimes do something evil. Again, it is necessary to recognize that most oppressive regimes do not oppress everybody, and in most cases they will be bringing benefits to the majority of people or at least the majority of people who count. These benefits go beyond the collective social benefits of a stable economy, law and order, community pride, and the like.

Sometimes these benefits are merely asserted. During the Spanish Inquisition, for example, the authorities promised that everyone who attended an auto-da-fé would gain spiritual benefits. 31 This was one factor that motivated people to attend the great festivals in which heretics were censured and killed. To see the wicked secret enemies of Christendom punished for their false beliefs and subversive acts was supposed to be good for one’s soul.

More palpable benefits sometimes attend the purges of modern totalitarian governments. As Hannah Arendt 32 pointed out, a purge is great for a young person’s career, as long as he or she is not one of the victims, because it creates job opportunities. If half the top officials at a company or bureau are sent to prison, one result is a large number of job openings. Younger men and women are promoted to positions of prestige, responsibility, and high pay—much more rapidly than they could have expected. Suppose, for example, that you were a young man in such a situation; how would you feel toward the regime? It has brought you occupational success well beyond your dreams. Your family and neighbors all treat you with new respect. Your in-laws, who used to look down on you and think you weren’t good enough for their daughter, now look up to you, ask for your opinions or favors, and brag to their friends about their daughter’s big-shot husband. It would be hard for you to be critical of the government under those conditions, because it has enabled you to realize your own potential so well. You have flourished under the current system.

From a distance, we can see the flaws in such a response. The young person’s advance was not due to his own achievement but to the evil actions by the government toward his former superiors. Moreover, we can anticipate that when another purge comes, many of those who rose so rapidly will find it their turn to be arrested. But it does not look that way to the people who are there at the time. People tend to believe that they deserved their successes. Even if you recognize that the arrest of your former boss was the immediate cause of your promotion, you are likely to focus on the fact that it was the years of good work you had done in your position that brought you the promotion when the opening occurred. Thus, to your mind, you deserved it, and the purge was merely a matter of timing.

Moreover—and this is a crucial point—people generally do not realize how arbitrary and groundless such arrests are until it is their own turn. They may find it hard to believe that there were really so many traitors and saboteurs in their organization, even among people they knew and may have liked, but they typically believe that some of the charges must be true. After all, the government would not just arrest and imprison a large number of innocent people who were loyally serving it, would it?

Later on, the trials and confessions confirm the assumption that something must have been going on. Possibly, the poor achievements of past years were in part a reflection of the sabotage of those former leaders who are now safely in prison or dead. The future looks bright for optimistic up-and-comers like yourself who have now been put in charge and given a chance to realize your dreams. The bubble bursts only when you yourself are arrested later, and even at that point you are shocked and think there must be some huge mistake. You know you are innocent and expect to be cleared. Only gradually do you come to realize that your own innocence will not protect you any more than the innocence of your predecessors protected them. But at this point, it is too late, and in any case the disillusionment of people in prison is hardly an unexpected or serious problem to the regime. There are other young men who have been promoted to replace you, and they feel exactly as you did a few years ago when you were in their place: surprised at your treason and arrest, but grateful to have their talents recognized and optimistic at the opportunity to do important work.

Thus, even a government that is arresting and killing its own loyal citizens can retain considerable support. The ones who are working are doing quite well, and indeed the very purges that will eventually kill them are in the short run increasing their loyalty. The only ones who see through the sham are the innocent ones who fill the prisons, but their opinions are scarcely heard, and in any case they will soon be dead or otherwise out of the way. From the regime’s point of view, all it sees in the cities and offices are loyal, grateful, hard-working supporters.

If such benefits fail, then the regime can always fall back on fear and intimidation to silence dissent and secure passive cooperation from the majority. The methods can be combined, of course. The young man who has just been given a tremendous promotion and gained the respect of his in-laws is especially unlikely to put it all at risk by announcing publicly that the purge was illegal and its imprisoned victims were innocent, even if he knows for certain that that is true—and it is highly unlikely that he will have such certainty. And even if he did, he would then also recognize that to speak out would make him a target. Instead of enjoying the shining admiration in his young wife’s eyes, the respectful looks from his neighbors, his children’s delight in the new things he buys them, or the newly deferential tone in his father-in-law’s voice, he would be putting himself and them at risk. He could face prison, torture, and death. His wife and children would be plunged into poverty and have to move in with those very in-laws, who would probably think that his sudden rise had owed more to treasonous conspiracies than to any merit on his part. His neighbors would avoid mentioning that they knew him. And for what? Far better to accept one’s good fortune and keep one’s mouth shut.





PART

4

Conclusion





