CHAPTER

2

Victims and Perpetrators The problem of evil can be approached in two completely different ways. One is to understand the image of evil, that is, the way evil is imagined and portrayed—the way it exists in people’s understanding. The other is to understand the causes of behavior that is seen as evil.

Because the reality of evil is sometimes shaped and altered by the image, it is sensible to begin with the image. This chapter and the next will undertake to distinguish image from reality and construct a basic understanding of the image. This chapter addresses the different perspectives of victims and perpetrators. To pursue our task of understanding the perpetrator, it will be necessary to see the limitations of the victim’s view and be able to step outside them. This is especially important because the habitual ways of looking at evil generally start from the victim’s viewpoint. Chapter 3 will discuss the image of evil. In Chapter 4, we will begin to look at the causes of evil.

As I said in Chapter 1, evil exists primarily in the eye of the beholder, especially in the eye of the victim. Most people do not think of their own actions as evil, even if others regard what they are doing as supremely evil. But if no one deliberately does evil, how do so many evil things get done? In this chapter, we will look at how the people who perform evil acts think and feel about them. If they don’t see their own actions as evil, how do they see them?

Killers Dressed in Black In the twentieth century, the most compelling and enduring image of evil is the Nazis. The Nazis have replaced the red-skinned, pointy-tailed Satan as the prototype of evil. Men dressed in black, with leather boots and skull insignias, carrying out the large-scale and systematic murder of millions of innocent, unarmed, naked citizens: What could be more evil? And so the question can be asked: Did they regard what they did as evil?

The answer appears to be no. Perhaps it should be a qualified no, for many of them had serious doubts and misgivings, and some objected strongly to the Nazi regime’s actions as morally wrong. But these people, who saw or suspected evil, were not the ones most involved; indeed, many of them ended up withdrawing from active participation in the killings. The people who carried out the worst acts did not believe they were doing evil, or at most they struggled between doubts and conflicting obligations. There is nothing to suggest that large numbers of people came to adopt a positive attitude toward doing things they saw as evil.

Then how did the Nazis regard their actions?

Nazi Idealists First, they seem to have thought they were making the world a better place. The Nazis were idealists and Utopians. It is paradoxical to suggest that many of the men who performed the greatest evil regarded themselves as doing good. But that is how they saw it.

The Nazis were guided by a strong utopian vision: They wanted to build the perfect society. In order to transform an overpopulated country into a Jeffersonian rural democracy (their particular idea of the perfect society) they required more land. They saw some very suitable land to the east. Unfortunately (in their view), that land was already occupied by all those Polish people. Those people were in the way, and the logical plan was to move them out somehow. Concentration camps were initially for relocating people, not for killing them. The systematic killings seem to have started only after alternative options for relocation became impractical. 1 The original plan was just to get certain people out of the way in order to carry out the start of the perfect society.

Indeed, the Nazis felt that they were falling behind other nations in their efforts to create an ideal society based on modern science. 2 They pointed in particular to the United States, where compulsory sterilization was practiced and euthanasia was being debated, and where the Indians who had occupied the desirable land had been herded off onto reservations. Moreover, it was not a matter of the Nazis saying, “Look, the Americans are doing these things, even though they might seem bad, so we should be allowed to do them, too.” Rather, the Nazis used the American example to persuade reluctant Germans that their country was falling behind in the great march of historical and scientific progress. Their argument was along these lines: “Look, the Americans have applied modern ideas to build a better society, and if we do not do the same we will be left behind as a foolish, doddering, obsolete form of society. Instead, we must rush to the forefront of historical and scientific progress. We must do as well as the Americans, and even better.” Very likely, and not entirely without evidence, 3 the Germans probably thought they were smarter than Americans, and so they could use that advantage to surpass us. They wanted to build the perfect society, but we Americans were clearly racing ahead.

Many Germans may have had some resentment and dislike of the Jews, but these were not the main factors. As Zygmunt Bauman has pointed out in his important book on the Holocaust, it would have taken the Nazis centuries to carry out the Holocaust if they had relied on making ordinary German citizens angry enough to kill Jews. 4 Inciting crimes of passion is a very inefficient and unreliable way to conduct a genocide. The Rwanda holocaust of the 1990s, which in several respects surpassed the Nazi system in efficiency of killing, seems to have been carried out amid a deliberate silence of emotion. 5 Apparently, passion is disruptive.

Rather, Bauman says, the mentality that directed the Holocaust was a gardener’s mentality. A gardener is raising flowers and other plants in accordance with a particular plan for a beautiful, fine place. The weeds must be removed to make this vision reality. Some gardeners may hate the weeds, while others may regard them merely as an inconvenience. In the end, however, it doesn’t matter much what the gardeners’ feelings are: Both types of gardeners end up killing the weeds. All that really matters is that the envisioned perfection of the promised garden requires getting rid of the weeds. The great society imagined by the Nazi leaders required getting rid of Jews, Slavs, Gypsies, and others who were in the way and who could by their mere presence spoil the perfection of the society the Nazis wanted to create. Killing all those people, like weeding a garden, boiled down to a fairly unpleasant chore that had to be done to achieve an envisioned wonderful outcome—one that would be a positive good for everyone. At least, everyone who mattered to them.

Righting Past Wrongs Many Nazis regarded their actions as getting even for past wrongs and injustices. In their view, they had been mistreated and they were setting things right. To be sure, they were overdoing things; the retaliation far exceeded the scale on which they thought they had been wronged, with a few possible individual exceptions (such as those who believed that their family members who had died in the First World War were victims of conspiracies, machinations, and betrayals perpetrated by the Jews).

Still, many Germans believed they had suffered substantial injustices. They felt their country deserved a leading position in Europe, but instead it had been treated with disrespect; conspired against by the older powers; tricked into losing the war; and then utterly exploited, humiliated, emasculated, and looted by the outrageous Versailles treaty and postwar settlements. It defied their common sense to see how their proud and mighty country had become a military, economic, and political basket case. The Jews had undermined the war effort and stabbed their country in the back (or so many Germans came to believe), and the Allied enemy powers, unable to win on the battlefield, had cheated and then exploited Germany.

From an objective viewpoint, there were some kernels of truth in their complaints. The Versailles treaty was unfair, and they had been badly used. Very clearly, though, the Jews had not stabbed the Germans in the back. But the Germans’ perception was what mattered in terms of the actual flow of events.

Given the realities of the battlefield and the flattering distortions of official propaganda, the Germans had believed they were doing extremely well in World War I. They had won the eastern war, decisively defeating the Russians (who had surrendered on terms highly favorable to the Germans). They had fought to a standoff in the west, their boys and generals producing an even draw against the combined rest of the civilized world. It was almost the miracle of Frederick the Great 6 all over again. Abruptly, the Germans learned that they had lost the Great War, that the Kaiser was abdicating, and that they were being stripped of conquered lands and forced to pay ruinously large reparations. Even their victory in the east was being nullified, and they were being treated as losers there, too, having to give back all the new territory that had been surrendered to them in the 1917 victory treaty with Russia. And on top of everything else, their money had become worthless and the social order was crumbling. Conspiracy theories, such as that the Jews had stabbed them in the back, were not merely plausible; they were almost the only way such a stunning turnabout could be understood.

A full appreciation of the German mental state must also incorporate the shock of the war itself, win or lose, which is now rather difficult for people to imagine. Before World War I, Europe in general had almost forgotten how bad war could be. They had not had any mid-nineteenth-century bloodbath comparable to the American Civil War; it was not since the Napoleonic wars a century earlier that Europe had been laid waste, and the memory of those horrors had faded substantially. 7

Moreover, even if those memories had been fresh, they would not have prepared Europeans for World War I. A century’s worth of rapid technological innovation had made the weapons far more cruel and deadly than had been imagined. The guns used in the Napoleonic wars, for example, were so inaccurate that soldiers who were the targets did not even hide behind trees or dig holes in the ground. World War I shocked Europe with its brutality: guns that could kill at several miles’ distance, heavy artillery, poison gas. A second shock was that the war lasted much longer than anyone anticipated. It gradually killed so many young men that the grinding losses affected nearly every family.

Of all the summaries of the causes of World War II, the best brief one I have found is that of John Keegan. 8 The First World War had been so much more horrible than anything Europeans had remembered or even imagined that it produced a lasting and profound psychological impact. The winners concluded that there must be no more wars. The losers concluded that there had to be another war to set things right: So much sacrifice could not be allowed to be in vain. And so Germany rearmed while England and France made concessions (“appeasement”) and hoped for peace. The Germans saw embarking on the conflicts and policies that led to the Second World War as a way of getting back what was rightfully owed them and getting even with some of the enemies who had robbed them.

Cruelty as an Unfortunate By-Product Some Nazis felt that the cruelties were a relatively small part of a positive, admirable program. After all, no one is perfect, and considering the radical social changes that were taking place, some problems and missteps were to be expected. Indeed, after the war, some older Germans would try to say that Hitler was not all bad, that he had done many good things. 9 They tended to find that no one would listen and that the rest of the world objected strongly. But to them, the bad parts were unfortunate by-products of something that had had much to recommend it. The country had really gotten back on its feet, and there was a strong public morality with “family values” heavily and consensually emphasized. After collapse and depression, the return to normality seemed a miracle.

A variation on this view was that the mistreatment and killing of unfortunate victims was a regrettable but necessary part of what had to be done. No utopia has been built without pain, and no war has been won without loss. Many individuals probably regretted seeing their Jewish friends deported and otherwise mistreated, but perhaps they thought such actions were a sad part of a desirable process: bad means toward a good end.

The men and women who carried out some of history’s most evil acts did not generally regard their own actions as evil. Some felt they were getting revenge for past injustices they had suffered. Others felt they were simply helping to make their world a better place. Still others felt they were carrying out their duty. Among these, there were many who disliked the mistreatment and killing of other human beings, but most were able to see their objections as merely a personal reluctance to carry out an unpleasant duty—and as a sad or dirty part of a great, noble enterprise. We should not condone or forgive the catastrophically cruel wrongness of some of the Nazis’ ideas. But we must understand those ideas if we are to understand the extraordinary evil that was enacted.

How Perpetrators Think Although evil may exist most palpably in the minds of victims, one cannot rely on victims’ accounts alone to explain or understand evil. The perpetrators of evil are often ordinary, well-meaning human beings with their own motives, reasons, and rationalizations for what they are doing. Although victims deserve to be heard, their views cannot be taken as the definitive account of why the perpetrators acted as they did. To reach an understanding, it is necessary to hear what the perpetrators have to say.

Unfortunately, perpetrators of crimes and atrocities tend to say rather little. They tend not to write their memoirs or furnish interviews to social scientists. Histories of major episodes of oppression, terror, and genocide tend to be based heavily on victims’ stories, because those are mainly what’s available. This imbalance is compounded by the recognition that perpetrators have ample reason to lie or distort the truth to reduce their guilt, and so whatever they do say is met with suspicion. Only recently have researchers begun to realize that victims also have an agenda and that their accounts may be biased. Still, even if the victims distort, it is quite clear that the perpetrators do too.

One way to work around the practical and legal obstacles to understanding heinous criminals is to look at how people explain the relatively minor and common misdeeds of everyday life. Accordingly, we will now turn our attention away from large-scale, systematic mass murder and examine ordinary interpersonal conflicts. Using modern research techniques, it is possible to gain a fairly thorough understanding of how people recall and perhaps rationalize the things they have done wrong.

These everyday sins may fall far short of what one would call “evil,” but it is likely that learning how everyday perpetrators think about their offenses will provide valuable clues to how the perpetrators of major violence and other crimes think. The very fact that these phenomena are so common makes them important and interesting. After all, a theory that applies only to serial killers is not very useful for understanding people in general, because less than 1 percent of 1 percent of the population are serial killers. Also, because everyday events are relatively easy to study, one can study them very carefully and thoroughly and reach solid conclusions. In contrast, the perpetrators of exceptional crimes are difficult to study: They are often in prison or in hiding; there are not usually enough of them available to make a statistically “robust” sample; and there are numerous technical, legal, and other difficulties for the researcher.

To learn how perpetrators think, two graduate students and I collaborated on a research project designed to see how people would talk about something they had done that at least someone else thought was wrong. 10 We asked people to write an account of a recent incident in which they had done something that made someone else very angry. For comparison, we also asked them to write an account of an event in which someone else made them angry. Thus, each person wrote one “perpetrator” story and one “victim” story. This procedure yielded insight into how ordinary people commit such acts, as opposed to how semihuman monsters or deranged sociopaths might think. We then spent several months carefully coding the collection of accounts to see what patterns were statistically more frequent among the perpetrator accounts than the victim accounts, and vice versa. What follows is a quick tour through the aspects of the perpetrator’s mentality that can be gleaned from those findings. These are key differences to be kept in mind as we shift from the victim’s perspective to the perpetrator’s.

How Bad Was It?

A first conclusion was that the actions seemed much less evil—less wrong—to the perpetrators than to the victims. Victims tend to see things in stark, absolute categories of right and wrong; perpetrators see a large gray area. Many perpetrators admitted that they had done something that was partly wrong, but they also thought that they were not fully to blame and that it was not as bad as others (especially the victims) had claimed. Even while blaming themselves, these perpetrators still thought the victims had overreacted and blown things out of proportion.

If the perpetrator’s first slogan is “It wasn’t so bad,” the second is “I couldn’t help it.” From the perspective of people who have done something wrong, it is often quite obvious that factors beyond their control played a large part. These external causes diminish their responsibility, according to them. This is indeed what perpetrators of major crimes have been saying for a long time: for example, the Nazi functionaries’ postwar defense of “I was only following orders.” The same excuse is alive and well today. It is found in the legal and personal claims of members of violent youth gangs. 11 Likewise, Argentina just granted a blanket amnesty to all soldiers and lower officers who were involved in the repressive terror perpetrated by the military state (mainly in the late 1970s). The pointing to external factors is equally implicit in the modern American legal defense that an externally induced “irresistible impulse” or “temporary insanity” had caused one to kill. Once again, this is something people say even while admitting that they did something wrong. They do not deny what they did, but in their eyes they are not fully responsible for acting maliciously or wickedly.

A minority of perpetrators claimed that their actions were fully justified. In their view, they had a legitimate reason and even a full right to do what they did, and the victim was unreasonable in objecting to it. A person might be angry, for example, that a friend (who is the perpetrator in this case) had insisted on dictating where and when they would go out, being unwilling to compromise, but the friend might well say that she had paid for the car and so had a right to make such decisions unilaterally. Lest we regard these as trivial patterns, we should take note that many wars seem to fall into this pattern. War-making nations rarely admit that their cause is unjust or self-serving, nor do they claim they were prompted to attack by an irresistible impulse. Rather, they cite the need to defend their own legitimate (in their view) rights.

Again, these research findings are based on minor transgressions, typically among friends and relatives. But one does not have to look far to find similar patterns among people who commit serious crimes. Diane Scully’s 12 interviews with convicted rapists found them using similar arguments to reduce the severity of their offenses. They blamed alcohol or other factors, and some even claimed that rape became an addiction so that they could not stop themselves from raping women once they had tasted this forbidden pleasure.

The prize for minimizing one’s crime must go to one serial murderer and rapist whom Scully interviewed in prison. His account would be almost humorous if it were not for his shocking actions and his appalling insensitivity to the victims’ suffering. This young man had captured five different women at gunpoint and raped them, after which he stabbed them to death. It is difficult to imagine how anyone could regard such acts as anything but brutal, cruel, and evil. Yet the man described them in quite different terms. He said he had always made sure to be “kind and gentle” with them, at least “until I started to kill them.” He claimed they enjoyed having sex with him (which is almost certainly false, because surveys of rape victims have found that approximately zero percent of them report any enjoyment or pleasure). 13 And even the murders seemed less heinous in his retelling: “The killing was always sudden, so they wouldn’t know it was coming.” 14

Deliberate and Intentional?

One of the most important discrepancies between the accounts of victims and those of perpetrators involves the crucial question of why the perpetrator acted as he did—in other words, his motives and intentions. Two versions prevail in the victims’ accounts, 15 and in fact the two are probably. In one, the victim emphasizes that the perpetrator had no reason at all related for what he did. Victim stories do not merely tell what the perpetrator did; they imply or even point out that there was no reason for acting that way. The utter outrageousness, the sheer incomprehensibility of the perpetrator’s action is emphasized. The act seems arbitrary, random, gratuitous. When people describe such events in everyday conversation, they use such phrases as “Can you believe it—what so-and-so did?” or “There was no reason for X to say that.” The perpetrator appears to have acted on a capricious whim.

The other version found in victims’ accounts presents the perpetrator as deliberately malicious. The perpetrator seems to be acting out of a focused, sadistic desire to do harm, as an end in itself. The attitude of the perpetrator, as portrayed by victims in such stories, ranges from moral indifference to sheer meanness. This is a very important aspect of victims’ perceptions, and there will be much more to say about it in the next chapter.

For now, though, the crucial point is simply that perpetrators’ stories about what they have done very rarely exhibit plain meanness. Occasionally, a perpetrator will say something to the effect of, “I don’t know why I did it,” but the vast majority present comprehensible reasons for the way they acted. Likewise, they may admit that what they did was wrong, but they almost never say they were motivated by sheer meanness or out of a desire to inflict harm as an end in itself.

Thus, the view of perpetrators as casual, arbitrary, or sadistic is predominantly a victim’s view. Perpetrators rarely portray themselves that way. The contrast is especially surprising in the context of this particular study, because the same people wrote both perpetrator and victim stories. Each person seemed to change his or her style of thinking when moving from the victim to the perpetrator role.

What to Do with Bygones: The Elastic Time Frame Another important difference between victims and perpetrators is the time span of their stories. In this, our data corresponded very well with other data the world over. Victims use a very long time span. When describing what happened to them long ago, they will often provide background leading up to the incident, describe consequences, and even relate their story to the present. Individual victims may continue to ruminate about their traumas and suffer over them for decades. Whole societies and cultures may nurse one grievance for centuries. The victim’s motto is “Never forget.”

In contrast, the perpetrator’s motto is “Let bygones be bygones.” Perpetrators can furnish a clear and detailed memory of something that happened long ago, but it seems to be bracketed in time. They do not usually give background events leading up to the act, nor do they describe lasting consequences. If they refer to the present at all, it is usually to say how different the present is from the episode in the past or that what they did wrong long ago has no bearing on the present.

And so a violent or oppressive event recedes into the past much faster for the perpetrators than for the victims. For the perpetrators, it soon becomes ancient history, whereas the victims may see it as crucial to understanding the present. This difference in time span can be seen in many places and conflicts. It is apparent in the difference between white and black American attitudes about slavery, between Jewish and German attitudes about the Holocaust, and between Northern and Southern views about the American Civil War and Reconstruction. The injustices that remain fresh in the victims’ minds fade rapidly into long-ago, irrelevant history for the perpetrators.

One important reason for the time span difference is probably the magnitude gap. What the perpetrator gained was generally smaller than what the victim lost, and so the perpetrator has less reason to replay that memory. The event affected the victim much more than the perpetrator, and so it would almost inevitably tend to linger in memory and come up more often.

Seeing Oneself under Attack Our research was not the only project to tackle the perpetrator’s mentality. Several other studies have made similar attempts, and an important finding is the tendency of perpetrators to view others’ actions as attacks on them. Bullies, wife-beaters, tyrants, and other violent people tend to think that other people are attacking or belittling them, even when others would not have the same interpretation.

In one study of emotionally disturbed boys at a residential treatment center, 16 researchers classified the boys along a continuum based on how much they tended to display behavior problems involving inappropriate aggression, such as arbitrarily hitting another boy who was just sitting there. Then the researchers showed the boys a series of photos of people engaging in various social interactions. They boys were supposed to say what they thought was going on in the pictures. The most aggressive boys tended to see hostility and aggression when it wasn’t really there. They interpreted relatively innocuous and agreeable interactions as attempts to dominate others aggressively.

The same conclusion has emerged from studies on family violence. 17 Men who beat their wives differ in many respects from other men—and one important difference is their tendency to construe seemingly innocuous or ambiguous acts by the wife as deliberate personal attacks.

Suppose, for example, that two couples are talking one evening, and one couple mentions that they recently enjoyed a great meal at a very expensive restaurant. They describe the excellence of the food and the shocking size of the bill. The other husband turns to his wife and says casually that the two of them “ought to try that place some time.” The wife responds, “I don’t know, dear, it sounds awfully expensive.”

A typical husband might simply agree and forget about it, and many husbands would have a feeling of appreciation and gratitude at having a sensible, frugal wife. But a few husbands might take that remark as a criticism: She is implying that he doesn’t earn enough money. She is saying he’s a failure as a provider, as a man. She thinks he’s not as good as other men who can afford such fancy meals. And she’s saying this right in front of their friends, to humiliate him publicly. She’s being really mean to him and making him feel and look terrible. He’d better teach her a lesson.

This is the style of thinking that is more common among abusive husbands. Compared to happily married men, and even compared to most unhappily married men, abusive husbands tend to think that their pride and dignity are being attacked whenever there is any disagreement or conflict. One research project asked men to evaluate a series of scenarios in terms of whether they thought the wife’s actions damaged the esteem of the husband. The scenarios included various disagreements between husbands and wives. In some, the wife deliberately opposed her husband; in others, the opposition was presented as accidental; in yet others, it was a mere difference of opinion. The abusive husbands saw more than twice as many of these common scenes as damaging to the husband’s dignity as did men who were satisfied with their marriages. 18 The implication was clear: Abusive husbands tend to interpret many of their wives’ behaviors as assaults on the husband’s self-esteem.

Similar observations have been made about street violence. 19 A man receives seemingly minor signs of disrespect as if they were major blows to his pride, and he responds with violence. From the perspective of the victim, and often from the perspective of bystanders as well, the provocation seems minor and the response excessive. Indeed, try asking a middle-aged suburban mother of three, “What might someone say to you in a bar that would cause you to kill that person, assuming a weapon were available?” Her answer is likely to be that nothing or almost nothing anyone could say would elicit such an extreme response. Yet we know that in many cases relatively minor or casual insults elicit just such severely violent reactions. The apparent conclusion is that the people who respond violently are prone to overestimate the degree to which comments by others are meant as powerfully insulting attacks on them.

Several important implications follow from this finding. For one thing, it becomes possible to begin to predict who is likely to be dangerous or violent. Hypersensitive people who often think their pride is being assaulted are potentially dangerous.

This hypersensitivity to insults also makes it possible to understand what might otherwise appear to be senseless violence. A man who beats up his girlfriend or stabs a stranger in a bar might seem a malicious villain to observers. In his own eyes, however, he is merely defending himself against an attack. Many violent people believe that their actions were justified by the offensive acts of the person who became their victim. 20

Even when a neutral observer would conclude that no serious provocation occurred, it is still important to recognize that, in the perpetrator’s own view, he or she was merely responding to an attack. In the example of the couple talking about the expensive restaurant, maybe the woman was merely trying to be sensible and frugal, and maybe the other couple saw no harm in her remark, but to her angry husband, his manhood had been publicly trashed. Of course, nearly everyone would condemn him for beating her up later that evening, regardless of what he thought she said or meant. Nonetheless, from his point of view, he was merely making a somewhat justified and understandable response to a vicious assault on his identity.

The driving force was his own pride, his high self-esteem, his male ego. He was so intent on being superior to her that he watched for any little episode or remark that could possibly be interpreted as reflecting badly on him, and whenever he found one he turned violent against her in response. But if you accept his need for high self-esteem as a given, then on his terms he was at least partly justified in beating up his wife later on after she had belittled and humiliated him in front of their friends.

Who Is Correct?

There is one more crucial question that arises once these differences between perpetrator and victim stories are understood: Who’s telling the truth? One assumes that both versions cannot be correct. The traditional answer has been to assume that victims are telling the truth and perpetrators are lying or distorting the facts to reduce their guilt. That certainly seems plausible. Still, one cannot accept this assumption without question and without evidence. Victims do have their own reasons to see things in a certain way, and it could be that they distort, too.

The question of who’s telling the truth is very difficult to answer, especially because both perpetrators and victims may sincerely believe what they are saying. One would need objective evidence against which to compare the stories of victims and perpetrators, and such objective evidence is not often available.

Although researchers have not yet found a reliable way to compare victim and perpetrator stories to the objective truth in some real episode, a simulation was recently conducted in a laboratory study. Psychologist Arlene Stillwell assigned ordinary college students at random to play the role of either the victim or the perpetrator in a small incident. 21 They were given a description of what happened and then asked to tell the story in their own words, as if they had been the person involved in it. Thus, they had to recite the story from memory as if it had happened to them—as either the victim or the perpetrator, decided by the flip of a coin. By using this method, Stillwell could compare the victim and the perpetrator stories to the objective information she had initially supplied them, which was exactly identical for everyone.

The results of this experiment surprised everyone: Victims and perpetrators distorted the facts to an equal degree. The distortions were systematically different, of course. The victim stories generally reshuffled and twisted the facts to make the offense seem worse than it was, whereas the perpetrators reshuffled and twisted things to make it seem less bad. For example, a mitigating circumstance such as being under severe stress at the time might be played up by the perpetrator as an important part of understanding why he acted the way he did; meanwhile, the fact that the perpetrator was under stress might be entirely omitted from the victim’s story. Along the same lines, the victim might dwell on the lasting bad consequences of what the perpetrator did, whereas those consequences would probably be downplayed or even missing in the perpetrator’s story.

The implications of these findings are important. Consistent with the view that evil exists in the mind of the beholder, it is clear that victims see things much differently, and much worse, than perpetrators see them. Moreover, it is not safe to take the victim’s story as objective truth. It is true that perpetrators have reasons for shading and altering the truth, but victims appear to have their own wants and needs that alter the way they describe what happened. One cannot rely on either the victim’s story or the perpetrator’s; the reality may lie somewhere in between. No one’s story can be fully trusted in a scientific sense, although most stories do contain some significant elements of truth.

What, then, can be concluded about how perpetrators think? They do not see things in the simple, black-and-white absolutes that victims and lawmakers are fond of. To them, events are complex and morally ambiguous. They may see something wrong in what they did, but they also see how they were affected by external factors, including some that were beyond their control. In other cases, perpetrators see themselves as having acted in a way that was fully appropriate and justified. In addition, to the perpetrators, a misdeed may seem like an isolated event in the distant past that has no relation to the way they live their lives in the present.

Perhaps most important, perpetrators typically do have reasons and motives that make some sense to them. Victims may see random, gratuitous acts of cruelty, but perpetrators rarely see their own acts that way. We cannot rely on victims to tell us why the perpetrators did what they did.

Mixing and Blurring the Roles When Perpetrators Become Victims So far, we have seen that the perpetrators of evil generally do not regard themselves as evildoers. Their actions become evil when viewed by their victims or, sometimes, by other people. In most cases, then, evil comes into being only through a combination of two different roles: One person performs the actions, and the other sees them as evil. The roles of victim and perpetrator are interlocked.

There is a further, ironic twist to the interrelationship between victim and perpetrator roles: Many perpetrators regard themselves as victims. In their accounts, in their recollections, and probably even in their most sincere gut feelings, many perpetrators see themselves as people who have been unjustly treated and hence deserve sympathy, support, and extra tolerance for any wrongs they have committed.

Perpetrators of minor transgressions often see themselves as having been provoked by the victim. They see the victim’s anger as an unjustified overreaction (even if they do admit that what they did was wrong). In a recent study in which people were asked to describe something they did that hurt somebody, many people added information about how they had suffered or been mistreated, so that their stories effectively cast them as victims, too (even though they were supposed to be the perpetrators). 22

The metamorphosis of perpetrator into victim can also be seen outside the laboratory. In a noted book, Peter Sichrovsky described his interviews with the children of Nazi war criminals. 23 Many had grown up thinking that their parents were victims of the war rather than perpetrators. They had been led to believe that their parents had been forced to do undesirable things and were the targets of unfair persecutions. He quoted one woman who recalled her father after the war as a “nervous, trembling man, in constant fear that the police would get him. Four of us were living in a single room, my father had no work, and was afraid to go out in daytime.” She went on to say how that memory of him as victim precluded seeing him as a criminal perpetrator: “Is that what power-hungry monsters responsible for the deaths of millions look like? I could never see my father in that role.” 24 Sichrovsky adds that these impressions were not simply the result of the parents misleading their children. Rather, the parents saw themselves as victims (of a lost war, of a totalitarian system, and of vindictive, mean-spirited persecution), and the children came to share that view through daily contact.

Indeed, the efforts of the Third Reich’s children to distance themselves from their guilty families have often involved remarkable pursuits of the victim role for themselves. As documented in Sichrovksy’s book and in a similar work by Dan Bar-On, 25 many of these children sought out Jewish friends, married Jews, or converted to Judaism themselves. Others chose careers as public defenders or Amnesty International functionaries where they could work on behalf of political prisoners and other victims of oppression. Others sought out desperate causes that promoted the welfare of various oppressed groups, and some committed suicide, which is an effective way of claiming a permanent role of victim for oneself. 26 In one case, the daughter of a prominent Nazi had carried on a long love affair with a Jewish man. She wanted to marry him but found herself unable to return to his home with him—because in his home in South Africa he, as a white man, belonged to the class of oppressors. Apparently, she wanted to link herself to a victim, and although he qualified very well as a Jew, he became disqualified as a white man in the land of apartheid. In his home country he was not a victim, and so she couldn’t marry him. 27

At the extreme of modern violence is the serial murderer. J. Norris’s book on these individuals shows that many of them suffered prolonged abuse and mistreatment early in their lives and considered themselves to be victims. Arthur Shawcross, for example, was a victim of homosexual rape. During his childhood, he suffered rejection and other mistreatment by his mother. He also claimed that he had been exploited by several women in the neighborhood, who induced him to perform oral sex on them. His sense of victimization did not desert him even when he began to kill people. “He perceived himself to be the victim even as he was becoming the aggressor,” a pattern that Norris regards as common among violent sex offenders. 28

John Wayne Gacy seems to have felt the same way. He kidnapped boys and young men. He would torture them, abuse them sexually, and then kill them. Serial killers often face difficulties in disposing of the corpses, but Gacy’s solution was to bury them underneath his house, where there was a crawl space. At night, after a killing, he would take the body down under the house, dig a hole for it, put it in, and cover it over. One wonders what his thoughts were in the mornings, getting up for breakfast while the mutilated bodies of his victims decomposed underneath his feet. Gacy is known to have murdered 33 people this way, mostly children. Possibly there were many additional victims. In any case, Gacy would have to make any list of the most vicious and evil perpetrators in recent decades in the United States.

Yet he did not see himself that way. “I see myself more as a victim than a perpetrator,” said Gacy. 29 His victimization proceeded along multiple lines, at least as he saw it. His early life had not been satisfactory: “I was the victim, I was cheated out of my childhood,” he complained, although it might be pointed out that at least he was able to live through his childhood, unlike the lads he killed. His victimization continued in adulthood. He felt that the media presented an unfairly negative portrayal of him to the public: “I was made an asshole and a scapegoat.” Thus, he saw himself as the victim of misunderstanding and lack of sympathy, causing him to wonder whether anyone could “understand how badly it had hurt to be John Wayne Gacy.” 30

Studies of ordinary street crime in the United States show a similar blurring of victim and perpetrator roles. Sociologist Jack Katz, referring to “a long line of studies that have provided evidence … of precipitation by the victims,” 31 says that the roles of perpetrator and victim are often exchanged during an incident. One person may behave aggressively by attacking or insulting another. The person who is attacked regards himself (or, far less often, herself) as a victim with a righteous cause to defend and strikes back, often with dangerous or lethal levels of violence. Thus, the outcome is tragically ironic to many a killer: He meant well, he was attacked, and he acted only in well-justified (in his view) defense of the Good, yet he ends up being cast as the villain and perhaps convicted of murder. His sense of being unfairly treated is likely to continue into prison.

And sure enough, prisoners often feel more like victims than like perpetrators. Jan Arriens has compiled a set of letters and other writings by prisoners on Death Row in the United States, and these killers do not see themselves as evildoers. “I am the hunted, the caught, the prey, the victim of the crafty, the cunning, and powerful,” as one wrote. 32 Others compare themselves to victims of the Holocaust, slavery, and other evils. They commonly refer to the execution of convicted prisoners as “legalized murder,” thereby implicitly comparing themselves to their victims. Indeed, a number of them contend that their own execution is a greater crime than the one they committed. In their view, they killed someone during a spur-of-the-moment loss of control, whereas the state’s execution of them is fully premeditated, which makes it all the more heinous. The legal system itself says that premeditated murder is worse than a crime of passion; so, these convicted men reason, what the state does to me is far worse than what I may have done to my victim. “I may have committed a crime, but all in all I am a bigger victim than a perpetrator:” Thus speaks Death Row.

These same patterns of distortion can be seen in the thinking of the perpetrators of brutal ethnic violence in what was once Yugoslavia. For several years, the world has been fascinated and horrified by the reports of mass murder, wanton destruction of property, systematic rape, killing of prisoners, and similar atrocities that seem to go on and on there. A recent news report focused on the irony that the Serbs, who are generally regarded as the perpetrators of the worst atrocities, regard themselves as the victims in Bosnia. “Far from being weighted down by guilt, they consider themselves, if anything, the most aggrieved party in the Bosnian nightmare—indeed, one of the most aggrieved peoples in the entire world.” 33 The reporter noted that the Serbs used the expanded time frame common to victims: “Visitors are lectured about Turkish atrocities against the Serb people going back to 1389.” 34 Similar patterns can be seen among the perpetrators of horrors and atrocities throughout history. The ones who carry out the massacres perceive themselves as victims of mistreatment and injustice.

Why do perpetrators often claim the victim role for themselves? There are multiple advantages to the victim role after the fact. During the crime, of course, the victim gets the worst of it, and there is no rush to claim the victim role before or during the crime. It is only in retrospect that people want to be victims.

Before considering why the victim role might appeal to the perpetrators, it is necessary to clarify one point: Do perpetrators really regard themselves as victims, or do they simply pretend to claim that role? It is almost certain that there are some perpetrators at each extreme, that is, some who sincerely see themselves as victims and others who are completely disingenuous in their self-serving claims. Moreover, many perpetrators do see themselves as under attack by someone else, and hence their claim to the victim role may start well before their own violent act. In any case, most perpetrators probably fall somewhere between total sincerity and total hypocrisy. They tend to look for whatever will help them believe what they want to believe: namely, that they should be regarded as victims rather than as evildoers.

The first advantage of the victim’s role is that victims have a legitimate claim on the sympathy of others. Victims have already suffered, and everything from moral calculation to simple human decency makes us want to extend a helpful hand to them. Most people feel some obligation to try to bring a victim’s suffering to an end, not make it worse. To a perpetrator who is looking for ways to avoid punishment, victim status seems very promising. Having some claim on the sympathy of others would help to reduce one’s own vulnerability.

Moreover, victimization is often seen as an acceptable explanation for one’s own misdeeds. The simplest and most familiar form of this argument is the traditional belief that killing in self-defense is acceptable. If you are the victim of another’s attack, you are allowed to defend yourself.

In a more recent form of this argument, the claiming of victim status by alcoholics, drug addicts, and similar others is often an effective way to get themselves off the hook for their actions. The stern morality of personal responsibility holds people accountable for their actions and punishes their misbehavior, including drinking or taking drugs. In recent decades, a rival view has portrayed these individuals as victims of urges they cannot control. 35 In this view, one should not blame these people for what they have done, because it was not by their choice. They are victims who need help, and clearly this is a better position than being a self-indulgent pleasure-seeker who deserves to be punished.

The victim holds a moral high ground that starts to look mighty good to the perpetrator. This is especially true if the victim’s side comes to win the war or gain power in some other way. Perpetrators may be troubled by guilt and may feel worried about what society will do to them if they are caught. Thus, they may envy the former victims: Society views them with compassion and solicitude, and they are often treated as immune from normal criticism. If only I could claim those advantages, thinks the former war criminal, I’d be home free.

Mutual Fault and Shared Blame There is one more crucial feature of the blurring of victim and perpetrator roles. The violent incident may emerge from a cycle of events in which victim and perpetrator both acted dangerously or aggressively. The causes of violence often involve reciprocal actions by the victim and perpetrator. Both may be to blame.

Several strangers are drinking in a bar. One man makes a joke at another’s expense. The second man responds with a direct insult, with no pretense at humor. The first responds with an explicit insult of his own. The second man shoves the first, spilling a little of his drink, and the first man angrily throws the rest of the drink in the second man’s face. The second man lunges at the first, swinging his fist but missing. The first man dodges the blow and then hits the second man in the stomach twice, hard. The second man hits back several times, knocking the first man down and giving him a painful bloody nose. The first man gets up and draws his knife. He stabs the second man fatally. Who started this? Who was the aggressor? Who acted in self-defense?

Such cases of mutual provocation and aggression appear to be more the norm than the exception. To be sure, there are some cases in which wholly innocent victims are attacked by predatory individuals, but these are relatively rare. One study by David Luckenbill found, for example, that the majority of cases of criminal homicide involved reciprocal provocations in which mutual hostility escalated until one person killed the other. 36 Often there were other people present when the argument started, and the audience would take sides and egg the two on. In any case, the norm is for both people to be involved. Let us consider some of the evidence.

We have already seen that street crimes often arise from mutual antagonism and spiraling provocations. It is no accident that victims and perpetrators tend to be the same kind of people. 37 People spend much of their time with others who are like them, and they tend to commit crimes against the people with whom they come into contact. Many killers see themselves as having been attacked or victimized by others, and in their eyes they were defending themselves or striking back.

A study of men imprisoned for violent (but not deadly) assault revealed the same pattern of provocation and reciprocal aggression. According to researcher Leonard Berkowitz, hardly any of the men thought they had even landed the first blow during the fight. Berkowitz thought it was difficult to ascertain who was the original aggressor. Most often, a quarrel simply escalated until it became violent. 38

Turning from crimes among strangers to violence in the intimate world of love and family, one finds similar patterns of mutual, reciprocal causation. This is an unpopular view nowadays, and the general public prefers to think of family violence as a matter of evil or sick individuals who lash out against totally innocent, helpless family members. And there are undoubtedly many cases in which that picture is accurate. More often, however, and especially among adults, there is evidence that both parties are aggressive and that violence is the end point of an escalating quarrel.

In the landmark studies of marital violence conducted by Murray Straus, mutual aggression was the norm. 39 In fully half the cases where any domestic violence was reported, both spouses were violent. Moreover, even if only one spouse was violent, that person tended to believe that he or she was responding to some injustice by the other.

Recent work has also revealed that a surprising amount of violent behavior occurs in dating relationships. There, too, the pattern seems to be mutual. Most high school and college students who report hitting or otherwise physically attacking a dating partner say that they have been victims of such aggression, too. 40

Moreover, about half the couples who experience any sort of violence tend to say that both parties were responsible for initiating it. This seems to mean that they recognize that the victim of violence may have done something to provoke it. Thus, if a girl slaps her date in the face, the couple may later agree that he had done something to provoke her, such as insult her. They don’t just blame everything on her.

Researchers who study marital violence are quite familiar with these cycles of mutual, escalating violence. 41 A common pattern is for the argument to start when one spouse criticizes the other for some perceived inadequacy, failure, or misdeed. The other may respond angrily, and the exchange of critical views degenerates into name-calling and similar insults designed to offend and hurt the other person. At some point, one may push or shove the other angrily. Genuine physical violence, such as hitting or slapping the partner, may come only after these initial steps.

These patterns suggest that there may be some truth to the common claim by perpetrators that they are the victims. A recent work on domestic violence approvingly quoted the following (slightly overstated) conclusion from an earlier study: “Batterers always see themselves as the victim of the battered woman.” 42

A dramatic example was provided on national television recently. Former football star and sports commentator O.J. Simpson was arrested following the brutal murder of his ex-wife and her male friend. Police records confirmed that there had been many complaints of domestic violence in their household, including cases in which he had struck her, destroyed property, and threatened her with severe injury. Yet before his flight to avoid arrest, he left a note saying that he felt he was the victim. On the face of it, this seemed absurd: His wife had been beaten and now lay dead, so surely one ought to regard her as the victim. He did not deny her status as victim, but he did claim that he should also be considered a victim. One can only assume that he felt he had been mistreated by her in some cruel fashion, which made his violence against her a retaliation rather than a spontaneous outburst.

It is worth considering that this mutuality is the most plausible view. Most people wish to see violence in morally clear terms with innocent, virtuous victims and evil, malicious perpetrators. In fact, however, most people become violent only when they think they have been attacked in some way. The idea that some people simply start beating up their spouses out of the blue, for no apparent reason, does not fit well with what is known about human nature. It is far more likely that in a marriage full of mutual resentment, hostility, power struggles, and occasional exchanges of ugly and cruel remarks, one person may cross the line into physical violence when he or she feels that the spouse’s actions were unfair and unacceptable. This is not to defend the perpetrators of family violence—in fact, as we have seen, the tendency to misread innocuous comments as attacks on one’s esteem or rights lies at the root of a great deal of seemingly avoidable violence. But it does render the perpetrators’ actions more understandable.

Large-scale aggression often shows similar patterns of mutual, escalating provocations. In war, for example, it is common for neither side to regard itself as the aggressor. To be sure, it does occasionally happen that one country unilaterally decides to invade or attack another for its own potential gain. More often, however, history records that the outbreak of war followed an exchange of ultimatums, threats, warnings, and other provocations. On a smaller scale, terrorists see themselves as victims fighting back against an oppressive, intrusive, unjust state. In their view, they have been mistreated and denied legitimate means of expressing their views for so long that they have no recourse but to strike back violently. 43

Let us now take a close look at one case of mutual violence, to see how it was experienced and perceived by both sets of perpetrators. Neither side saw itself as evil. But both sides were sure they were in a battle against evil.

I have chosen the famous story of Masada because it does have several sides and can be viewed in more than one way. Although a recent, somewhat fatuous television movie depicted the incident as a simple matter of heroic resistance against overwhelming numbers of wicked, decadent conquerors, the facts of the matter make it much harder to draw a simple conclusion about who was the aggressor and who, if anyone, was evil. 44 The prevailing and simplistic view of an evil army destroying an innocent community of religious patriots and their families is not the full story.

The basic historical facts are well known and straightforward. Jews rebelled against their Roman conquerors. After several defeats, a large number retreated to a mountain fortress (Masada) where the Romans besieged them. The defenders resisted for a while, until the Romans undermined their defenses and made defeat a certainty. At this point, the Jews made a suicide pact. The men killed their wives and children and then began to kill one another and themselves. The Roman assault in the morning met no resistance, because all the Jews were already dead.

Consider this episode first from the view of the resisting Jews. Their country had been conquered, and they were fighting for their freedom. At first they had resisted in covert ways, as best they could, and finally they had accumulated enough popular support for a military insurrection. They led a major uprising all over Israel.

Unfortunately, they turned out to be no match for the Roman legions, who followed up their victories in the field by destroying the holy city of Jerusalem and demolishing the sacred temple, as well as carrying out occasional massacres of innocent civilians. Thus, not only the Jews’ national freedom but also their religion and their lives were threatened.

Finally the Romans were pursuing the last of the freedom fighters. The fierce defense of the mountain citadel had been able to resist Roman efforts to take it by storm, but the Roman engineers had finally undermined the walls, and the next day’s assault was bound to succeed. Rather than be defeated and either massacred or enslaved, the defenders chose death by their own hands.

Now consider the Roman side of the story. They generally treated their conquered peoples with tolerance and good sense, and the empire was mostly peaceful. Most Jews favored cooperation or peaceful coexistence of some sort, except for a small group of fanatics who began a campaign of terror, assassination, and murder. During peacetime, many Roman administrators as well as a great many Jews who cooperated with the Roman authorities were killed by the daggers of these Zealots.

Efforts to compromise and to keep the peace failed. When the terrorist campaign evolved into a full-scale revolt, it was necessary to call in the troops. Rome’s policies were to tolerate indigenous religions and safeguard the conquered peoples, but the brutal treacheries of the terrorist and military resistance made it necessary to crack down on the Jews and even to carry out some reprisal killings in the hope of discouraging further resistance. The Romans also destroyed the Temple in Jerusalem, but this was after the Zealots had used it as a fortress during the fierce battle and many Roman lives had been lost in an effort to capture it. Even after the cause was lost, though, the Zealots exasperated the Romans by continuing to resist. They fled to their mountain fortress and put up a further resistance, which necessitated a costly and dangerous siege. Even when their defense became hopeless, they continued to create trouble and expense, which would have to be paid somehow, quite possibly by taxes on their fellow Jews who had never supported them anyway. Not to mention more deaths of Roman soldiers.

And what about the mass suicide? According to historian Franklin Ford, the Zealots were probably right to expect little mercy from the Romans after all they had put them through. There might well have been a massacre of the Jewish soldiers. On the other hand, the Romans almost certainly would not have massacred the noncombatants, especially the women and children. Probably, most of them would have ended up as domestic servants in Roman households, which is not the best situation in the world, but not the worst either, and in any case individuals have nearly always chosen slavery over death. For the Zealots to kill their women and children thus shed a great deal of blood that need not have been shed. From the perspective of the Romans, it may have seemed quite appropriate for them to use whatever force was necessary to put down what was to them a disruptive and bloodthirsty group of traitors.

Thus, violence often emerges from a pattern in which both sides perform hostile or provoking acts. In retrospect, this should not surprise us: People do not typically beat their loved ones or attack strangers for no reason. One may dispute whether these reasons are sufficient to justify the violent response. But it is rather clear that people who act violently often think that they are responding to an intolerable and often aggressive set of acts by someone else.

Is No One to Blame, Then?

I have already said that many of these conclusions are unfashionable. Should we blame the woman whose husband beats her, simply because she criticized him beforehand? Are terrorists to be forgiven simply because they claim to have legitimate grievances? Should a knifing in a bar be dismissed as an unavoidable result of escalating provocations rather than an illegal and immoral taking of a human life? Aren’t we committing the cardinal error of blaming the victim?

In my view, these moral dilemmas arise from a common, deeply rooted, but fallacious tendency to confuse causation and responsibility—or, to put it another way, the mistake of wanting to find a single person who is to blame. What is needed is a much broader sense that being victimized does not justify a violent response. Yes, victims do sometimes need to be blamed; but this should not exonerate the perpetrators. We should be willing to blame both the victim and the perpetrator, if necessary. In fact, in the majority of cases where aggression was mutual, we should blame both sides.

There seems to be little doubt that many assaults and murders begin with an exchange of angry words. In an important sense, the insulting remarks cause the subsequent killing. They cause it, but they do not excuse it. It was wrong of the first person to insult the second, but this does not make it less wrong for the second person to hit or kill the first.

Unfortunately, America’s legal system and therapeutic culture often seem to support the view that perpetrators should be forgiven if they were victims. A case of child abuse is discovered and the community is outraged; then the lawyer demonstrates that the abuser was herself abused as a child, and the social scientists confirm that being a victim of abuse is a significant cause of becoming abusive oneself. She should not be blamed for what she did to her little girls, because her father was the truly evil one. Sympathy is garnered, and the defendant is given a lighter sentence or even acquitted. A more appropriate response would be to pity the abuser for what she suffered during her own childhood—but condemn her own abusive actions nonetheless.

During the years I have spent working on this book, one of the most dramatic news events involved the marital catastrophe of John and Lorena Bobbitt. The couple came to national attention when Lorena was arrested for cutting off her husband’s penis with a kitchen knife while he lay in bed one night. She admitted that she did mutilate him in this way, but she accused him of having mistreated and raped her on multiple occasions, which he denied. He too was indicted, and both cases went to trial.

There are only four logically possible conclusions about the Bobbitts’ case: that he was the guilty party; that she was the guilty party; that both were guilty; or that neither was guilty. In the national debate carried on in the mass media over several months, three of these four conclusions were extensively discussed. The first two—whether he or she was the guilty one—were featured in the debate in the early months. At the end, the fourth was officially adopted and both John and Lorena were acquitted of all crimes. Apparently, no one had done anything wrong.

The one conclusion that was almost never considered was that both of them had committed crimes and should have been found guilty. Quite possibly, John had abused his wife, and if so he ought to have been punished to the full extent of the law. Still, whatever he did, it was not acceptableto go to the kitchen, return with a knife, and mutilate him in his sleep. Whatever her grudge against him was, it is hard to regard her actions as legal.

My point is that our cultural tendency to see good guys and bad guys, or bad guys and innocent victims, may make us unable to see the common reality in which both sides are in the wrong. What one has suffered as a victim does not excuse one’s subsequent violent action. This is the crucial blind spot in the way Americans assign blame today. And it is probably no accident that our being so reluctant to blame anybody coincides with our being an exceptionally violent society.

Regardless of what one thinks of the details of the Bobbitts’ case, it is clear that the cause of controlling domestic violence in the United States would have been much better served by a pair of convictions than by the pair of acquittals. Police are often reluctant to intervene in marital fights, partly because they think it is a waste of time. Even if they arrest one partner, the other is likely to drop the charges in a few days. Finally, here was a case in which no one dismissed the charges and both cases went all the way through trial; yet the juries let both of them go. It would be hard to imagine a more discouraging message to send to police officers across the country.





