CHAPTER

3

The Myth of Pure Evil Where does one look for the face of evil? One can search with some success in the writings of theologians, in the scripts and images of low-budget horror movies, in wartime propaganda, and in similar sources. When I was a boy, though, my most vivid and detailed lessons about evil came from comic books. Among the most durably successful comic books are those produced by the Marvel group, and one of their most popular titles is X-Men. This series is about a band of mutants with unique superpowers who fight more or less in secret to defend the human race from various threats, including the evil workings of other mutants who are less noble and altruistic than the X-Men. I followed the X-Men for years. One of the perennial adversaries of the X-Men, starting from the very first issue, was a group called the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants. They had vague plans of conquering the world, but they were also motivated by an apparently thoroughgoing hatred of ordinary people. They were in many respects the consummate, archetypal bad guys.

In retrospect, what is especially striking about the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants is their name. It seemed quite appropriate and natural to me at the time, and I never questioned it. But during the research for this book, I have gradually come to realize how extremely rare it is to find an organization that names itself as dedicated to evil.

Indeed, the positive affirmation of evil is almost entirely lacking in the real world. At most, some few organizations (usually those involved in physically competitive undertakings, such as teen delinquent gangs or sports teams) give themselves names that will presumably strike fear into the hearts of opponents: Raiders, Pirates, Demons. The Hell’s Angels motorcycle gang was like that, although they were hardly dedicated to evil. 1 There are also musical groups such as Public Enemy or Black Sabbath who adopt titles connoting enmity to virtuous life, but even these usually imply rebellion against conventional standards rather than outright evil. Some sports teams call themselves devils, but usually there is a modifier to soften the evilness of the name: the Blue Devils, the Sun Devils. Moreover, the images and pictures these teams use are often manifestly nonevil. They tend to depict an amusing devil with a funny costume and a cartoon face, as opposed to something more obviously sinister. The categories that our modern culture perceives as seriously evil are never used as group names. No sports teams call themselves the Child Abusers or the Bigots.

Indeed, many groups that are known under evil-sounding names prefer more positive, favorable names for themselves. Researchers have noted, for example, how unsuccessful most terrorist groups are at getting the public to use the names they choose for themselves. 2 They usually want to be known as “freedom fighters” or as such-and-such a liberation army.

Occasionally, an individual wants to adopt an explicitly evil name, but such people tend to encounter severe resistance. A recent Associated Press news story reported the case of a Japanese businessman who wanted to name his son Akuma, which means “Devil.” The man explained that his surname (Sato) was so common in Japan that he wanted to give his son a name that would stand out. But the local authorities refused to accept the name. After a six-month legal dispute, the man gave in and named his son more conventionally. 3 Members of violent gangs occasionally choose names connoting evil, such as the sobriquet Monster used by the Los Angeles gangland murderer Kody Scott. Yet even he did not see himself as evil. He regarded himself as defending his neighborhood and the honor of self and friends against the forces of evil, embodied principally in the members of rival gangs (and to a lesser extent in the police forces who sought to prevent and punish the lethal street battles). He seems to have chosen the name Monster more to boast about his martial prowess than to celebrate evil, and in his memoir he seeks to portray himself as mostly on the side of the good guys. 4

Given that there is so much evil in the world, why do so few groups or individuals name themselves in positive affirmation of evil? As we saw in the last chapter, most people who do evil do not think of themselves as doing evil. Like “Monster” Kody Scott, most of them regard themselves as good people who are trying to defend themselves and their group against the forces of evil. If we talk to their enemies, however, we soon learn that the enemies also see themselves as the good guys fighting against evil. The world often breaks down into us against them, and it almost invariably turns out that evil lies on the side of “them.”

In one sense, then, the face of evil is no one’s real face—it is always a false image that is imposed or projected on the opponent. But the image of evil is familiar to everyone today, just as it has been familiar to everyone for thousands of years. How can we be so familiar with something that doesn’t exist? How can so many different cultures and peoples all over the world come up with roughly the same image of evil, if it is not founded in reality? Or, to turn the question around, how can the image of evil survive so well if it is a mistake?

This chapter will explain the perennial image of evil. I will argue that the image of evil is not confined to archaic superstitions and quaint religious theories—indeed, it has been an important force in the twentieth century. The purpose of this chapter is to understand what psychological needs or forces sustain this image despite its weak relationship to empirical reality.

The most pervasive and compelling image of evil has pretty much the same characteristics wherever it appears. Actual events are then often distorted, misperceived, or otherwise twisted to fit this image. The image survives in the eyes of beholders everywhere because it satisfies several important needs and reassures people about their own goodness and innocence.

This image requires a name, because it will come up repeatedly. For convenience, the myth of pure evil approximately captures the main implications.

Images of Evil Let us take a close look at how evil has been depicted in several major sources. An accurate appreciation of how evil is usually portrayed provides keys to understanding the psychological forces that sustain the myth of pure evil. To draw valid conclusions, one wants to have converging evidence from widely different sources, and so religious theology and popular modern films are a valuable pair of sources in which to look for parallels. Because the effects of culture often operate mainly in the socialization of children, it is desirable to consider some of the messages aimed directly at children; I will include some research on depictions of evil in children’s cartoons. Last, because Christian thought, movies, and children’s cartoons all reflect the cultural mainstream, it seems desirable to add a source of evidence outside the mainstream. I will briefly examine the modern paramilitary cult in the United States, which has attracted notoriety through its links to home-grown American terrorism and other antiestablishment violence.

We should pay special attention to the motives of evildoers and to the relationship between them and their victims. What drives them to do wicked, hurtful things? And how do they come into contact with their victims?

Evil at the Movies Undoubtedly, today’s Americans gain more frequent and vivid glimpses of the face of evil from movies than from religious writings. The enduring popularity of horror films is quite surprising; indeed, several scholars have concluded that horror films are the most reliably popular movie genre. 5 This is no doubt partly due to two advantages of horror movies over other movies: They can be made relatively cheaply, and they are less likely to fail at their assigned task. (Humor, for example, is delicate and difficult, but fright is easily achieved.) Yet the public’s enduring fascination with being frightened by evil figures is also a main reason that horror films make money.

Admittedly, not all movies have villains. It could be argued that the movies that do have villains are somehow less realistic or of lower quality. There is some merit to that argument. Lionel Trilling, in his overview of the evolution of Western literature, concluded that villains vanished from serious literature around the start of the twentieth century because they were insufficiently realistic. 6 Just as serious modern literature does not have plain old bad guys, sophisticated movies may also avoid such stock figures.

Yet this is beside the point. Villains survive in popular entertainments because people still like to see them—in some important way, they do correspond to how people see the world. Indeed, the very fact that villains endure in popular entertainments despite being discredited by high literature, theology, and psychology is a testimony to how strong the appetite for them is. After all, if they were merely realistic, it might be difficult to draw psychological conclusions about their presence in movies, just as the appearance of computers in modern movies probably means nothing more than that they have become a fact of life. But to the extent that movie villains depart from reality, we can safely conclude that they speak to a deeply rooted preference for understanding evil in certain ways.

The theme of chaos is a perennial aspect of evil in movies. According to one authoritative book on horror movies, a common theme is the creation of fear through “the invasion of the abnormal into the world of the normal.” 7 A horror movie starts with a vision of a happy, peaceful, ordinary life, and such visions have been an important and desirable element of the good throughout history. Horror movies like to start with this stable, happy setting and then show how it gets turned upside down by the invasion of evil. The loving family that is laughing and smiling at its picnic in the opening scene will undoubtedly be screaming and weeping before long. They will find themselves in the grip of hostile powers that they cannot understand, and they won’t even know why these terrible things are happening to them. That is how evil works, in the movies.

There was a major change in the history of horror movies, and it separates two eras of this kind of filmmaking. The first emphasized supernatural villains such as vampires, werewolves, mummies, witches, and evil invaders from outer space. The second era began with Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho (1960), which featured a human villain. The Hitchcock approach has been refined (or has deteriorated, depending on your point of view) into the “slasher” films in which a vaguely defined human character murders victims seemingly at random until he is finally thwarted. According to Carol J. Clover’s thoughtful book Men, Women, and Chainsaws, 8 the landmarks of this subgenre included The Texas Chainsaw Massacre, Carrie, and Halloween, all of which came out during the 1970s. A variation on this theme, starting with I Spit on Your Grave, consists of films in which a woman is raped by a group of men and takes revenge by murdering them one by one. This genre likewise began in the 1970s.

Films of this type gradually clustered around a fairly standard plot, according to Clover. A demented killer more or less inexplicably inflicts brutal, painful death on young couples who are engaging in illicit sex. Traditionally masculine responses such as fighting back, taking charge, or reporting to the authorities are fruitless, and the men who try these lines of action are quickly killed. Meanwhile, helpless young females die lingering, bloody deaths. Eventually, a tomboyish female figure (and usually one who has resisted the temptations of illicit sex) resists the killer, escapes, fights back, and ultimately succeeds, often by killing the killer. Clover says the audience (made up largely of young males) typically cheers for the madman’s murders, especially as disliked or envied characters are killed, but they also cheer the young woman’s victory over the madman.

The subthemes of punishment for illicit sex and reward for adolescent self-control are apparent. Still, these themes of controlling adolescent sexuality are subtle and seem almost tangential to the plot. In the story itself, the killer’s motives are not explained at all or, at best, are presented as some vague desire for revenge. A good example is provided by the popular series of films that began with Nightmare on Elm Street and for a time made Freddy Krueger one of the most famous villains in American pop culture. The basic story of this series was that a group of neighbors had banded together to kill Freddy (by trapping him in a building and burning it down) because he was molesting and killing children. Freddy then began to strike back from beyond death. His method was to come into children’s dreams and murder them there, with the twist that when they were killed in their dreams, they died in reality. In one sense, then, Freddy’s motive was a simple wish to avenge his own death. Yet that explanation is patently inadequate, because he was a child molester and murderer before he was killed. It appears, then, that he was evil all along, maliciously and inexplicably, and revenge was merely a secondary motive that spurred him on to extra efforts (and required a change in strategy because of the practical drawback of being physically dead). In the story, Freddy was evil from the start and was merely forced to change his venue from waking life to dream life.

Villains are not confined to horror movies, of course. Action movies are full of bad guys. These movies also seem to conform to a fairly standard pattern. Usually, the villains are motivated by greed for either money or power. These motives tend to be presented without much elaboration. Two additional features are common: sadism and egotism. Many of the movie villains seem to enjoy hurting their victims simply for the sake of doing so, and they tend to have very exalted opinions of themselves. Indeed, their pride often proves to be a fatal flaw, because their overconfidence gives the hero a chance to escape from their clutches and defeat them. The sadism is part of the essence of the villain. In a recent television special on villains in movies, the nationally prominent movie critics Siskel and Ebert emphasized this general point: “Enjoying being evil is the key to any successful villain.” 9 They added that this is the “most important feature.” Thus, it is not enough to perform harmful acts. The truly evil villains derive pleasure from inflicting harm.

Not all these traits are necessarily combined in the same person. In recent years, the most popular movie villain is a group of drug dealers. 10 The leader is usually motivated by greed and egotism, but he typically employs some henchmen who are often merely sadistic (and usually egotistical, too—especially with regard to assessing their ability to defeat the hero in individual combat). They enjoy hurting people, and they go away feeling superior. They are sometimes also portrayed as motivated by drug addiction, an issue to which we will return because of the prominence of the drug menace as a favorite image of evil in American society today. First, however, let us examine another important and quite different source of information about the face of evil.

Religion and the Devil Probably the best place to learn how people think of evil is in religion, which often provides explicit, vivid explanations of evil. The noted scholar Jeffrey Burton Russell has written extensively about the images of evil in Christian thought. As he points out, cultures all over the world have arrived at “remarkably similar” versions of evil figures and forces. 11 The idea that these similarities are the result of the spread of certain concepts from the same original place to cover the entire world is not plausible. Instead, Russell says, one must conclude that some common psychological process is responsible: The same version of evil was invented several different times, in different parts of the world, independently. Religious ideas of evil thus spring from the way people see the world. 12

Russell notes that the word devil comes from words meaning “adversary.” Essentially, evil is seen as the adversary of the good. 13 Evil is defined in relation to good, as its opposite. Evil does not exist by itself—there must be some positive forces of good, some conceptions of what is right and desirable, so that evil can emerge as the opposite.

There are two important implications of the idea that evil originates as the opposite of the good. The first has to do with the prospect of eventual victory. If evil is dependent on good (as a reaction against it), then there is hope of eventual victory. In past eras, this issue was debated in theological terms: Was God responsible for creating Satan? If so, is it likely that Satan will eventually be defeated and perhaps even saved? Christian views of the supremacy and omnipotence of God have grappled with how to understand the notion of Satan as God’s intentional creation, because it seems to suggest that God created evil. In Russell’s terms, the theological dilemma is as follows: You assume either that God chose to permit evil (in which case God seemingly shares the blame) or that God was unable to prevent it (in which case God is revealed to be something less than all-powerful). Neither of those views is acceptable to the faithful, because the first implies that God’s goodness is limited and the second that God’s power is limited. Generation after generation of Christian theologians have searched for a way to explain evil without accepting either of those options.

Other religions have frankly acknowledged Satan as the equal of God. For example, in Iranian religions, Ohrmazd and Ahriman were twins, one good and one evil, and they competed on a fairly equal basis in the divine tasks of creation and rule. 14 Such dualistic views see the universe as a permanent struggle between ineradicable principles of good and evil, and it is not likely that either will ever fully destroy the other.

In our own time, the issue of the relationship between good and evil is usually phrased in terms of human nature: Are people fundamentally good, or is there a side of everyone (or of some people) that is fundamentally bad? The utopian idealisms that flourished in recent centuries blamed society for making people bad, and there was sincere hope that by reforming society—whether through a Rousseauian return to nature, sharing the benefits of liberty and equality, or helping society to evolve into a socialist paradise where everyone would share things equally and work for the betterment of all—human evil could be obliterated. The perennial disappointment of these idealistic visions has discouraged most modern thinkers from advocating them seriously. In particular, the twentieth century’s love affair with communism, which at first brought hope and faith to millions of people all over the world, led to shocking disillusionment when communist regimes repeatedly degenerated into tyranny, police repression, internal and external oppression, lack of freedom, and other abuses. In the 1930s, one prominent Western idealist after another turned away from communism and described the bitter disappointment he or she felt about Soviet Russia. What had seemed to be the last, best hope of humanity was now a terrorist police state, arresting and killing innocent citizens, making deals with the Nazis, and exploiting the masses while providing lavish special privileges for its gangster-style leaders. 15

My point is that these utopian flops, from Communist Russia to the short-lived hippie communes of the 1960s, have prompted a reconsideration of human nature. It will not be nearly as easy as everybody once thought to produce an ideal society, because human nature is not as malleable or as benevolent as the idealists had naively hoped. The forces that create evil are very deeply rooted in human nature. Even radical overhauls of society are far from sufficient to remove them. People may think that if only everyone had enough to eat, or a little freedom, or a little land, or a little more self-esteem, then hatred and violence would cease. Perhaps hatred and violence do subside for a little while when people first get these things, but in the long run hatred and violence have proved far more pervasive and durable than any of the social conditions on which they have been blamed. As far as we can foresee, evil will continue to be the opponent of the good. The final victory of the good is not in sight. Not by a long shot.

The second important implication of the view of evil as the adversary of the good is that it seems tailor-made to increase hostilities between rival nations, ethnic groups, and other social units. One of the most powerful and universal human tendencies is to identify with a group of people similar to oneself, and to square off against rival groups. Moreover, people automatically and inevitably begin to think that their group is good. But if we are good, and you are our opponents, and evil is the opponent of the good, then you must be evil. Groups of people everywhere will come to that same conclusion, even groups on opposite sides of the same conflict. The stronger the tendency to see one’s own group as good—and this tendency is often surprisingly strong—the more likely one is to regard one’s rivals and enemies as evil. Such views may then be used to provide easy justification for treating one’s enemies harshly, because there is no point in being patient, tolerant, and understanding when one is dealing with evil.

Throughout history, people have asserted that their rivals or enemies were in league with the Devil. Popular mythology has often invoked the theme of someone voluntarily making a pact with the Devil. Russell concluded that this theme has been especially common when applied to minority groups who are different in some way from the dominant group in the culture, such as Jews in Europe.

What drives Satan and other evil figures? Apart from some vague ambition to gain power, the answer appears to be: nothing. Or, rather, nothing beyond the sheer satisfaction of doing evil. In Russell’s words, the Devil is a figure who is bent on “inflicting suffering for the sake of suffering.” 16 In this book, I will use the term sadism to refer to a tendency to enjoy harming or hurting other people (along with going out of one’s way to find opportunities for that pleasure). As we will see, sadism is an elusive, controversial, and complex phenomenon in terms of the psychology of actual perpetrators of evil. But it is not elusive, controversial, or complex in the image of evil. It is central. Pure and simple, the Devil is sadistic.

Not all religious views of evil focus on malice, however. Another trend emphasizes evil as chaos. Evil is disorder, unreason, and generally the disruption of the rational, stable, predictable, ordinary patterns of life. This was not just a device invented by the moviemakers; it has marked religious ideas about evil for many centuries.

There is one additional religious trend that does not receive much attention these days but has long been prominent: pride. Indeed, Satan’s first sin was pride. He wanted to be God’s equal; in some versions, he even wanted to replace God as ruler of the universe. In modern life, given the apotheosis of self-esteem, religious figures have backed away from condemning the sin of pride, but through most of history, pride was a central aspect of badness. The great evil figures of religion and mythology do not have low self-esteem—on the contrary, they have always been inordinately proud, confident, and even arrogant. Satan had high self-esteem, very high. His high self-esteem is central to his evilness.

Bad Guys for Kids Another important place to look for depictions of evil is in material created especially for children. It is through such material that a culture teaches its basic values and beliefs to the next generation. Nowadays, children probably learn less from books of fairy tales than from cartoon shows on television, and so I will examine a study of these shows. As one might expect, many of them present stark and simple battles between the forces of good and the forces of evil.

Two psychologists, Petra Hesse and John Mack, made a detailed study of taped versions of children’s cartoons in the late 1980s. Specifically, they identified the eight most highly rated cartoon shows at the time, taped 20 episodes of each, and then spent a long time carefully analyzing their content to understand how they presented images of evil, enemy figures.

Their conclusions are consistent with what we have already seen in movies and religious depictions. The villains have no clear reason for their attacks. They seem to be evil for evil’s sake, and they have been so all along. They are sadistic: They derive pleasure from hurting others, and they celebrate, rejoice, or laugh with pleasure when they hurt or kill someone, especially if the victim is a good person. The mere wish to inflict pain for the sake of doing so was aptly captured by a phrase repeatedly uttered by the evil villain Cobra Commander: “Let’s reach out and crush someone.” The nonspecific “someone” suggests that the main point is just to inflict hurt, almost regardless of who is hurt.

Apart from the joy of creating harm and chaos, these villains seem to have little motive. Even when they are depicted as wishing for money, power, and war, these wishes are not explained. They already have plenty of money, and it’s not clear what use they would have for more. Likewise, they often seem driven by a fierce and implacable hatred of the good guys, which is also not explained.

Evil is presented as being inherently the enemy of peace and order, as well as of beauty. “If it were not for the enemies, the world would be at peace,” 17 as the researchers concluded. The protagonists and heroes want to live in peace, and they only become violent in self-defense against the attacks of the bad guys. The villains want war for the sake of war, and they claim to enjoy destruction and chaos. In some cases, they find beauty threatening and make a point of trying to destroy beautiful things.

A few additional observations by these researchers are worth mentioning. First, the evil figures tend to speak with foreign accents, unlike the heroes, whose speech is nearly always perfect American English. The foreignness of the villains is often underscored by depicting them as nationalities who have been enemies of Americans, such as Germans, Eastern Europeans, Asians, or Arabs. Second, they tend to use oppressive techniques to enforce their power, such as torture, mind control, and arbitrary dictatorship. Third, they tend to lose emotional control from time to time. In some cases, the loss of self-control contributes to their undoing, because they make errors that allow the heroes to defeat them. Their anger, in particular, escalates until they lash out blindly and thereby perform self-defeating or self-destructive acts (such as destroying their own resources, weapons, or allies).

The New War One more useful source of images is the popular paramilitary culture that has emerged over the last couple of decades to idolize and idealize the violent pursuit of traditional American ideals. Sociologist James William Gibson spent many years immersing himself in this subculture, from Soldier of Fortune conventions to “Paintball” mock battles, and he has furnished a thoughtful and fascinating description of it in his book Warrior Dreams. 18 In many ways, the paramilitary culture is just the latest version of the traditional American theme of regeneration through violence, but there are some new twists. The technological fascination with powerful weapons is a central aspect, and it can be dated back to the famous Clint Eastwood detective movie Dirty Harry, in which the hero carried an immensely powerful handgun. The gun was a running theme in the movie’s dialogue and stimulated a huge demand among private owners, even though knowledgeable sources regarded the gun as completely unsuitable for actual urban violence. Also, Gibson emphasizes that the novels and movies that constitute the “New War” subculture show the act of killing with a loving emphasis on detail that was largely missing from the classic shoot-’em-up Westerns and war films of past decades.

For our purposes, the most relevant part of Gibson’s work is his analysis of the enemy as depicted in these novels (such as William Pierce’s The Turner Diaries or Jack Hild’s SOBs: Soldiers of Barrabas series), magazine features (most notably in Soldier of Fortune), and films. These enemies live in dark, chaotic regions outside the civilized world, and they are “deeply savage animals [and] perverts who commit crimes for pleasure.” 19 On one level, they are driven simply by the standard material motives of greed and lust, even though these go beyond normal desires: They scheme to get endless millions of dollars, and they somehow manage to have harems of attractive females at their service. On another level, though, they are driven not by pragmatic wants but by sadism. They get a sort of sexual joy from violent acts of torture, rape, and murder. Often they are sadistic to the point of refusing to let their victims die a quick death, wanting instead to prolong the death agony for their enjoyment.

Another main goal of the enemy groups is the destruction of the American social order, along with its moral values. Gibson says: “Creating chaos is the objective of the evil ones in the New War, just as it was at the beginning of time.” 20 The evildoers (as perceived by the paramilitary subculture) hate the vision of peace, harmony, and order that traditional American society represents.

The enemy villains of modern paramilitary culture are outsiders, many of whom resemble enemies of past wars. Often they resemble Indians (although usually they are merely street punks or gangsters who have adopted Indian motifs of warpaint and costumes). Others resemble the Nazi German or Japanese enemies of World War II. Many are nonwhite, although the protagonist group is usually racially integrated so that any implication of racial antagonism is muted.

Last, Gibson notes that the enemies are often so overwhelmed by their rage and wicked desires that they are unable to control themselves. The heroes and protagonists, in contrast, “are men of nearly impeccable self-control.” 21 Thus, many New War novels can be read as simple allegories of battle between those who have self-control and those who lack it, with the latter seeming to gain the upper hand in this modern era of American decadence.

Pure Evil What can we conclude from this survey of depictions of evil? The myth of pure evil can be seen as a composite of these images. The myth defines the way people think of evil—which is in some crucial respects quite different from the real, actual causes of violence and oppression.

First, evil involves the intentional infliction of harm on people. I began this book by noting that evil is in the eye of the beholder; now we can add that these beholders are generally people who suffer harm. They see the agent of evil as someone who harmed them. Moreover, the harm is intentional. Evil seeks to do harm and does it deliberately. At least, that is how people think of it.

Second, and of crucial importance, evil is driven primarily by the wish to inflict harm merely for the pleasure of doing so. By and large, evil is not understood as something that reluctantly uses violence as a means to an end. Rather, the harm inflicted by evil forces is gratuitous. 22 Evil is sadistic: Evil people enjoy the suffering they cause, and they inflict harm to get this enjoyment. Sometimes evil is seen as driven by cravings for power or money, but these are not well-articulated motives, and such desires are certainly not part of some positive scheme (such as the wish to gain power in order to make the world a better place). If evil wants money and power, the money and power are often seen merely as means toward further evil.

This lack of a comprehensible motive behind evil is strikingly similar to the research findings about ordinary interpersonal conflicts that I discussed in the last chapter. When people have been angered or victimized by someone else, they tend to describe that person’s actions as having no coherent or apparent reason. Sometimes, they simply present the actions as arbitrary and almost incomprehensible. At other times, they depict them as motivated by sheer malice. But perpetrators almost never describe themselves and their own actions in either of those ways.

Thus, ordinary interpersonal conflicts seem to become assimilated in the myth of pure evil. People are unable or unwilling to see that someone who hurt them had an understandable reason. They distort the other’s actions to fit the myth of pure evil.

Third, the victim is innocent and good. The forces of evil may occasionally turn on one another, but for the most part they try to attack good people. Victims are usually good people who are going about their business decently and appropriately. They are set upon out of the blue and for no reason by evildoers. Such victims deserve the utmost sympathy and support from all decent people, because what happened to them could happen to anyone. The evil one bears all the blame—in sharp contrast to the patterns of mutual, shared responsibility that are often found behind actual violent events.

Fourth, evil is the other, the enemy, the outsider, the out-group. Evil does not exist by itself but only in relation to the good. And what usually happens is that the conflict of good versus evil is often superimposed on the conflict of us against them. The pattern of having cartoon bad guys speak English with foreign accents, even among themselves—which is absurdly unrealistic on the face of it—reflects this underlying assumption that evil attaches mainly to people outside our own group.

Fifth, evil has been that way since time immemorial. Evil is not a matter of well-meaning, decent people turning bad in response to traumatic, difficult, or otherwise unpleasant experiences. Evil is steady and relentless and, for the most part, unchanging. Maybe once long ago there was a turning to bad, a fall from grace, an evil awakening, a new recognition, but throughout all of recent history, evil has been just that: evil. With individual people, the same is true: They were always evil, at least since childhood. Generally, they are born to be bad, as opposed to starting off good and turning bad in response to some decisively influential experience.

Sixth, evil represents the antithesis of order, peace, and stability. The normal world, the good and peaceful world, is stable and predictable. The intrusion of evil is essentially a disruption of the normal pattern of things. Evil is not just harm; it is also chaos and irrationality. Hence the common tendency, especially in a slightly more superstitious past, to think that earthquakes and other natural disasters are evil, because they bring both harm and chaos.

Seventh, evil characters are often marked by egotism. They do not lack for self-esteem. If anything, they have too much self-esteem, because they overestimate themselves. They are wildly ambitious and supremely confident, and they look down on everyone else. From Dracula and the Sheriff of Nottingham to the latest action movie’s drug lord villain, evil characters are arrogant and self-assertive. Satan himself became bad through pride, back at the dawn of time.

Last, evil figures have difficulty maintaining control over their feelings, especially rage and anger. This characteristic is not as well established as some of the others, and there may be many exceptions. Indeed, some depictions of evil characterize it as coldly calculating, driven by an implacable hostility toward the good and normal, as opposed to being out of control. Still, there is some tendency to depict evil as given to impulse and wild actions, and indeed this wildness is sometimes seen as the vulnerable spot or fatal flaw that allows good to triumph.

The last two features, high self-esteem and poor self-control, are less central to the myth. (Ironically, we will also see that they conform to reality more than the other features. These features of the myth may reflect the intrusion of reality into a psychological fabrication.) Taken together, then, the other features constitute the myth of pure evil. A force, or person, that seeks relentlessly to inflict harm, with no positive or comprehensible motive, deriving enjoyment from the suffering of others, is evil. It maliciously and gratuitously seeks out unsuspecting, innocent victims from among the good people of the world. It is the eternal other, the enemy, the outsider who despises the orderly and peaceful world of the good and seeks to throw it into chaos.

Pure Evil in Modern Life Let us now examine how the myth of pure evil is used outside the realms of fiction and theological theory. In the everyday affairs of ordinary men and women, how is the myth active? This examination will help shed light on why people favor such depictions of evil, because it will show what kinds of functions the image serves.

Crime and Evil in the News Here is a story from the newspaper. A young couple was watching television in the living room of their nice suburban home one evening. Suddenly men broke in and attacked them. They beat the husband and wife brutally. The husband had to be put in the hospital, and the medical experts said his condition was serious. Nothing was stolen from the home; the men who broke in were not there for the purpose of robbery. No one knows who did this. The perpetrators are at large now (when the story appeared).

Several newspapers left the story at that, but others added another fact: The male victim was currently under indictment for involvement with juvenile prostitution. 23 Not surprisingly, people who read this second version of the story were less shocked and frightened, because it made the crime seem less random. It starts to seem plausible that someone might want to punish a man who was seeking illegal profit by exploiting and ruining the sexual innocence of children, and one can even imagine that perhaps some distraught relatives of one of his child prostitute victims inflicted the beating. In contrast, without that information, the story seems to show that ordinary, well-meaning suburbanites are vulnerable to being attacked for no reason in the false security of their own living rooms.

Thus, the news media sometimes have considerable latitude in how they portray a crime. In this case, providing all the facts made it seem (perhaps unfairly) as if a wicked person brought misfortune upon himself. But by omitting the victim’s indictment, the story is easily made to resemble the myth of pure evil: Innocent victims are attacked for no apparent reason by vicious, alien forces. The forces of chaos and suffering are poised to intrude into our suburban homes—that is the implicit message in the shorter version of the story that many newspapers ran.

The focus of this section is crime, more precisely, the perception of crime. To be sure, the actual causes of crime are important for any understanding of evil; but the next few chapters will examine those causes in detail. To understand how the myth of pure evil operates today, it is essential to look at how crime is perceived, especially insofar as its perception differs from its reality. For this task, it is useful to look at how the news media deal with crime.

As we will see later on, most crimes follow fairly standard and predictable patterns. 24 In particular, murders tend to be the result of escalating arguments between relatives, neighbors, or other acquaintances, in which one person deeply offends or insults another, who responds by resorting to violence instead of pursuing the debate verbally. The victims of crime tend to be quite similar to the perpetrators in many superficial respects. Young, poor, urban black males tend to be the victims of crime, just as they make up a disproportionate share of the perpetrators. In many cases, the eventual perpetrators and victims know each other and are in intermittent conflict, and assault, robbery, and murder tend to be committed between them as a product of their conflicts.

Although such crimes may be the norm, they are not the ones to gain top billing in the nightly news. Instead, acts of random violence are featured, especially ones that seem to lack comprehensible motives. Consider some examples of the most talked about crime news stories of recent years, ones that ran for more than one day and that made weekly magazine covers—the most prominent news events.

In one, a woman was jogging in New York’s Central Park. A gang of young men reportedly just out looking for some excitement found her, ambushed her, beat her up, and raped her. They smashed her head with big stones and left her in a coma. She survived the attack, although she was badly injured and disfigured. The news reports emphasized her unsuspecting innocence and the apparent capriciousness of the brutal attack on her. The attackers were presented as casual and unrepentant. The term wilding was adopted from the young men’s discourse and passed briefly into national usage. It meant performing wild, aggressive actions merely for kicks.

In another story, two young women were passing through a park in Houston. Several young men had just completed a gang initiation that involved ritual fisticuffs. They were feeling both proud and flushed with aggressive arousal when the young women came upon them. They killed the young women. The media emphasized how one of the boys had placed his foot on the neck of the dead girl, seemingly proud of his putative victory.

The media also described how the young men had congratulated one another during their arraignment as having “made the big time,” that is, attracted attention from the news media and the establishment. The remark was understood to mean that the young men were unrepentant and were actually enjoying the media coverage as a kind of recognition of their success. Quite possibly, of course, it meant no such thing. The young men may have had little chance to talk, and when they happened to meet in the midst of the dramatic proceedings, one might have tried to make a small joke about how all this attention contrasted with how society seemingly had ignored them through most of their lives. But it was reported in a way that made it seem that they were enjoying the fruits of their malicious and deadly acts.

Both of these crimes bear a clear resemblance to the myth of pure evil. The innocent victims were going about their legitimate business when they were attacked by wicked young men for no reason. The bad men sought to do harm just for the sheer pleasure or sadistic enjoyment of hurting someone (and possibly for the perversely egotistical satisfaction of being recognized on television). They represented the horrific intrusion of chaos and lawlessness into the peaceful, civilized world in which young women can walk or jog without fear.

The reason these stories were featured on the news was not that they were typical of crime in general. If anything, they were featured because they were atypical. But a crucial aspect of their appeal—the part that probably boosted the sales of newspapers and magazines and commercial advertisements during televised news—was that they conformed to the myth of pure evil. Random crimes are unusual and exceptional, but random crime is what epitomizes evil to many magazine subscribers.

In another famous recent crime, a man was severely beaten by a group of policemen. By coincidence, most of the beating was captured on videotape by a citizen witness, and the films were on the news. The media played the story as racial violence, emphasizing that the victim was black and his attackers were white, suggesting that the white police were simply out to inflict harm on minority citizens. The victim was described as a “black motorist,” which thus invoked the theme of racial victimization while presenting him as an innocent person driving a car. This depiction helped the story conform more to the myth of pure evil than certain of the omitted facts would permit. For example, it turned out that the victim had a criminal record, was currently violating his parole, and had resisted arrest during a high-speed car chase. Yet such facts were downplayed in most stories, because they make the policemen’s action seem more understandable and hence less evil. The depiction of him as an innocent motorist helped place the policemen (who were certainly far from innocent, regardless) into the role of pure evil.

There was an interesting sequel to this episode. When a jury acquitted the police officers, the public was outraged, and many black neighborhoods in that city (Los Angeles) rioted. It seems likely that the media’s portrayal of the offending policemen along the lines of the myth of pure evil helped fuel the outrage; after all, had the victim been depicted as a criminal, fewer law-abiding citizens would have been prone to riot in protest of his mistreatment. Out of the many crimes occurring during the riots, one in particular was selected for maximum attention, and this also invoked the myth of pure evil. A white truck driver was dragged from his vehicle by black rioters and severely beaten, including being bashed in the head with a brick. His innocence was emphasized—he had certainly had nothing to do with acquitting those policemen over the earlier beating of the motorist. He was turned into a symbol for black rage directed randomly against white people in general. Meanwhile, the fact that other black people had found him and taken him to a hospital received considerably less attention in the news. Black people threatening the life of a white person was apparently a highly newsworthy item, but other black people saving the life of that same person was less so.

The interracial aspect of these crimes is significant because it too plays on the myth of pure evil. The evidence is overwhelming that the majority of crimes are committed between members of the same racial and ethnic groups. That is, whites kill whites, and blacks kill blacks. The media, however, prefer to feature stories about interracial crimes. They assume, quite plausibly, that America’s sensitivity about racism generates a special interest in such crimes. Such crimes presumably sell more papers and magazines.

And why is that? One reason is that racism lends itself to being understood in terms of the myth of pure evil. When antagonism develops between blacks and whites, each will quickly tend to see the other as being motivated by sheer unreasonable malice. The myth of pure evil emphasizes the otherness of evil, and someone from a different race is easier to see as different from oneself and more fundamentally “other” than is someone of one’s own race.

The incorporation of racial conflict into the myth of pure evil suggests one risk in the current American rush to categorize everyone by race and gender. The more people become sensitive to these differences, the more easily they will fall into the us-against-them mentality, and the more readily the myth of pure evil will be pasted onto the other side. The more people are pushed to be constantly aware of differences, the harder it may be for them to get along. In the history of the world, increased recognition of differences between groups has led more often to conflict and violence than to peaceful cooperation and sharing. America is now making a dangerous gamble on the opposite result.

Drugs and Alcohol: The Chemical Demons What is fueling the current epidemic of violence in the United States? Many citizens will offer a fairly simple answer: drugs. The mass media reinforce this view by depicting crime and violence as stimulated by the ingestion of drugs. In another variation, they emphasize that gangs sell drugs and rival gangs kill each other (and anyone else who happens to get in the way) in battles over the right to sell drugs in certain areas or over ownership of particular shipments of drugs. The media cater to the belief that many people who take drugs are addicted and that these desperate, brain-fogged people will rob and kill innocent victims to get money for drugs.

Occasionally, events do conform to such beliefs. Certainly gangs fight over drugs and over specific opportunities to distribute and sell them. Certainly addicts have been known to commit robbery and burglary to get money to buy drugs.

Still, it is inaccurate to take these events as the norm. A close look at the evidence suggests that the impact of drugs on gang violence is uncertain and inconsistent. A report by The Economist 25 concluded that the drug business in general makes American gangs less violent, for several reasons. Foremost is that violence is bad for business: It scares customers away. Many people might like to buy drugs but are reluctant to drive their nice cars down inner-city alleys full of young men who carry Uzi machine guns and periodically shoot at one another.

Indeed, as some gang memoirs indicate, American youth gangs were violent long before drugs appeared. 26 The violence was often linked to neighborhood rivalries, grievances, feuds, and the exchange of insults and humiliations. In the 1970s and early 1980s, many young men devoted much of their lives to these violent contests over reputation and pride. When it became possible to sell drugs, however, many of them abandoned old grievances and turned their attention to making money. Getting rich is much more appealing, and more compelling, than shooting up your neighbors. As mentioned in Chapter 1, “Monster” Kody Scott describes in his autobiography his shock at getting out of prison and returning to his old neighborhood where long-standing hatreds and grievances had been forgotten by gang members who now all just wanted to enjoy the easy profits of selling drugs. He was ready to resume the war, but everyone else seemed to have lost interest in those ancient vendettas.

Yet the media continue to present drugs as the cause of gang violence. In a revealing incident, a Chicago police investigation developed two theories about a three-day gang battle that killed 13 people. One theory was that the two gangs were fighting over who held the unwritten right to sell drugs in a particular area. The other was that two men, one from each gang, had gotten into a deadly argument over a woman, and their argument escalated into the shoot-out between their groups, which had long been enemies anyway. The local news media reported only the drug turf theory, ignoring the equally plausible theory about the dispute over the woman. 27 Men have been fighting over women for thousands of years (remember Helen of Troy?), but the current preference is to blame violence on drugs. Appallingly, the media reported only the theory that fit popular stereotypes and ignored the other one.

Why would the media present a misleading picture? One might accuse reporters of bias or incompetence, but this is not entirely fair. The news media are involved in a highly competitive business of their own, and for them the need to make money is a matter of inducing citizens to consult a particular newspaper, radio station, or television program for their news. Ideally, one might hope that competition would raise standards for accurate, intelligent, thoughtful coverage. It has become clear to nearly everyone in journalism, however, that the entertainment value of news coverage is more effective in attracting an audience. One has to tell the public what it is interested in hearing, and often this means presenting simplistic explanations that conform to the expectations, beliefs, and prejudices of the public. Journalists do not see themselves as in the business of educating the public so much as of informing it of what it is interested in hearing about. They do try to get the facts right, but the world is full of facts, and they can present only a very few. So they choose the hot ones, the ones that seem to fit the public’s appetites. Drug-related crime sells papers.

Coupled with this need to cater to the audience is the pressure to provide simple explanations. In the 1980s, the news world had to confront the fact that more people now learned about the news from television than from newspapers and other printed media. The informational implication was widely noted: An article in the daily newspaper contains a great deal more information than an evening television broadcast. The pressure to provide brief sound bites and quick, flashy presentations has increased. “Gang war over drug turf; film at 11” might fit into the 10-second promotional time slot and attract viewers for the local news that night. “Police speculate that gang war may be either a dispute over a woman or a feud over drug turf; film at 11” is too long and complicated. Besides, people are impatient with multiple explanations, which always give the impression of uncertainty and lack of closure. One theory is always better than two, where the public is concerned. 28 In contrast, in the academic disputes of experts, there are nearly always multiple theories.

So the question becomes: Why does the public prefer to hear that drugs are the source of most violence, even if this is not really true?

The answer is that drugs support people’s beliefs in the myth of pure evil. Drugs are an alien force, an other, an outside entity that forces itself into our world of normality and brings chaos and destruction. People who are under the influence of drugs are different, incomprehensible, unpredictable. Moreover, the public persists in believing that drugs create intentions, such as the intention to commit violent acts. In fact, of course, the drug is merely a chemical substance and has no such power to create intentions. Violent impulses exist in people; at most, drugs may bring them to the surface and impair people’s ability, or willingness, to stifle them.

Drug-induced violence sustains an important feature of the myth of pure evil—the innocence of the victim. There is no reason to worry about reciprocal causation or victim provocation if one invokes drugs. “He took drugs, and the drugs made him kill people.” Enough said: One doesn’t ask whether the victims had started a fight or offended him, or whether he had been nourishing a grudge for years, or whether he in fact was mentally ill and drug use was merely an irrelevant symptom of what was causing the violence. Such is the simplistic form of explanation that many people prefer, and the presentation of information about drugs in the mass media caters to this prejudice and sustains it.

In an important sense, the popular mythology of drug use is the modern version of possession by demons. Superstitious medieval citizens believed that demons from the underworld took possession of people and forced them to do evil things. Modern citizens no longer believe in demons, for the most part, but many do believe that drugs operate in roughly the same way. The drug is seen as an alien, evil force, coming from outside our land, brought by dangerous, wicked people with foreign accents. The drugs operate just like the demon, who takes control of a human being and causes him to perpetrate wicked, malicious crimes.

The popularity of this “demon possession” image of drugs is boosted by the fact that many drug users find this myth somewhat appealing and useful. It reduces their guilt to claim that an alien force (drugs) took possession of them and forced them to do bad things. This is much better than saying that they simply took drugs because they liked the feeling of being high, and they didn’t mind doing other nasty things as well. People are not sympathetic to somebody who is responsible for self-indulgent crimes such as taking drugs and hurting others. But they are sympathetic to “victims” of drugs who can say with a straight face that they found themselves in the power of an external, evil force that made them perform heinous acts against their will.

The tendency to think about drugs in terms of the myth of pure evil is not confined to modern America or to crack cocaine. Similar arguments have been made about LSD, PCP, heroin, and others. 29 The strangeness of illegal drugs contributes to the image of them as an alien force bringing chaos into our rational world. Yet even the most familiar of drugs, alcohol, has been assimilated into the myth from time to time. The phrase “demon rum” from the nineteenth century is only the most obvious indication that alcoholic intoxication has been regarded as a modern version of demonic possession. The modern beliefs that most alcoholics cannot control their drinking (such as the theories promoted by Alcoholics Anonymous) imply as much: Alcohol is a dangerous substance that overwhelms helpless individuals and forces them to engage in acts against their will. Stanton Peele and other thinkers have criticized the lack of individual responsibility implicit in some of these doctrines, and there is little doubt that some addicts and alcoholics like to excuse their misbehavior by blaming it on the external force of drugs or alcohol. To thwart such easy escapes, AA insists that its members take responsibility for their actions, including things they have done while under the influence of drink.

In particular, alcohol is often used to explain violent behavior. When someone abuses a spouse or child, gets into fights with strangers, or murders an innocent bystander or romantic rival, the people involved often blame alcohol. Crime statistics, it is true, show that alcohol is involved in over half of violent crimes. 30 Yet the evidence does not support the easy explanation that alcohol “caused” the violence. Alcohol is neither necessary nor sufficient to cause aggression, and the vast majority of drinkers do not hurt anybody. A glass of sherry will not turn a little old lady into a dangerous bully, nor will a couple of beers set a mild-mannered schoolteacher off on a killing spree.

Apparently, alcohol merely reduces the inner restraints against violent impulses; it does not create those impulses. Peaceful, friendly people will remain so under the influence of alcohol. Alcohol increases aggression only if the person has hostile, aggressive tendencies caused by other factors. In a well-known experiment, for example, college students who had consumed alcohol were no more aggressive (as measured by how severely they decided to zap a rival student with electric shocks) than students who had not had alcohol—except if the other person had provoked and angered them. The person who had had alcohol and then was provoked was exceptionally aggressive—more aggressive than the person who was provoked but had not had alcohol. Thus, alcohol increased aggression only when there was already some angry impulse present. 31

So alcohol alone is never an adequate explanation for violence. It can increase the degree of aggression, but it does not by itself cause it. The same is true of certain other drugs Why, then, do people persist in speaking as if drugs and alcohol were the full explanation?

Part of the answer no doubt has to do with people’s tendency to simplify matters and invoke the most obvious cause. But another part is that in some ways the alcohol/drug explanation is preferable. It satisfies people in a way that a more complex, integrative explanation would not. Blaming violence on alcohol or drugs is appealing for the same reasons that the myth of pure evil is appealing.

The appeal can be appreciated by considering domestic violence. Too often, we forget how much ambivalence is involved in domestic violence, especially on the side of the victims. They hate being attacked and hurt, but usually they also love the perpetrator for many positive things that are unrelated to the abuse. How can they explain the fact that someone who loves them and whom they love will hurt them? To acknowledge that the abuser feels some implacable hostility toward the victim would be very upsetting, because it would force the victim to face unresolved conflicts and possibly fundamental incompatibilities in the relationship. In contrast, blaming the violence on alcohol allows the victim to go on loving the abuser apart from the abuse. The alcohol is the alien, evil force that takes over the beloved partner and forces him (or her) to commit these terrible, hurtful actions. The abusers encourage these views, because for them alcohol is an excuse that is less damaging than any of the other likely explanations for their acts. 32

The Hated Face: Enemies in War Turning from the bedroom to the battlefield will offer another valuable perspective that can shed light on the appeal of the myth of the pure evil. As Carl von Clausewitz (the Prussian veteran whose On War became the most famous book ever written on the topic) once said, “War is inconceivable without a clearly defined image of the enemy.” 33 And opposing sides in war have often gone to remarkable lengths to depict each other in terms of the myth of pure evil.

One reason to depict the enemy as purely evil is that such an image helps create an obligation and an incentive to fight. If the enemy is clearly evil, then it is right to hate him and it is appropriate to do one’s part to defeat and destroy him. Most wars—whether major international conflicts or brutal series of battles between street gangs—require popular support. To marshal such support, it is necessary to justify one’s own violent actions. Indeed, if the combatants in a war were limited to the people who would directly benefit from victory, there would be too few participants. Hence, leaders who want to make war need to find a way to get people who have little or no personal stake in the matter to risk their lives to kill and maim other people whom they have never even met.

For example, in the American Civil War, the ruling class in the South needed some way to enlist the support of poor white Southerners, who did not benefit from slavery and had little interest in broad Constitutional issues such as states’ rights. There were not enough sons of plantation owners to make up an army, and no one else had that much at stake. Likewise, in the Vietnam War, young men who had never heard of obscure places in Southeast Asia were asked to travel there and fight over them. Closer to home, researchers who have observed gang wars have noted that gangs sometimes need to draft nonmembers into their ranks when a major conflict with an enemy gang is brewing. In some cases, these gangs force reluctant teenagers to join them during the dangerous, violent conflict and then kick the survivors out of the gang once the war is over. 34

The need to justify one’s own aggressive actions is one of the perennial problems of war. Just as warring armies need food, ammunition, and medical supplies, they and their civilian supporters need justifications for why they are fighting. Otherwise, they lose the will to fight. The Vietnam War was not lost on the battlefield, where there were something close to 10 enemy casualties for every American death. It was lost because the population at home could no longer find justifications for the sacrifices that were involved. In that same war, the North Vietnamese had to make much greater sacrifices, partly because their armies were less well equipped with the most deadly weapons. But they were far better equipped with justifications than the Americans. They were fighting for their national survival, their right to govern themselves, and for freedom. Nothing on the American side came close to matching those reasons.

A common solution to the problem of justifying one’s aggression is to depict the enemy as evil. If your enemies are pure evil, there is little need for additional explanations of why you want to fight against them. Hence, the more thoroughly one can assimilate the enemy into the myth of pure evil, the less one needs to provide valid reasons for one’s aggression.

In addition, people who are reluctant to enter a conflict or are undecided about their loyalties and interests can be effectively won over if they can be persuaded that the adversary is evil. Perhaps the most famous example of this in the twentieth century was the British propaganda early in World War I, which depicted the German troops as savage, cruel Huns. Many of the atrocity stories were later revealed to be extreme exaggerations or outright falsehoods, but they played an important role in convincing an ambivalent American public—which included many people of German descent—to support the Allied cause and eventually to enter the war, decisively, on the Allied side. After all, how could one support a country whose soldiers were reported to kill innocent babies with bayonets? Indeed, how could one even fail to be firmly and actively opposed to them?

A second, related benefit of construing the enemy in terms of the myth of pure evil is that there is no need to feel bad about killing the enemy, or indeed about any sort of abusive or atrocious treatment of the enemy. This is an important theme of War Without Mercy, John Dower’s book on the Pacific theatre of World War II. 35 Hatred and demonization of the enemy were much greater in the Pacific than in the European side of that war, partly because of racial antagonism between Americans and Japanese. Dower showed that violent acts by American boys fighting in the Pacific far exceeded those reported from Europe. They killed Japanese prisoners, urinated in the mouths of corpses, fired upon lifeboats carrying survivors of sunk Japanese ships, and collected “grisly battlefield trophies” 36 such as gold teeth, ears, bones, scalps, and skulls, some of which were sent home as gifts to their American sweethearts. This is not the way American boys usually act in war, but when their perceptions of the Japanese enemy were sufficiently colored by the myth of pure evil, they were capable of remarkable excesses of brutality.

A less obvious but still very powerful benefit of demonizing the enemy is that all the misfortunes and suffering on both sides can be blamed on the enemy. If there is conflict, then of course it must be blamed on evil, for the good side would never seek out or desire conflict. What the good side suffers is the fault of the evil side. By the same token, whatever the evil side suffers is also its own fault, because it brought it on itself by means of its evil activities.

The clearest examples do not involve explicit warfare, because such examples are generally ambiguous. An example in which an essentially innocent party is blamed for both sides’ suffering, however, can be found in the antagonistic relations between the Christians and the Jews. When the Black Death was decimating central Europe, many Christians came to the conclusion that the Jews must be responsible (it was rumored that the Jews were poisoning the water supply). It is well known now that the Black Death does not result from any such poisoning, but at the time it seemed plausible, especially because people thought that the plague seemed to spare the Jews, which of course it would do if they were causing it. (At the time, Christianity was strongly opposed to bathing, whereas Judaism promoted cleanliness, and so illnesses that flourished because of poor hygiene practices preyed more on Christians. Hence the observation that the plague seemed to spare Jews.) The Jews were regarded as evil, and so it made sense that they would have perpetrated such a dastardly action as poisoning the water supply to spread a fatal plague. These beliefs prompted a number of riots and massacres of Jews. The Jews’ suffering was regarded as their just deserts for their wicked acts. 37

Hope and confidence constitute a final benefit of demonizing the enemy. If the enemy is bad, then God must be on our side, and so it seems certain that we will win in the end. To be sure, there are dangers of overconfidence, but it is much easier to enlist people in a cause if ultimate success seems ensured. Consider the Crusades, as a dramatic example. Militarily, the Crusades were clearly a very risky venture, as the events proved over and over. The majority of knights and soldiers who departed for the Holy Land never came back. Usually they died from disease and the other dangers that attended the journey. Many were killed in military combat with the enemy, who uncannily seemed able to win battles, despite having to fight without the support of the Christian God.

The Children’s Crusade 38 is one of the most tragically absurd examples of overconfidence springing from belief that God would join the side of the just and faithful and would guarantee victory over the heathen enemy. In 1212, two boys reported visions in which God told them to lead an army of innocent children to liberate the Holy Land. Children from the towns and villages of central Europe came and followed the boys. The large groups of chanting children walked to Italy. The Pope sent some of them home; many died of disease or starvation along the way. Many others were reportedly sold into slavery by the Italian merchants who disingenuously offered to ferry them across the Mediterranean.

The notion that a motley gang of children could walk more than a thousand miles without logistical support, cross the Mediterranean Sea along the way (supposedly by means of a dry passageway that would suddenly appear for the young Crusaders, just as the Red Sea had opened for Moses and his flock in the Bible), and then inflict a battlefield defeat on a well-equipped army of adult soldiers who lived there is preposterous by military standards; but religious faith made the idea seem plausible back then. The important point is the appeal of the belief that victory is ensured because divine powers will intervene on one’s side. Viewing the enemy as evil was extremely helpful in getting people to participate in the Crusades.

Innocent Victims Why does the myth of pure evil continue to exert such a hold over the way people think, when it so rarely corresponds to the reality of events? With any phenomenon that is so broad and common, there are likely to be multiple explanations, and no single or easy answer will be enough. One important factor in the myth’s appeal is that it portrays the victims as wholly innocent. The victims, and the many people who identify with victims, will clearly find such a portrayal very agreeable.

The broader context of this argument is that people favor certain explanations over others because the preferred ones appeal to their psychological wants and needs. People are not relentlessly driven to find the truth; often they want to reach a particular conclusion. To be sure, there are severe limits on what people can convince themselves of, and the human capacity for self-deception (contrary to some stereotypes) is constrained by many factors. Still, many events involve ambiguous circumstances with several possible explanations that are all somewhat plausible and that roughly fit most of the facts. It is in precisely such situations, where a person can see several possible explanations but is not compelled by powerful evidence to settle on a particular one, that people are most able to find ways to draw the conclusion that they personally prefer. 39 In such circumstances, people will tend to rely on the myth of pure evil to explain events—as long as that myth makes them feel better, comforts them, or offers them an explanation that they find congenial.

With almost any form of misfortune, the people who suffer immediately begin to ask themselves whether they were at fault. One study of victims of severe accidents, for example, found that all of them had asked, “Why me?” and found some sort of answer. 40 Some of them blamed themselves; others blamed an assortment of other factors. It seems to be a very deeply rooted pattern in human nature to respond to disaster by wondering whether it was your own fault. 41 People look for explanations for their suffering, whether religious, scientific, or causal, and one perennial dimension of these explanations is whether people blame themselves or not. But people want to think that the bad things that happen to them are not caused by their own actions. This preference has been well documented in many contexts, ranging from the reactions of corporate managers and executives at “blame time” 42 to the responses of college students who are led to believe during a psychology experiment that they have just done quite poorly on some test. 43

The myth of pure evil depicts malicious, alien forces intruding on the world of well-meaning, unsuspecting, virtuous people. The victims are thus freed from any blame or responsibility for their own misfortune. Their problems are not entirely solved by such an explanation, of course, but it is comforting in at least one respect: They do not have to feel guilty, stupid, or otherwise responsible.

An explanation that frees the self from all blame is likely to have strong appeal to victims, for several reasons. One is that people simply like to see themselves in a favorable light. 44 They may be suffering, but at least their self-esteem can survive intact. Another reason is more practical and interpersonal. As long as you are an innocent victim, you have a legitimate claim on the help, sympathy, and support of others, which may extend to financial or material aid. In contrast, if you are the author of your own misfortune, people are less willing to help you. When people’s capacity for helping is limited—as it often is in times of crisis or misfortune—they tend to give priority to innocent victims, while those who brought their own suffering on themselves are the first to be cut off. 45

A good way to appreciate this process is to imagine the choice you face when you have been injured by another person. One possibility is to blame yourself: I started this, so I deserved whatever happened to me. Clearly this is not a very pleasant or comforting explanation. In fact, if you decide that you deserved this misfortune, then perhaps you will deserve others, and the future can start to look rather bleak and depressing. 46

Another possibility is to decide that the problem was simply a difference of opinion or a problem of communication: You decide that no one is to blame. When you are suffering or in trouble, however, it is unsatisfying to decide that your problems are no one’s fault. Presumably, such accidents can occur at any time, and so your troubles could arise again.

Not surprisingly, then, people prefer to blame their problems on someone else’s actions. There are two ways to do this. One is to see the other’s responsibility for your suffering as due to a temporary or uncharacteristic act that the person did under pressure of circumstances or external forces. As we saw in the last chapter, this is how perpetrators themselves prefer to regard the misdeeds they acknowledge. They say, yes, I did something wrong that hurt someone, but I couldn’t help it, and it was quite unlike the way I normally act—so I shouldn’t be judged too harshly.

Yet, as we also saw, that is not the way victims prefer to see things. We are understandably reluctant to give the benefit of the doubt to someone who has just hurt us. Emotionally, this may be the least satisfying response, because you conclude that the perpetrator played a decisive causal role, yet you cannot allow yourself to feel outraged by it. You are supposed to maintain fair, positive, respectful feelings toward the person who has just wronged you, even while you are feeling the effects of this presumably isolated bad action the person has performed. This is tough, especially when you are angry and in pain.

The other alternative, then, is to blame the perpetrator for being a bad person. This explanation corresponds most closely to the myth of pure evil: The perpetrator is responsible for what he or she did to you. You (the victim) condemn him or her along with the act, because the act is something that expresses what the person is truly like. The transgression is seen not as isolated and uncharacteristic (which is how perpetrators usually depict their wrongs) but as typical, or at least as something that reveals the true inner self, which may be held in check or concealed (hypocritically) most of the time. Naturally, if you didn’t do anything to provoke the other’s attack, the question of why that person attacked you will arise. Here again, the myth of pure evil is helpful: He attacked you because he is wicked. He is the sort of person who attacks innocent people for no reason, or for his own pleasure or benefit. There is no need to think that you did anything to deserve or provoke the attack.

Thus, the explanation that corresponds most closely to the myth of pure evil is also the explanation that people prefer, when they have a choice. In particular, victims and their friends and supporters 47 seem likely to favor an explanation that absolves them of all responsibility for their suffering.

In general, people maintain their self-esteem by blaming their troubles on external factors and on other people. 48 Victims of aggression are no different, and they have a ready-made target to blame. It is more comforting to conclude that the world contains evil, malicious people who attack innocent victims for no reason than to believe that one’s sufferings are the result of one’s own poor judgment and ill-advised actions that provoked a violent response from someone else. This brings us back to the vital issue of reciprocal violence, which we will now consider once more.

But What about Reciprocal Violence?

I noted that most violence and aggression involve reciprocal, mutual grievances and provocations. The most common pattern is for two people (or groups) to offend, provoke, and attack each other in escalating rounds until one of them kills or injures the other. At the same time, I concluded that the most common way of thinking about violence—the myth of pure evil—puts all the responsibility on one side and absolves the other side. The myth of pure evil depicts sadistic, malicious forces that arbitrarily and randomly attack innocent, virtuous victims.

This difference is perhaps the most radical discrepancy between the image and the reality of evil. Can our image of evildoers really be irrelevant to the majority of actual cases of violence?

No. In fact, what seems to happen often is that both sides of a conflict perceive it through the lens of the myth of pure evil—but in mirror images. Each side sees itself as the innocent victim and the other as the evil attacker.

This point was made vividly in one of the classic psychological works on violence, Hans Toch’s Violent Men. 49 Toch divided his attention about equally between studying police who deal with aggressive criminals and studying the criminals themselves. Both groups tended to see themselves as well-meaning, innocent people who had to cope with arbitrary, provocative behavior by the other group.

Consider a typical story from Toch’s book. 50 Two policemen, according to their report, get a call about a fight going on at a house. They arrive, self-conscious about being white authority figures in a black neighborhood. A black man is sitting on the hood of a car outside the house where there was the complaint. They begin to ask him questions. He insults them and uses racial epithets. His hands are inside his pockets, which seems both defiant and threatening, because he could be carrying a weapon. They ask him to remove his hands from his pockets. He refuses defiantly and obnoxiously, calling them more insulting names and insisting on his rights. He makes vague threats that he and his friends are going to kill the policemen. Some of his friends are beginning to gather around, voicing criticisms of the police, and the cops fear that a riot could be starting. They attempt to take the man into the back seat of the squad car, but he resists, and they end up having to force him—to hit him and put him in handcuffs. All the time he is screaming angrily at them. Finally, to defuse the explosive situation, they drive off with him.

Now consider the young man’s story. He was not involved in the domestic squabble and did not even know the police were called. From his perspective, he was sitting quietly in his neighborhood when two white policemen came up and began to question and hassle him. In response to their questions about the incident, he said (truthfully) that he did not know anything, but they refused to accept that as an answer. One of them ordered him to take his hands out of his pockets. He asked whether he was being arrested or charged with anything, but they dodged this question and continued to command him to remove his hands from his pockets. Looking back, he said that if they had simply explained why they wanted him to remove his hands, he would have done so, but they refused to explain their command and merely insisted on it. Then they seized him and one of them struck him. (When asked by the interviewer why the policeman would strike him for seemingly no reason, he did recall the additional fact that he had just called the policeman a “stupid bastard.” And indeed one assumes that according to police policy such a remark, while certainly uncharitable, is not supposed to be grounds for striking a citizen. But you could also understand that a nervous young policeman might be moved by such a remark to think that he had better reassert control over the situation.) By now several of the man’s neighbors were gathering to watch, and it was obvious to them that the police were behaving in an unjustified and inappropriately aggressive fashion. Some of them began making angry comments, pointing out that what the police were doing was wrong. Becoming fearful of police brutality, the man began to scream for his rights, but they beat him and wrestled him into the car and drove off with him.

The point of this example is that both the young man and the two policemen 51 described the event in terms of unprovoked, unreasonable, aggressive behavior by the other side met with a reasonable and well-meaning response on their part. Each man described his own aggression as something that he was forced to do, reluctantly, in response to the brazen, threatening, unjustified, offensive acts of the other. In other words, both descriptions of the incident roughly corresponded to the myth of pure evil—except that they exchanged the roles of evildoer and innocent victim. From the policemen’s point of view, they were simply trying to do their job to investigate a complaint, and the young man became hostile because of his racism and general disrespect for authority. From the young man’s perspective, he was innocently minding his own business when two white policemen attacked him for little or no reason (except, again, racism), violated his rights, and tried to embarrass him in front of his neighbors.

Who is correct? As we saw earlier, the answer is difficult to ascertain without some objective record, but it seems likely that both accounts shaded the facts to favor a certain interpretation. The aggressive policeman mentioned in passing that he responded to what he saw as a disrespectful attitude taken by the young man: “His attitude bothered me a little bit, so I asked him if he would take his hands out of his pockets.” 52 Perhaps, then, it was not an overt threat that led him to begin the business about the pockets, but only a perception that the young man was being insufficiently deferential and therefore needed to be put in his place. Moreover, he described his first comment about the hands as being a polite request, which of course is quite different from the way it appeared in the young man’s version. Meanwhile, the young man left out his calling the policemen “stupid bastards” until the interviewer asked. Both parties perceived the other, but not themselves, as motivated by racial antagonism.

The myth of pure evil, then, is surprisingly durable and elastic. Even when each side provokes and antagonizes the other, the myth can be invoked. Ironically, the myth fails to acknowledge mutual provocation, but it appears that both sides in a conflict are quite capable of seeing themselves as innocent victims and the other as unreasonably, gratuitously wicked.

Similar patterns are found over and over. Cases of mutual aggression are described by the participants as if the other side were unreasonably, gratuitously violent whereas they themselves were merely innocent, well-intentioned victims who were ultimately forced to defend themselves.

Even terrorists, who would seem to be the most obvious example of a group that attacks and kills innocent people, conform to this pattern. Terrorists see themselves as victims. One scholar observed how striking it is that despite the great diversity of causes that terrorists represent, their rhetoric has broad similarities. They all tend to speak as if they were engaged in a battle against the forces of evil, who have somehow amassed great power and numbers on their side. To the terrorists, they are the ones fighting for the real victims, and their just cause is so desperate that they need to resort to any tactics they can find. 53 Another scholar who studied terrorists in Germany observed that they all felt themselves to be victims of the oppressive and repressive government. 54

If one concedes that terrorists have at least the one valid point—namely, that they are relatively weak and helpless in comparison with the huge governments and security forces they oppose—then one would think that repressive governments might be the ones who finally acknowledge their own oppressive nature. Surely, they if anyone could see that they are the aggressors, especially when they arrest, torture, and kill the relatively helpless, innocent citizens who end up as their victims. But they do not. Studies of repressive governments repeatedly find that they too perceive themselves as virtuous, idealistic, well-meaning groups who are driven to desperately violent measures to defend themselves against the overwhelmingly dangerous forces of evil. These patterns can be seen right from the earliest Western examples of institutional terror, in which committees gave lists of names to police forces who arrested, prosecuted, tortured, and executed the people on the lists. The Spanish Inquisition saw itself as needing to defend Christianity against internal enemies: heathen unbelievers, dissenters, and heretics who pretended to be normal, faithful Christians. The Terror following the French Revolution was driven by the paranoid view that the forces of reaction and subversion were trying to infiltrate the new government and destroy it before it could initiate its reign of virtue in its envisioned utopian republic. The Khmer Rouge believed that Cambodia was threatened by both internal and external enemies and needed desperate measures to survive. The century’s bloodiest killing campaigns—the Stalinist and Maoist purges in the Soviet Union and China—were both fueled by fears that the utopian revolution was succumbing to the evil machinations of internal enemies who (aided by hostile foreign powers) were sabotaging and undermining the leaders’ efforts to serve the people.

So far, I have argued that the myth of pure evil tends to blind people to the reciprocal, mutual causes of violence. Even people who appear to outside observers to be clearly the aggressors, such as by participating in large-scale violence against relatively innocent and helpless victims, tend to see themselves as being the virtuous victims. They too see evil as a powerful invasion of their good and peaceful society. Their victims do not seem to them like helpless innocents. Rather, they appear to be representatives of the forces of evil.

The tendency for perpetrators to claim victim status is easier to understand in light of the myth of pure evil. On the face of it, it seems preposterous that former Nazi killers or Argentinean torturers could define themselves as victims. But the fact that violence generally has reciprocal causes means that they can usually find some respect in which they were attacked, too (if only by being the targets of what they see as unfair, selective prosecution and stigma afterward). If they focus heavily on what has happened to them, they can still manage to see evil as the force that attacks them rather than as part of themselves.

A vivid example was provided in Dan Bar-On’s book, which consists of interviews with children of the Third Reich. One of the women, Renate, told about her father, who was arrested nearly two decades after the war ended. She said her father complained about being arrested and prosecuted when others who had done far worse things went free. He expressed humiliation that he, a decent and proper German who had always done his best to serve his country effectively and had led a blameless, correct life, would find himself thrown in jail with common criminals. He had never even padded an expense account, but here he was being treated like an ordinary lowlife. Renate said she eventually became unable to bear his complaining because even though there was some merit in his claims to being a victim, he never said anything at all to acknowledge what he had done wrong. He had been a leader of one of the Einsatzgruppen—the small contingents who moved through conquered territory in Russia and executed Jewish citizens by shooting them, long before the gas chambers and crematoriums were built. She said he never expressed any regret or remorse or compassion for the people he shot, and this fact eventually revolted her to the extent that she could no longer even speak to him. The family began to regard her as a traitor because she failed to stand by her father in his time of trouble. She said she might have been able to support him if he had acknowledged some guilt or remorse, but he never did. 55 He never mentioned his own guilt or admitted that he deserved punishment, while he constantly harped on how he was the undeserving victim of excessive persecution.

In general, then, the myth of pure evil conceals the reciprocal causality of violence. By doing so, it probably increases the violence. The myth of pure evil depicts innocent victims fighting against gratuitously wicked, sadistic enemies. The myth encourages people to believe that they are good and will remain good no matter what, even if they perpetrate severe harm on their opponents. Thus, the myth of pure evil confers a kind of moral immunity on people who believe in it. As we will soon see, belief in the myth is itself one recipe for evil, because it allows people to justify violent and oppressive actions. It allows evil to masquerade as good.





PART

2

The Four Roots of Evil





