CHAPTER

4

Greed, Lust, Ambition: Evil as a Means to an End We turn now from the image of evil to the reality. There are four main root causes of evil, and the next four chapters will examine each one in turn. We will begin with the most obvious: evil as a means to an end.

The Killer Horsemen To several million medieval Christians and Moslems, the Mongol hordes of Genghis Khan and his successors were the embodiment of evil. To Europe, the Mongols were demons incarnate, but they thought of themselves as supremely practical. This practicality included killing. The nomadic Mongols were sheepherders, and the act of killing sheep was a routine familiar to just about everyone. Nomads don’t think of their animals as pets, precisely because it is fairly often necessary to kill one of them.

According to historian David Morgan, the Mongols debated killing everyone in northern China. 1 The idea was to make pastureland and prevent uprisings. Finally, the Mongols decided against the plan, convinced by arguments that the loss of tax revenue and tribute would not be worth it. It made more sense to leave the people alive so they could send money. Again, the Mongols weren’t bloodthirsty—they were practical.

The Mongols conquered city after city throughout the so-called civilized world to the west of their homelands. Besieging, storming, and conquering these cities was costly and time-consuming, and the Mongols had no particular need to lay everything to waste, although they were quite willing to do so when necessary. But that too was a matter of practicality. The Mongols wanted two things: They wanted their superior authority and power to be accepted, and they wanted material wealth. Fighting battles and storming cities were means to these two ends.

The Mongols gradually developed a standard policy toward the cities that lay in their path. 2 Each city was presented with a choice. It could open its gates, let the Mongols in, submit to their rule, and agree to pay them tribute, in which case the Mongol army would move on peacefully. Or the city could offer armed resistance, in which case defeat meant the destruction of the city and large-scale or even complete massacre of the inhabitants. In some cases, such as if the siege were long or costly, the Mongols would spend an entire week killing every living thing within the city. The Mongols wanted this policy to become generally known, of course. The point was to get some of the cities to let them in with no resistance and hence no casualties on their side. An occasional freebie of that sort would be a nice picnic for the troops, especially as compared to the tedium and privations of a siege.

Still, some cities did resist. After all, cities were built precisely to hold out against such predatory invaders, and so to surrender meant belying the very purpose of the city. What, then, may we assume went through the minds of the Mongol invaders on the day they finally entered a resisting city and began to massacre the inhabitants?

It may be unrealistic to surmise that they were totally detached and unemotional about it. They might have felt some anger and frustration toward the people who had killed their friends and forced them to suffer the deprivations of siege warfare. They might also have found some pleasure in looting, pillaging, and other violent acts that finally relieved the intensely monotonous boredom of the siege. Sexual pleasure was rare for a lowly soldier in a traveling, besieging army, but of course on this day the women of the city were at the Mongols’ mercy. If the women were going to be killed anyway, or even just sold as slaves to some rich stranger, one might as well see what they had to offer. One could even suggest that it is wasteful (from a practical point of view) to kill a pretty woman without raping her first.

What about showing mercy—what the great thinker Hannah Arendt called “animal pity,” the basic sympathy that one feels with the suffering of another human being like oneself? Being utterly merciless no doubt contributed to the Mongols’ reputation for being evil. Yet from their point of view, it was the only practical thing to do. To take pity on the citizens would be counterproductive and hence impractical and hence stupid. It was not just that the Mongols didn’t feel like taking pity: They knew they weren’t supposed to take pity. Taking pity was bad for business and was very costly. Killing them all was essential to prevent having to go through the whole miserable siege business at the next town.

The Mongol policy (later adopted by many other siege campaigns in Europe) is a compelling example of violence as a means to an end. To their victims they may have been evil, but in their own eyes and, perhaps, to objective observers they were merely pursuing a rational, sensible strategy for getting what most people want: wealth and respect. A great deal of crime and violence falls into this category of instrumental activity. The hurting is not done for its own sake but rather to further one’s goals.

The defining criterion of instrumental violence is that the perpetrator would be willing to abandon violence if he or she could achieve the same goal without it. This puts the victim in a relatively good position, at least as compared with victims of other forms of violence such as hate crimes, where the victim’s suffering is the essential point. To an instrumentally violent person, the material gain is the point, and if the material gain can be had without violence, so much the better. That was the essence of the Mongols’ policy: If the city would open its gates peacefully, it would be spared the slaughter. From our historical vantage point, it is clear that the cities that capitulated peacefully were much better off. The Mongols’ demands amounted to a stiff property tax—which is better than being pillaged and massacred.

Evil Means to Acceptable Ends Some evil undoubtedly does derive directly from the craving for material gain. The desire for money, pleasure, power, and similar gains is deeply rooted in the human psyche. Countless means are used to pursue these desires, and some of them are evil.

Although I emphasize that the means, not the ends, are evil, it is important to recognize that these goals have been sufficiently problematic and disturbing to society that from time to time the ends have been condemned, too. The desire for money and the desire for sexual pleasure have both been condemned by the Catholic Church, which has listed them (as greed and lust) among the seven deadly sins. Envy of someone else’s wealth is another. Ambition, in the sense of a desire for power and success, has also often been recognized as an unsavory and dangerous motive, and at least the anarchists (strong Utopians and idealists themselves) have believed fervently that power is inherently bad.

Yet these condemnations are overstated. Money, pleasure, and power are not inherently bad, nor is the pursuit of them invariably destructive. In fact, it is doubtful if there have ever been human beings who were free of such desires, and if so these exceptional individuals (saints and Zen masters, perhaps) could exist only in a society kept going by masses of people who operated on those motives constantly. Even the Catholic Church, at the height of its power, had to change its views to allow people to desire and receive sexual pleasure in marriage, as well as to allow people to make a profit on their work. Power clearly can be sought through peaceful, constructive, and socially acceptable means. Moreover, an effective government is essential to the health, prosperity, well-being, and probably even the survival of the people.

Evil thus attaches only to the means by which these ends are pursued, not to the ends or desires themselves. Attempts to condemn the ends are generally foolish and futile. The first root of evil is instrumental: It is a resort to objectionable techniques as a way of achieving acceptable ends.

To think of evil as the use of wrong means toward acceptable ends is already far afield from the myth of pure evil. According to the myth, evil people seek to do harm for its own sake and derive direct pleasure from doing it. In contrast, an instance of purely instrumental violence involves someone who may take no pleasure at all from hurting others and may even be reluctant or unhappy about it. The myth of pure evil sees harm as a vital end in itself, not a means, and certainly not a means toward goals that are common and acceptable.

Turning Bad We can understand instrumental evil as the use of a particular set of means to pursue goals that, alternatively, might be pursued with acceptable means. The key question for understanding this form of evil then becomes: What makes people choose evil means rather than other, more acceptable ones? This question goes to the heart of crime: Why would someone rob people rather than try to earn a living through legal and accepted means?

The goal of this book is to understand how otherwise decent people, much like you or me, can come to participate in evil acts. Let us begin by examining one of history’s most famous and widely condemned sources of evil, the so-called Free Companies who ravaged central Europe during and after the Hundred Years’ War. These roving gangs of bandits would descend on an innocent, unsuspecting farming village. They would steal its food and other wealth, leaving the poor peasants at best destitute, at worst brutally killed. Homes were burned and women were raped. According to the chroniclers of the fourteenth century (who admittedly were somewhat prone to sensationalism and probably exaggeration), the Free Companies destroyed entire villages, held others for ransom, violated nuns and mothers, destroyed the peasants’ meager farm equipment (thereby preventing them from growing more food), and engaged in assorted other abuses. The peasants came to see them as comparable to the biblical plagues. The Pope issued several edicts condemning and excommunicating them, to little avail. 3

Who would willingly choose a life as a member of one of these cruel and vicious bands of outlaws? Surely no one like you or me. But imagine yourself in the following scenario. You are a regular soldier in the British army fighting in France during the Hundred Years’ War. Your commander, the Black Prince, is widely admired as “the Flower of Chivalry,” and the war is driven by seemingly legitimate claims of the English to territory in France, which has been stolen by the French crown. The current expedition is a punitive raid intended to punish rebellious towns and villages who have gone over to the enemy (French) side, which stands to gain major advantages from the rich lands. The French army does not show up to oppose you. Following orders, you help punish the rebel towns by looting and burning them.

Punishment is not the only goal of your army’s raids: The loot from the villages is an important source of revenue and even food. Medieval armies had only the most primitive notions of logistics and supply, and you could hardly count on food reaching you regularly from supply bases back in England. “Living off the land” was the polite phrase for the standard procedure of enabling the army to survive by looting and pillaging the unfortunates in its path. Procedures for paying the soldiers’ wages were not much better than procedures for supplying them with food, and the wealth pillaged from conquered towns was often a crucial substitute for regular pay, welcomed by both the troops and their commanders. As for feeling guilty about this—well, war was war, and indeed the French themselves seemed no more sensitive about their villagers. The French tried to repel the British with a scorched-earth policy of destroying the farms and villages that the British might conquer. The peasants and townspeople lost out either way.

A major turning point came in September 1356. The French king brought a large army into the area and finally caught up with and trapped the Black Prince at Poitiers. Badly outnumbered and cut off from escape, the British dug in and tried to make a deal, but negotiations fell through. The French launched a frontal assault and were cut to pieces by the British archers. After many hours of fighting, a counterattack by the British captured the French king and drove off the remnants of the French army. Between the death or capture of its major leaders and the decimation and humiliation of its army, France was left without means of carrying on the war.

The unexpected and complete victory left the Black Prince with a new problem—a lack of opposition. He did not need all his soldiers and could not afford to pay them, and so he did what other generals in the same position did in those days: He simply released many of them. These former soldiers were the beginnings of the Free Companies.

And what would you have done? You are a British ex-soldier in western France, living among your nominal enemies. Even if the people did not hate you, there would be no jobs available, because the main occupation is farming and the farms are all taken. You have no skills other than fighting, and so even if you could get a farm you wouldn’t be able to operate it. Nor do you see any realistic hope of getting back home to England.

Meanwhile, the chance to join one of the Free Companies is a feasible and even attractive alternative to starvation. You can remain with your friends and comrades, and you can use your military skills. You would be doing what you have been doing already, namely, attacking farming villages. There is some danger but not much: The villages cannot defend themselves, and with the total defeat of the French army there is no serious force to oppose you (indeed, there is hardly any authority in the area at all). It certainly seems as safe or safer than trying to make your way home alone, through a hostile countryside and across the Channel. 4

Seen from a distance, then, the members of the Free Companies appear as ruthless, bloodthirsty criminals preying on defenseless peasants, and perhaps that is an almost entirely fair description. Yet it is also understandable how an ordinary person might have ended up among them, given the circumstances. They were not necessarily men who were innately wicked and attracted by a life of easy plunder and sadistic pleasure. (Indeed, probably the life in one of those outlaw brigades was anything but easy.) To many, perhaps, such a life was a way of obtaining food, safety, and money. There is nothing inherently evil about those desires, and in fact their victims probably wanted the same things. The difference between them and their victims was that they saw violent, evil means as their best and perhaps only chance for getting them.

Why Choose Evil Means?

We can now return to the broader question of why people resort to evil means toward acceptable ends. Certainly in a peacetime society such as today’s United States there are ample legal ways of getting food and shelter. Why turn to crime?

One answer is that the criminal does not perceive the legal and legitimate means as feasible. As with the Free Companies, violence seems the only way to get what one needs. The memoirs of Kody Scott and Nathan McCall state that they felt that they, as young black men, were rejected and excluded from the legitimate system and hence the only way to get by was through crime. 5

Another answer is that evil means often appear to be easier than legitimate ones. Michael Gottfredson and Travis Hirschi 6 pointed out in their important book, A General Theory of Crime, that most crimes require little in the way of skill, patience, institutional credentials, or planning. To make money through standard, legal work one must often acquire credentials and abilities, all of which may take years of schoolwork and other training. In contrast, very little is necessary to hold up a convenience store or rob a pedestrian. A gun or other weapon and a few minutes are sufficient to accomplish the deed. You don’t even have to know how to shoot; just holding and pointing the gun will probably be enough.

Careful planning of career strategies is also necessary for success in many legitimate occupations. Crimes, in contrast, tend to be spontaneous and unplanned (unlike the elaborately planned capers featured in movies). In explaining how spur-of-the-moment crimes often are, Gottfredson and Hirschi cited interviews with prisoners who recounted that in many cases they had passengers waiting outside in their cars who had not even suspected that a crime was going to be committed. No well-planned crime involves bringing along innocent, unaware witnesses who might conceivably make trouble or raise objections.

Thus, evil means may be chosen because they seem easier and more feasible than conventional means. You can get rich by performing brain surgery or by mugging passersby. Elaborate skills and long years of hard work are required for the former; hardly any training is needed for the latter.

Related to the perception of ease is the perception of effectiveness. Evil means may be used because people think them more likely than other means to be effective. For example, the twentieth century has seen countless examples of insecure regimes that have instituted official terror policies to maintain their hold on power. People who oppose or even criticize the regime are arrested, tortured, and sometimes executed. Torture is sometimes defended as a necessary means of gaining information, but in practice most torture is conducted without the intention (or the result) of gaining any useful information, and the framework of interrogation is merely a pretext. 7 Torture is used to bully, intimidate, and punish dissent, as a way of shoring up the power of the torturer’s organization.

From the other side, terrorists and others operating outside the political structure likewise tend to believe they have no alternative. They have often tried (sometimes sincerely, sometimes perfunctorily) the standard, legal options for redress of grievances and found them unsatisfactory. Such people do not turn to terrorism out of a love of violence, or at least not primarily. They believe that they have no choice, because their grievances are serious and real and because the system offers them no way of dealing with them. 8 Whether they believe that setting off bombs to kill civilians is likely to bring about political changes is hard to ascertain, but they can at least be reasonably sure that their cause and their problems will gain some attention by terrorist acts—which is more than they think they will get through legitimate channels.

The case of terrorism shows that even when legitimate means of protest are available, people may reject them as hopeless and ineffective. Hence, the temptation to resort to evil, violent methods can be understood in the context of circumstances that appear to lack other methods—and, in fact, sometimes that appearance is correct. Most people are probably reluctant to resort to crime or violence, but sometimes that is the only option.

A fascinating study by Diego Gambetta of the origins of the Sicilian Mafia makes this point clear. 9 Gambetta notes that traditional analyses of the Mafia have called it the “industry of violence,” but this is misleading: What the Mafia really provides is protection. Normally, citizens of modern countries are protected by the government and the police, but when these are inadequate to do the job, people will turn to other sources of protection. The Mafia came into being to provide just such services in Sicily, where government and police were unequal to the task.

Consider a simple example. One man wants to sell a horse, and another wants to buy it. The seller wants to charge too high a price, and indeed he may be concealing the fact that the horse is sick or weak. The buyer wants to pay too low a price, possibly by misleading the seller about the market value of such a horse, or perhaps he wants to pay with counterfeit money or a bad check. It is illegal, of course, for either to cheat or defraud the other, but suppose the government is not able to provide a guarantee that the transaction will be within the bounds of fairness. Then each of them is vulnerable. The risk and fear of being exploited may be large enough that even honest transactions are avoided, simply because one cannot be certain. That is, even if the buyer wants to buy and the seller wants to sell and the price is fair and both are honest, they may fail to make the deal because each worries that the other might be trying to cheat him. But being under the protection of a mafioso enables the person to make the deal with some peace of mind. If the horse turns out to be sick, the buyer can turn to his Mafia connection to get his money back. In fact, merely having such a connection will tend to deter such frauds. Only a fool would use a sick horse to cheat someone who is protected by the Mafia.

What creates situations in which there is a specific need for illegal protection? Sometimes legitimate authorities are weak or corrupt. Police tend not to intervene until a crime has been committed, which is unfortunately too late for the victim in many cases. According to Gambetta, the Mafia originated as a way of protecting Sicilian farmers on the dangerous journey through open country to the market in the distant city. A lone individual with a carriage full of farm produce would be an easy target for bandits, because the police could not guard the long, deserted roads. But the same man accompanied by two hired guards would be much safer. The profits from selling his produce in the city might well be enough to make it worth his while even after paying the guards.

One might object to this analysis by saying that, although it works fine for nineteenth-century Sicily, it has little relevance to the modern United States, because the police are well organized and able to provide protection to everyone. This is not completely true, however; there is still a market for private protection. In particular, criminals themselves often need protection. Suppose, for example, that you make your living by selling drugs, and your supplier cheats you or your customer robs you. You cannot go to the police to get your drugs back from the customer who didn’t pay. You cannot call the Better Business Bureau and file a complaint against the cocaine supplier who swindled you, nor can you sue him in civil court. Similar problems apply to prostitutes whose customers cheat or rob them, to burglars who need to sell the items they have stolen, and many others.

Criminals, after all, are often trying to make money, yet their transactions are not protected by law. Links to the Mafia may be of considerable value to them. Your drug supplier would be reluctant to cheat you if you were known to be protected by the Mafia. And if he did cheat you, you would stand a fair chance of getting your money back.

Thus, one set of explanations for the resort to evil means has to do with fairly rational considerations. People choose violent or destructive means because these seem easy and effective, or because they do not perceive legitimate means as feasible for them. Evil looks like an appealing shortcut to get what one wants. It holds out the promise of reaching a highly desired or attractive goal, and in a rather short time. It is quicker and in some ways more exciting and even more fun than legitimate ways of satisfying one’s material needs. Sometimes it is the only way that looks like it might work. That brings up a central question: Do evil means work?

Are Evil Means Effective?

So far, we have seen that people sometimes resort to evil because they think it will get them what they want. Are they right? Are evil means—criminal, destructive, socially condemned methods—effective? The answer is not simple.

For one thing, the answer seems to depend on the time frame one adopts. Assassinations do succeed in eliminating the detested ruler, but they do not usually succeed in bringing about the governmental changes that the assassins want. Crime may bring short-term gains, but in the long run most criminals do not end up wealthy. A recent study concluded that the average pay from crime for young black men in Boston was between $10 and $20 per hour, whereas the after-tax wage for legitimate employment was only about $5.60. 10 Thus, crime (especially selling drugs) seems to pay much better. But if the risk of imprisonment and violent victimization are included in the calculations, the economic superiority of a criminal career may be eliminated or even reversed.

More generally, the question of the effectiveness of evil and violence has been examined by many different scholars in many different spheres, by looking at the results of particular kinds of crimes or other objectionable acts. Over and over, they seem to come to the same conclusion: Evil is not very effective, especially when viewed in terms of fulfilling long-range objectives. At most, violence and cruelty help one gain temporary advantage over some adversary or obstacle. Consider some of the evidence.

The Rewards of Stealing One logical place to start is with the monetary income from robbery. 11 Does crime pay? The best answer is sometimes, and not very much. Many crimes are attempted but do not succeed. Even in successful crimes, the payoff for the criminal is often quite small. According to victim reports, the median loss from robbery is under $50 and the median loss from burglary is under $100. Shoplifting generally involves items of low value. Embezzlement usually involves taking money from a small business or fast-food store, and such crimes are unlikely to yield much.

Another recent review of criminal profits came to a similar conclusion. 12 The average loss in robberies and burglaries was around $80. Losses above $250 were relatively rare, reported by less than one-fourth of robbery victims. Robbing institutions instead of individuals yields more money, but not a great deal more. From police statistics, the average amount stolen from gas and service stations was only $303, and one must assume that the true average is even lower, because the smallest losses are the least likely to be reported to the police. Bank robbers average significantly higher amounts of money—sociologist Jack Katz gives an average of $2664—but this must be offset against the fact that they are also significantly more likely (around 80 percent, or four out of five) to get caught.

These data are mostly compiled from victim surveys, police reports, and insurance reports, so they look at the value from the victim’s side. The victim’s loss is not necessarily equal to the perpetrator’s gain—but unfortunately for the perpetrator, the typical difference merely reduces the already low yield of robbery. Most stolen items lose much of their value by virtue of being stolen, for the pawn shop’s price or the resale value of used appliances or jewelry is generally much lower than the actual legal value reported to the insurance agent or police. A burglary loss of a videotape machine worth $300 in terms of insurance replacement value may result in only a $50 gain for the burglar.

These differences in the cash value of stolen items exemplify the magnitude gap between victims and perpetrators. As we have seen, there is a general pattern in which the victim’s loss is larger than the perpetrator’s gain. Often the magnitude gap involves intangible factors such as the victim’s suffering compared to the perpetrator’s pleasure. With robbery and burglary, however, the difference can be measured financially. The act of stealing substantially reduces the value of the item that is taken.

Katz emphasizes one more fact about robbery that is worth considering. It is already apparent that most crimes yield fairly low amounts of money and that the amount obtained depends to a great extent on chance (that is, how much cash the victim happens to have). Still, every now and then, a robber or burglar will get lucky and succeed in garnering a substantial amount of money.

Even in such cases, however, the money is soon gone. Katz talked to many criminals about their biggest scores, and they typically said that afterward they went on a euphoric spree and ran through the money in a few days. They spent money on clothes, gambling, women, fine food, and other indulgences that soon exhausted their ill-gotten riches, leaving nothing behind. They did not invest it in real estate or mutual funds or anything that would have led to long-term improvements in their lives. Instead, they became high-rolling big shots for a few days and then were poor again, which put them in a position of needing to commit another crime to look and feel good again.

Organized Crime and Drugs Organized crime differs in several ways from casual or impulsive crime. According to recent accounts of organized crime syndicates, 13 the profits are often immense. In that sense, participation in organized crime does have instrumental benefits. Still, in the long run, the payoffs are counterbalanced by the vulnerability to being imprisoned or murdered. Members of the Mafia or other such groups may have steadier and higher incomes than other criminals, but their chances of staying out of prison and dying of natural causes are much lower than those of the average person. 14

The same applies to selling drugs, which is probably the most reliably lucrative criminal activity on today’s scene. Many people would debate whether selling drugs should even be considered as a form of evil: It simply provides people with a product they want and that gives them pleasure, it is akin to selling cigarettes or alcohol, and so forth. Still, selling drugs is illegal and is associated in the popular mind (somewhat unfairly, perhaps) with violence, and so it is worth considering as a possible form of evil.

By all accounts, there is an immense amount of money to be made in selling drugs. 15 As a way of acquiring cash, selling drugs is hard to beat—especially for someone without education, training, connections, or marketable skills. Yet it is clear that the long-term prospects are poor. Few pushers find the business to be a reliable path to the American dream of respectable financial security. The risks of being killed by rivals or captured by police are substantial, and probably they are compounded if the seller begins to take drugs, because drug use may lead to errors in judgment. Addiction is another occupational hazard.

So, selling drugs is an effective short-term source of money, but it is a high-risk occupation with relatively poor long-term prospects. You make very good money for a while, but you do not retire wealthy and bequeath a fortune to your children.

Political Murder Another form of instrumental evil, political murder, has already been brought up in several examples. Political murder (including terrorism, assassination, and the like) is usually instrumental: the pursuit of power or other political ends by violent means. Franklin Ford’s survey of political murder across many lands and eras 16 concluded that it has rarely brought about the lasting effects desired and intended by the perpetrators. Usurpers who seize power by assassinating the existing ruler tend to become victims themselves. Societies devoted to political assassination to achieve political changes, from the Moslem Assassins to the Jewish Sicarii (“Daggermen”) to the nineteenth-century anarchists, succeeded in killing quite a few eminent and powerful citizens but failed utterly to achieve the kind of sociopolitical arrangements they envisioned. Terrorists have failed to inspire popular sympathy and support; instead, there is a growing popular resentment and backlash against them. 17

Government Repression and Torture In a sense, government repression is the inverse of terrorism. Faced with internal enemies, some governments resort to evil means of clinging to power. They imprison, torture, and execute their opponents. Governments have many obvious and substantial advantages over individuals or small rebellious groups who seek to use violence to further their political ends. These advantages include the sovereign power that exempts them from foreign interference (or at least makes it less likely), legality, and control over information. The last of these can often enable them to keep most of the world from finding out about their violent acts, or at least from learning the extent of them. Probably the most dramatic illustration of this point was the Cultural Revolution in China during the 1960s. Outsiders knew that repressive measures were being taken and that people were being imprisoned, but it was not until several decades later (and, not incidentally, until after Mao, who presided over the Cultural Revolution, was dead) that the extent of the violence came to light. By early estimates, there were 2 million victims of the Cultural Revolution, which is certainly a great deal of human tragedy. More recent evidence has indicated that the true number of victims was around 10 times that many, which places the Cultural Revolution alongside the purges of Stalinist Russia as the most lethally successful mass murder campaign of all time. The Chinese rulers had managed to conceal about 90 percent of their killings from the rest of the world for decades, thereby temporarily making the Cultural Revolution seem more like a grisly internal purge than a holocaust.

How successful is government repression, in general? It must be conceded that government terror does seem to help prolong and strengthen a regime’s power, at least for a period of time. There is a substantial cost, however, in loss of legitimacy and erosion of genuine popular support. Over the past decade, most of the world has witnessed a dramatic political shift. Military dictatorships, Communist tyrannies, and other repressive governments have given way to much freer and more open societies. As this is written, the Communist regimes of Europe are almost all gone, replaced by largely democratic societies. South America and Asia have reached broad levels of political freedom almost without precedent in their authoritarian pasts. Of the remaining continents, North America and Australia have been relatively free of repressive governments for a long time, and only Africa remains as a bastion of violent, repressive governments—and even long-suffering Africa has taken some steps away from its harsh authoritarian patterns. Thus, the global picture at present suggests that terror and tyranny are somewhat unstable, temporary forms of government. They can succeed for decades, which is perhaps greater success than other forms of evil can claim, but they do not seem to be feasible as a permanent basis of power. 18

If internal terror is designed to defeat internal opposition, then one can measure its success by how that opposition fares. Judging by the experience of the former Communist nations of eastern Europe, it seems reasonable to propose that internal opposition can be silenced but not eliminated by repression and terror. The same lesson emerges from the South American tyrannies. Public criticism of the government can be almost entirely eliminated (for example, by jailing journalists who publish disagreeable stories or opinions), and private expression of dissent can be extensively suppressed if people learn that even their friends and family may betray them. But silencing dissent is not the same as generating support. When such countries do become free, there is generally an abrupt outpouring of retroactive criticism of the repressive regime. Terror seems to increase public compliance with the government, but not genuine support.

Government terror may also be analyzed in terms of specific acts of violence and oppression, as opposed to looking merely at the campaign as a whole. Torture is notably ineffective in its stated goal of gaining information. As Amnesty International has concluded, the vast majority of torture victims do not have any secret information about opposition groups to reveal to their captors, however much they may want to reveal such information to end their suffering. 19

A cynic might say that torture does succeed in eliciting information that, although inaccurate, is useful to the authorities in a twisted fashion. What generally happens is this. 20 An innocent person is taken prisoner and is accused of being an enemy of the regime (or, in the case of the Spanish Inquisition and similar torturing groups, an enemy of the dominant religious authorities and faith). Torture is applied to elicit a confession of subversive activities and information about accomplices. To believe that anyone can resist torture indefinitely is naive: Almost inevitably the body breaks down under the relentless onslaught of pain and harm, and the victim wishes to cooperate. Then ensues a hideous game: The torturers will not tell the victim what to confess (because they regard themselves as wishing to gain the truth, and forcing someone to sign a phony confession is usually not acceptable) but will not stop the torture until a satisfactory confession is produced. The victim ends up trying to guess what false confession is wanted and starts to invent all sorts of crimes, which the torturers dutifully record. They also require the victim to name accomplices, and so the victim starts naming various acquaintances as having participated in these imaginary crimes. (That is probably what led to the person’s arrest in the first place: Previous torture victims named him or her as accomplices in their phony crimes.) Although the information may be entirely false, it does give the torturers and their bureaucracy something else to do; namely, to arrest and interrogate these new accomplices until they confess, too. Many of the bloodiest purges have been sustained by this sort of domino effect in which innocent people invent crimes and name other innocent people as accomplices; the torture apparatus is kept busy and an ever-widening circle of internal enemies is identified.

Still, the identification of new victims can hardly be sufficient to label a torture operation a success. Yes, people suffer and die after confessing to crimes, and more people are arrested on the basis of those confessions, and the torture bureaucracy can get its budget increased because there seem to be more enemies than anyone suspected. But the information is mostly false. The regime gains little or nothing from torturing and executing an innocent civilian, and indeed each such death brings a small cost in terms of social disruption, weakening of legitimacy, and harm to the social fabric. In extreme cases, a large number of innocent deaths can leave a society weakened by sheer loss of manpower, as in the nearly fatal destruction of the Red Army by Stalin’s purge during the 1930s, which did more damage to the Russian officer corps than all the horrific battles of the Second World War combined. 21

Warfare War is another form of violence that is used to solve problems. In many cases it certainly does lead to some resolution of the dispute that started it. Yet whether it is a suitable long-term solution is debatable. It is necessary to consider mainly the countries that start the wars, because their opponents then have little choice except to defend themselves. Among the countries that start wars, some (such as Iraq in the memorable 1991 war over Kuwait) certainly end up losing, and so for them the resort to armed force was not an effective means. Even among the victors, however, it is likely that the hard-won benefits and advantages fall short of what they initially sought. Lands and cities are often seriously damaged by the process of conquering them. People resent ideological and institutional changes that are imposed on them by force. The victors’ human and financial costs may outweigh the value of what is gained. Sometimes, international objections or internal outcry pressure the victors into giving up part or all of what they have conquered. In general, it is not easy to find examples of modern wars in which the initial aggressor ends up fully satisfied with the outcome.

Once a war has begun, there are certainly wide variations in the extent to which combatants resort to especially evil means. Atrocities, crimes against helpless noncombatants, and the like can be examined as instances of particular evil within war. These, too, appear not to be very effective. Military prisoners were periodically massacred by the Christians during the Crusades, but it does not appear that the Christian side benefited from these outrages. The Germans executed Russian prisoners during the Second World War, but these executions did not give Germany victory. In the American Civil War, the South executed Northern officers who commanded black troops. 22 In the Spanish Civil War, both sides appear to have executed some prisoners. 23 In general, such tactics appear to reflect a policy of desperation in a losing cause, rather than being effective means to increase the likelihood of victory. Word soon gets out that prisoners are being killed, and so the enemy soldiers cease to surrender—which makes winning battles that much harder.

There is some evidence that crimes against civilians tend to be counterproductive. The Germans in World War II pioneered various tactics of total war, including the policy shift during the Battle of Britain to downplay the military targets and concentrate on breaking civilian morale by bombing London. Instead of producing a demoralized capitulation, this tactic apparently stiffened the British resolve. In the Ukraine, the German oppression against civilians was, in retrospect, a catastrophic blunder for them. Indeed, many Ukrainians hated the Soviet regime and initially welcomed the Germans as liberators, but when the Germans began killing civilians they had no choice but to side with the Russians. Later in the war, the British copied the unsuccessful German tactic. Their famous bombing of Dresden, a beautiful city without military significance, was reportedly intended to demoralize the Germans, but instead it outraged them and temporarily increased the resolve to fight on. The American bombings of North Vietnam during the Vietnam War were apparently equally useless in undermining popular support for the war; they may have just increased the will to resist, thereby contributing to the eventual American defeat.

To be sure, one can find some exceptions where systematic and atrocious massacres did reduce the will to resist. In these cases, presumably, the aggressor demonstrated that he had the power and the will to destroy all who opposed him, and so others capitulated because they realized that resistance was in fact useless and would lead only to death. The American bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki did lead to the prompt surrender of the Japanese. The Mongol massacres of cities that resisted did cause some other cities to surrender without putting up a fight. Sherman’s march through Georgia and South Carolina late in the Civil War drove home the fact that the South could no longer defend itself. The Zulu empire in southern Africa grew in part after several attention-getting massacres of resisting tribes convinced other tribes that it was better to join up voluntarily than to resist. 24 Indeed, the draconian practice of some occupation forces of executing innocent citizens as reprisals for partisan resistance does seem to have some effect of discouraging resistance, although in the long run it is hardly conducive to securing the cooperation of the conquered population.

It is apparent that excessive cruelty in war does force an enemy to realize that he is thoroughly outclassed, when the power differential is substantial and genuine. Dropping the atomic bomb on Hiroshima was in fact a demonstration that the Allies had a weapon that could destroy Japan if necessary. (It also demonstrated that they were willing to use it.) Fighting on under those circumstances was indeed doomed, futile, and suicidal. In the London and Dresden bombings, however, and in the case of periodic massacres of prisoners or hostages, no such irresistibly superior power is proved. Under those circumstances, atrocious cruelty seems merely to increase hatred and make people less willing to surrender or capitulate. Evil is thus counterproductive as a means of winning the contest; it is only useful, apparently, as a way of getting across the message that the contest is no longer a contest.

Murder and Other Violent Crimes One more class of cruel and criminal actions needs to be examined before we can draw broad conclusions about the effectiveness of instrumental evil. This class consists of individual violent crimes, ranging from domestic violence to murder. When people resort to such violence, they sometimes do seem to succeed—at least to the extent that they manage to hurt or kill someone.

The long-term effects of these actions are often very counterproductive, however. People who commit murder get arrested and find themselves in prison (and, later, burdened with a criminal record), which generally far outweighs anything they gained from the killing. A husband may win a domestic argument by beating up his spouse, but in the long run the relationship is damaged or ruined. The perpetrator’s chances of getting the victim’s love—which is a major motivation in domestic violence—are severely diminished.

There are two typical patterns of murder. 25 In the first, two people who know each other get into an argument, often over some seemingly minor or trivial matter. The argument escalates through nasty verbal exchanges to threats or minor physical violence. Finally, one pulls a gun or a knife and kills the other. Was this violence effective? The murderer can claim to have won the argument, I suppose. Still, the long-term costs tend to outweigh any benefit from winning, especially if (as is often the case) the initial dispute was indeed a trivial one. People are often sorry after they have killed or injured a family member, which is one of the most common violent crimes.

The other common pattern of homicide involves a robbery or burglary in which unexpected resistance by the victim prompts the perpetrator to use violence to get his or her way, resulting in the victim’s death. Thus, a robber may point a gun at someone and demand money, and if the victim refuses the robber may actually fire it. Or a burglar may think the house is temporarily deserted but is startled to be discovered by a member of the household and shoots that person in panic or desperation. Here again, the killing does help solve the immediate problem and facilitate the successful crime, but in the long run the perpetrator derives minimal gain and often considerable risk and cost from the murder. Objectively, after any given burglary, the burglar is worse off if he killed somebody than if he didn’t. Killing somebody brings intensive police attention, which is bad for business.

Thus, murder in general does not typically provide much benefit to the killer. Murderers are more likely than most other criminals to be caught, and so the costs and penalties associated with killing are substantially larger. The benefits, meanwhile, tend to be short-term or even negligible. 26

Adding It Up Taken together, the evidence is consistent and convincing: In the long run, violence is not a highly effective means of achieving material gain. Robbery, burglary, and other forms of stealing generally net only small amounts of money, and even people who happen to steal a large sum generally run through it quickly. There is more money in organized crime and selling drugs, but the costs are high, too, and the rate of imprisonment or premature violent death would be enough to dissuade most thoughtful people from choosing that line of work. Murder is usually regretted as a pointless and self-defeating act that brings the killer little satisfaction or benefit but produces serious problems and risks. 27

Assassination may remove a detested ruler or eliminate a rival, but it does not generally produce the desired effect in the long run; indeed, it is common for those who gain power by killing rulers to end up being killed or otherwise violently deposed themselves. Terrorism rarely or never brings about the desired political changes. Torture hardly ever elicits useful or accurate information. Severe government repression tends to turn the population against the regime, and although it can prolong such a regime’s tenuous hold on power, it does not seem to work in the long run. Starting a war often leads to defeat, and even successful wars usually carry a huge cost in terms of people, money, and property. Excessive violence within war tends to increase rather than break down resistance, except for the final stage when it can help to convince a beaten enemy that further resistance is hopeless.

This is not to say that violence never produces benefits or that it is always self-destructive. (Indeed, violence is often necessary and effective to defend oneself against violent attack. Then again, most people would not regard violent self-defense as evil.) Still, the resort to violence or other evil actions as a means toward some end is usually ineffective. Evil has a low success rate in the long run.

One must admit, however, that evil and violence do often achieve a significant measure of success in the short run. The violent person does win the argument, get the money, establish dominance, eliminate the rival, make good his claim to the disputed territory, silence dissent, or accomplish whatever other short-term goal prompted the violent response. These benefits may evaporate or seem trivial in the long run, but in the short run they are sought and gained. It is only from a broad, long-term perspective that one can say that evil means are not generally effective. They score much higher if one looks only at immediate payoffs and benefits, however small or trivial these may be.

What evil accomplishes best is to make someone else suffer. War may be a dangerous and unreliable way to benefit one’s own nation, but it does make life miserable for the enemy. Murder ends a life. Torture produces extreme states of pain and woe. Rape may not bring sexual pleasure to the rapist, but it does inflict degradation and suffering on the victim, sometimes lasting for years. (This fact, incidentally, may help explain the use of rape in war, such as the recently publicized incidents in which the various warring factions in former Yugoslavia have been reported to engage in the systematic rape of women in conquered villages. The rapes may not bring much pleasure or advantage to the victors, and they certainly do not help further the political cause, but they do dramatically compound the misery of the conquered people.) These patterns reveal the broad scope of the magnitude gap. Victims of torture, rape, murder, and other crimes suffer losses that are large compared to the benefits garnered by the perpetrators. A rape victim, for example, may suffer trauma, distress, and injury, along with a loss of sexual responsiveness, for many years thereafter. The rapist gets just a few minutes of rather limited pleasure. No matter how good those moments could feel—and apparently they typically are not that great anyway—they could not possibly measure up to the negative effects on the victim. 28

The broader implication is that evil and violence, while not generally effective in producing positive outcomes for the perpetrators, succeed in producing negative outcomes for the victims.

Even if we ignore moral issues and give full recognition to what perpetrators may gain from their violent acts, the net effect is profoundly negative. Evil makes the world a poorer, uglier, worse place, not just for the victims, but for everyone—even the perpetrators. The magnitude gap thus shows something essential about the nature of evil: Evil means are mainly effective in causing the victim to suffer seriously and disproportionately. Evil is a costly and inefficient means of securing material ends, but if one’s goal is to make the victim suffer, evil means can be quite effective.

Suffering, Dominance, and Power So, violence may not bring much in the way of direct material rewards to the perpetrator over the long run, but in the short run it can cause real harm to the victim. As a way of making people suffer, violence is thus a useful and effective way to establish dominance over another person or to defeat the other person’s dominance over you. In simple terms, violence is a tool for taking power.

At the individual level, the violent person in a relationship gains power over the other. Although there are many complex and elaborate theories about why men have generally been the rulers of their families, the evidence keeps pointing back to the simple fact that men are bigger and stronger than women and hence have always been able to enforce their superior position. Research on domestic violence tends to show that the husbands who batter their wives do so to establish their power in the family. Batterers are often men whose wives outclass or outrank them in some way, such as by earning more money or having a better education. Battering husbands also tend to adhere strongly to the belief in male superiority. They beat up their wives to shore up a weak or slipping hold on power in the family. “I have to hit her now and then to show her who’s boss” is a fairly standard comment made by such men to justify beating their wives.

Violence between parents and children follows the same pattern. Researchers have found, for example, that mothers tend to hit their young children much more than they hit their teenagers. The discrepancy is not because teenagers are so much better behaved than the younger ones; in fact, the opposite is often the case. But a woman can beat a child without fear of consequences, whereas she does not have the physical superiority to impose the same kind of physical dominance over a large teenager. 29

Looking beyond individuals, one can see the same pattern: Violence is used to gain or maintain power. There are probably very few countries in the world that do not owe their independence or current form of government to some act of violence, such as a war, revolution, or coup. Even the supposedly peace-loving United States was created through several wars: a revolution to throw off the dominance by England, a civil war to prevent the southern half of the country from seceding, a series of wars against native peoples to conquer additional territory, and a few very brutal military actions to maintain control over rebellious slaves or recalcitrant Indians.

Sociologist Jack Katz took an enlightening and detailed look at the use of violence to support interpersonal power in his analysis of the badass. 30 The badass is someone who cultivates an image of being supremely wicked, mean, and violent. Tattoos of swastikas, skulls and crossbones, snakes, bloody daggers, and other insignia may be used to create the image of a violent, evil person. The person may pick fights with others or be gratuitously mean and nasty to helpless, innocent people, among other ways of cultivating this image. The badass seeks to use violence (and related patterns) in a quintessentially irrational fashion. The badass will do nasty things that seem to have no reason and carry no practical benefit to himself.

Yet the badass does have a deeper purpose: He gains considerable power over other people by getting them to perceive him as irrationally violent. A badass is recognized as capable of turning wildly, senselessly violent for no apparent or predictable reason, and so everyone else has to be extra careful around him. Just as one might take precautions to avoid being the victim of a hurricane or tornado, one must be careful around a badass. In particular, one must take care not to offend or frustrate him, and this allows him to get his way. If his reputation is solid enough, the badass will scarcely have to do anything to use this advantage. This is the irony of the fighter who never fights because he is known to be such a dangerous fighter that no one is willing to challenge him.

The egotism of the badass is thus intimately linked with his violent nature—or rather with his violent image. So far, we have seen violence as a common response to a threat to one’s egotism, and this egotism often consists of claims to superiority that have little or nothing to do with aggression or fighting ability. With the badass, however, violence is central. The badass claims and gets respect precisely because of his aggressive nature. He represents danger and harm, and that is what gives him influence, even dominance, over other people. Violence is what makes him superior. (This superiority also raises the issue of self-esteem and egotism, which will be the theme of the next chapter.) The badass is an especially interesting case because he applies the myth of pure evil for his own benefit. The tattoos of skulls with bloody daggers thrust through them, the swastika pendants, and the other cues convey the idea that the wearer has embraced evil. Moreover, they suggest that the badass may enjoy inflicting harm on others, which is one of the central aspects of the myth of pure evil. The badass also cultivates this impression through his actions. Being mean and cruel for no apparent reason helps to reinforce the impression that he acts for the sadistic pleasure of the action, and not for any pragmatic gain. Katz gives the example of a group of young men who supported their badass reputations by entering the public library during open hours, knocking people down, making a mess, creating turmoil, and even starting a fire before running out. A couple of them were laughing so hard by the end that they could hardly keep running. Obviously, they gained nothing in practical or material terms by their acts. But that is precisely the point: They showed that they do such things for the mere pleasure of it. The elderly people walking into the library, for instance, would otherwise seem a poor choice as victims because they have little money to give and hurting them does not prove one a great fighter. Hurting them, however, does prove one to be an irrationally violent person who inflicts harm randomly for the pleasure of doing so, and that is a key part of the badass image. The innocence of the victim is, of course, another part of the myth of pure evil.

The badass uses one more crucial aspect of the myth of pure evil: chaos. As we saw in Chapter 3, the eternal images of evil combine hurting with chaos in the sense of irrationality and lack of stable order. As Katz emphasizes in his portrait of the badass, the irrationality is vital for conveying to everyone that the badass cannot be controlled or predicted, let alone understood. Most people want to live in a stable, orderly, predictable world. The badass makes it clear that he is not part of that world and does not live by those rules. By refusing to be rational, he forces other people to think irrationally and adjust themselves to him. The fear of unreasoning chaos is almost as deeply rooted in human nature as the fear of harm, and the badass plays on both fears.

Thus, we can see some benefit to violence if we look at interpersonal relations instead of material gain as the outcome. Violence, including even the mere threat of violence, is one of the main ways that people take power. Violence does not get people the material ends that they want, but it does help create and sustain a pattern of interpersonal relationships marked by power and dominance that can produce a desirable stream of minor benefits. Power pays, and violence produces power.

To be sure, violence is not always effective as a means of creating power relationships. Governments that violently repress their populations tend to lose rather than gain popular support, and in many cases this contributes to their downfall. Likewise, domestic violence does not strengthen family ties, and eventually many victims of such violence do leave the relationship if they can. Still, interpersonal dominance is probably the one outcome that violence is most effective at securing.

Violence as Self-Destruction: The Price of Living in the Present There is one more crucial point to be gained from this survey of the costs and benefits of violence that will help us understand why people perform evil acts if they are generally so ineffective. We have seen that evil can sometimes produce benefits in the short run even if these benefits tend to evaporate or be canceled in the long run. The choice of evil as a means to an end signifies a victory of the narrow over the broad time perspective. It is a victory of the present over the future, so to speak. Violence or other evil action may be an appealing or even a rational means of solving a problem, but only if the perpetrator adopts a very narrow time frame. As we saw in Chapter 2, victims have much longer and more inclusive time frames than perpetrators.

The implication is that evil is most likely to result when people are focused narrowly on the immediate present. If a perpetrator could stop and appraise the long-term effects of his actions, he might well refrain from violence. But the more he is immersed in the here and now, ignoring the long-term considerations, the greater the chance of violence.

There is another well-established pattern in which short-term gains are pursued at the expense of long-term benefits, and this is the broad category of self-defeating or self-destructive behavior. In my previous work, I have reviewed many studies of self-defeating acts, from case studies of political disasters to laboratory experiments with college students. 31 Over and over, the same pattern emerges: People mess up their chances, lose their money, make fools of themselves, and generally bring various forms of unhappiness down on their own heads by making the standard mistake of focusing excessively on short-term factors and ignoring long-term ones. 32 Other scholars working with similar facts have reached the same conclusion. Self-inflicted wounds are generally the result of adopting a very short-term focus.

The parallel between evil and self-destruction is not just a coincidence. Evil is often destructive to the perpetrator in the long run, despite the short-term goals that may be achieved. Take the all-too-familiar case in which an angry dispute between acquaintances becomes violent, resulting in the death of one at the other’s hands. Typically, the killer is sorry afterward and has nothing much to show for having won the argument. At most, perhaps, the victim has been prevented from making further insulting remarks. Meanwhile, feeling sorry is probably the least of the killer’s problems, as he is likely to face arrest, prosecution, and imprisonment, with accompanying disruptions of career and family life. Had the perpetrator been able to pause a moment during the argument and consider all the misfortune that he would be bringing down on himself by killing his acquaintance, he probably wouldn’t have done it. But the “heat of the moment” (in the common phrase) means precisely that: One does not pause to consider the long term. Being emotionally upset increases the tendency to make impulsive, risky, short-term decisions. 33 The violent person focuses only on the immediate situation, including whoever is upsetting him and the emotions that result from feeling that the other person is making him look bad. The violent act is a response only to the immediate situation.

The Victim’s Lot Unlike the other roots of evil, instrumental evil reduces the victim’s suffering to a peripheral, secondary position among the perpetrator’s concerns. The perpetrator wants something and is using violence or harm to get it. If he gets it, presumably it doesn’t matter much to him whether the victim suffers or not. The victim’s suffering is merely a means to an end. The evildoer may be totally indifferent to the victim’s fate or may even conceivably feel sorry for the victim. The perpetrator may tell himself with some truth that he did not want or intend his victim to suffer.

In an important sense, the relationship is much more casual for the perpetrator than for the victim (another sign of the magnitude gap). The perpetrator’s ability to hurt the victim is the central aspect of their relationship from the victim’s perspective. The perpetrator, however, is focused on what he may gain by that harm, and the extent of the victim’s suffering is only meaningful insofar as it promotes that goal. To care about the victim only makes the perpetrator’s task harder and more unpleasant.

The perpetrator’s indifference has several important implications for the victim. On the negative side, it means that perpetrators of instrumental evil are likely to cultivate a moral and emotional detachment from the victim’s suffering, and so it may be hard for the victim to reach the perpetrator. To the perpetrator, the victim’s life or death becomes a pragmatic rather than a moral issue. Killing the witnesses to a crime is one illustration of this attitude. The perpetrator may be reluctant to kill them and indeed probably has no personal reason to wish them any harm, but he may think that killing them is the safest course of action. Thus, small, seemingly accidental circumstances may become matters of life and death for the victim. One just happened by coincidence to witness the crime and so one’s fate is sealed, even though one had nothing to do with it other than the accidental fact of witnessing it.

This indifference was vividly illustrated by a news story several years ago. During the civil wars in Uganda, the rebels at one point took control of the capital after a fierce battle left much of it in ruins. The occupying force was busy looting the city and executing enemies. Gradually, the soldiers developed a new pastime. They would set up a small camp on the roof of one of the tall buildings and then head out to search for attractive young women. When they found one, they would tie her hands behind her back and take her at gunpoint up to the roof. Once there, several of them would rape her. When they finished, they would throw her off the roof to her death, her hands still tied behind her back.

One is tempted, as usual, to imagine this scenario from the victim’s point of view: hiding for days, hungry, scared, then captured by the enemy soldiers, being tied up, the escort at gunpoint through the town. Up to the roof, being undressed, probably beaten if you resist the rape, the pain and disgust as several men take their turns, just trying to get through that part of the ordeal, then perhaps the horror of discovering what the men will do with you when they are done. The intense screaming fright of the long fall.

Let us imagine the scene from the men’s point of view: the receding memory of the desperate fear of battle, the luxury of having a city to inhabit instead of sleeping on the ground. The gradually growing boredom of the long hot days guarding the defeated, occupied city. The close bond with the few ragged men who have shared your risk and fear and now can share whatever fun you can find. The casual killing of suspected enemies, and then the discovery of the game of hunting girls. Possibly the gang rape helps to strengthen the sense of camaraderie. Talking to one another during the event, never to the silent girl. And then, after the girl has been thrown to her death, the sense of letdown, of wondering what to do next, probably not unlike the way a group of men feels after they watch a big game on television that is over too early to go home. Perhaps they will play cards.

Presumably, the rape hunt was a sufficiently absorbing pastime to take the boredom out of the long days. Searching the houses for a suitable girl, capturing her, taking her up to the roof, undressing her, and so forth, would certainly be as absorbing as a challenging game. Rape does not usually bring a great deal of sexual pleasure, but the rapist does anticipate pleasure in advance, and at least some rapists testify that the process becomes compelling, even addicting, once one gets used to it. Even the ones who did not take part in a rape might get some stimulation, even pleasure, out of seeing an attractive girl naked, and if nothing else this would be a big improvement over the deprivation and discomfort that a rebel army has to put up with while on the move or in the field.

Yet it is shocking to imagine how someone with whom you have just had sex could mean so little to you that you could casually put her to death in such a cruel fashion. To throw a human being off a tall building, as you might throw a stone off a bridge or toss a food wrapper into a trash can, shows how extreme cruelty can derive from extreme indifference. Falling is one of the most deeply rooted innate fears in the human organism, and the moment of the fall would certainly generate an intensely horrible feeling. It is not surprising that perpetrators learn how not to empathize with the suffering of their victims. Obviously they managed to engage in sexual intercourse without feeling a shred of intimacy, for any lingering sense of connection with the victim would make it painful to kill her in such a casually cruel way. The contrast with the American rapist and murderer quoted in Chapter 2 is striking: Despite committing his horrible crimes, he said he tried to be gentle with the victims and to kill them relatively painlessly. In his own twisted fashion, he still seemed to feel some connection to his victims, enough to impel him to make a gesture toward reducing their suffering. Not so the soldiers on the roof.

Once again, it is necessary to invoke the magnitude gap. Each of these incidents meant a horrible death for the young woman, whereas to the soldiers it was only an afternoon’s diversion. In no sense did the pleasure or gain the soldiers got from hunting, raping, and killing these girls add up to anything like the loss and suffering that the victims endured.

The indifference to the victim can have a positive side, however. Victims of instrumental evil can ironically end up better off than victims of other forms of evil. Some victims may be able to save themselves or reduce their suffering by capitalizing on the pragmatic concerns of the perpetrator. The perpetrator wants something in particular, and if you give it to him there is no need for him to harm you further. The obvious example would be a robbery at gunpoint. He wants your money, not your death, and this fact does offer you a crucial chance for survival.

To be sure, it doesn’t always work. Criminologists have noted that some armed robbers seem to harm or kill their victims for no apparent reason. Even if you willingly give him your wallet and car keys, he still might shoot you. 34 But these are the exceptions. By and large, the harm stops when the perpetrators get what they want. Victims can use the perpetrator’s indifference as an opportunity to get through the incident with a minimum of harm and loss.

The dilemma may fall most heavily on victims of rape, if only because many legal rape cases turn on the issue of voluntary consent. Once she finds herself in his power, her best chance to get through with a minimum of harm may be to give him what he wants, yet if she fails to resist she may be letting him escape punishment if he is caught. The official advice to young women and girls on how to react to rape has wavered between advocating resistance and advocating submission. In the 1970s, because of the legalities, women were counseled to put up a fight, but the subsequent cost in terms of badly beaten or murdered victims has resulted in a shift toward advocating greater acquiescence.

Apart from such cases, though, the pragmatism of instrumental evil does have its advantages for the victim. The perpetrator does not primarily or essentially want the victim to suffer, and so the victim may minimize suffering by appealing to this pragmatic sense. For many victims, the difficulty may be in setting their own perspective aside and understanding the situation in the perpetrator’s instrumental terms. It is quite hard to set aside concern over one’s own suffering and possible death. But if the perpetrator can achieve his goal without the victim’s suffering, the victim may manage to avoid the worst.





