CHAPTER

5

Egotism and Revenge Two centuries ago, in southern Africa, before anyone took notice of the handful of white settlers, an independently minded young woman developed a romantic crush on the prince, who was just ascending to the chieftain’s throne. They were from the same clan and distantly related, so marriage was impossible, but flirtations were allowed, and indeed local customs among the Bantu permitted unmarried young men and women to have sexual contacts as long as they did not actually have intercourse. The woman contrived to meet the young chief on the road one day, and they had a very pleasant and passionate fling that afternoon.

Unfortunately, they did not manage to stay within the permitted bounds, and the chief soon received the unwelcome message that the young lady was pregnant. Acknowledging the pregnancy would mean disgrace and humiliation for the clan, and so the elders sent back word that the woman must merely be suffering from an iShaka, that is, a small beetle that in Bantu folklore was regarded as the cause of menstrual cramps and problems. Several months later, the chief received another, slightly sarcastic, message that it was time for him to collect the woman and her menstrual bug.

The chief tried to do the decent thing. He quietly brought the woman to live with him as his third wife, but the relationship was tempestuous, and the stigma of disgrace lingered over the woman and her infant. Some years later, he had finally had too much—some reports suggest that the boy had now become troublesome, too, losing one of the chief’s goats through carelessness—and so he sent her back to her people. Good riddance, he thought. He had other wives and other sons, one of whom was clearly the heir to the Zulu throne. (At the time, the Zulus were a small Bantu tribe.) Back in her village, the woman was treated badly. She had disgraced the village, and she had no man to support and protect her. To make matters worse, her strong-willed, opinionated, argumentative nature and sharp tongue made enemies. She and little Shaka (the unfortunate name had stuck) spent years living among people who despised and tormented them. The fatherless, stigmatized boy was regarded as fair game, and the other boys beat him up and humiliated him regularly for sport. By some accounts, he was also unfortunate in having very small genitals, which everybody could see given the near nakedness in summer, and they humiliated him about this, too. He grew up without friends, a lonely and bitter lad who was routinely picked on by everybody else. He was constantly reminded that he held the lowest status and esteem in the village and that everybody was above him and his grumpy, outcast mother.

The story probably would have ended like most such stories, with the boy either being driven off and killed or gradually accepted into a peripheral role in the village, but for one unexpected development: Shaka grew up to be a formidable giant of a man, nearly a foot taller than the average and well muscled from the years of having to fight all the other boys. Also, although it was not evident yet, he was intellectually brilliant, which had probably helped him through a few rough scrapes. The distant emperor was always looking for warriors, and Shaka was recruited to fight for him. By some accounts, he escaped the village at the last minute, when his enemies were plotting to kill him because they thought he was becoming dangerous to them.

He was remarkably successful in the military. Not only was he one of the most fearsome warriors in the army, he also proved to be extremely intelligent and creative. Bantu warfare at the time was highly ritualized, but the bitter young man detested the local traditions as much as he hated his many enemies, and when given a small command he began to introduce innovations to make his battles much more efficient and devastating. He liked being in charge. Following traditional customs for ritualized, half-assed war was a waste of time, he thought; far better to attack with planning and annihilate your enemies. His troop racked up the victories.

After years of service, the emperor decided to reward Shaka by making him king of the Zulus after their current chief (Shaka’s father, who had repudiated him) died. The Zulus were minor-league nobodies far from the center of the empire, and the emperor wanted Shaka to build a friendly buffer state between him and his distant enemies. Shaka quickly arranged for his father’s official heir (his half brother) to be murdered, and he consolidated his power. He then began to transform the sleepy clan into a powerhouse, using the military techniques he had developed in the emperor’s army. Once his new army was ready, he began to conquer his local neighbors. He offered them the chance to join him or fight him, and as his reputation spread, many took the option of joining him, even though it meant submitting to a foreign power without a fight.

And so it came to pass that the village where he had grown up as a lonely outcast boy lay in his path. What happened next reads like the fantasies of a child who has been tormented and beaten for years with no recourse. Shaka’s crack troops surrounded the unsuspecting village before dawn. When the sun came up, the Zulus entered, and there was almost no resistance. Normally, the towns that surrendered without resistance were allowed to join the Zulus with no casualties, but Shaka had scores to settle. The entire population was made to assemble in front of him. Everyone he remembered was made to stand in one line.

Shaka went through the line and identified the handful of people who had ever done him a favor or been kind to his mother. These few individuals probably could not remember what friendly good deed they might have done casually many years ago, but he remembered. Each one received a nice gift and was set free—but Shaka advised them to stick around and see how much their past kindness was worth.

He then turned to the rest, the ones who had picked on him, teased him, beaten him up, played mean jokes on his mother, snubbed him, or otherwise humiliated him. One by one, they were impaled on sharp stakes taken from the corral fences. Those big and sharp wooden stakes were pounded very far up into the victim’s rectum, causing internal bleeding and tissue damage and making for a sure but slow death. The people he hated suffered in the hot African sun all day. As evening fell, Shaka ordered his men to set fire to the wooden stakes, and those of his enemies who had remained alive through the day were burned to death. 1

Shaka’s story is a classic of revenge. He had suffered over years, and the suffering included both physical pain and the less visible injuries of humiliation and disgrace. He was the son of a king, a chief, but he was treated as an outcast and a bastard. Years later, he came back as a king and a commander of a small but superb army, and he exacted his full measure of revenge. The historical record is silent on what he did between the dawn raid and the evening bonfire, but it is safe to bet that he spent much of the time watching and listening to these people he had hated for years. (He was not a squeamish man.) He probably wanted to see them realize how wrong they had been to show disrespect to him, to underestimate him, to treat him in a humiliating or condescending way.

In the last chapter, I assessed the pragmatic effectiveness of violence. That effectiveness is generally low and erratic. The main exception is that violence is an effective way to make the other person suffer. By and large, one can conclude that violence and other evil means are unreliable for gaining material rewards or changing circumstances to fit one’s preferences, but they are good for causing someone else to feel pain. The exception is far from trivial, and it is especially important when what the perpetrator wants is precisely to make someone else suffer.

One such case is that of revenge. Sometimes people believe they have suffered some grievance or affront. Maybe there is no way to undo the harm or loss they have suffered, but they still want to make the person who hurt them suffer. Violence and similar measures are quite effective in such cases.

The death penalty provides a good example. When someone has been murdered, the victim’s family often wants the killer to be given the death penalty. Clearly, this measure will fall far short of undoing the loss they have suffered. As opponents of capital punishment like to point out, killing the murderer will not bring the victim back to life. In fact, it seems that the victim’s family gains very little in most cases by having the murderer put to death. They do, however, get revenge and any satisfaction that goes with it.

Families of victims often take this very seriously. Indeed, occasionally there is someone among the victim’s family who does not believe in the death penalty and says publicly that the killer should not be executed. Such individuals are often subjected to extreme pressure by others, including even the families of other victims having no relation to the case. They are told they are traitors. They get insulting phone calls late at night, even threats. Sometimes people suggest that they must not have loved the victim very much if they fail to demand the death penalty for the killer. 2

What prompts people to take strong measures to get revenge? The main answer appears to be threats to their self-esteem. A great deal of human violence is perpetrated by people who feel that someone has threatened or damaged their self-esteem. Being humiliated, embarrassed, treated with disrespect, made a fool of, or otherwise attacked on this dimension of worthiness is an important cause of violence, because it creates strong urges to take revenge.

Pride—love of self, self-esteem, egotism—is an important element in Shaka’s story. He was not simply getting even for having been cheated in some practical or material way. He was getting back at people who had put him down. As we will see, egotism lies behind most of the violent acts of revenge.

In Christian scripture and theology, Satan’s first sin was neither murder nor rape, nor was it greed or sloth. It was pride. Satan, the ultimate incarnation of all things bad, embarked on his evil career by loving himself more than God. 3

Although the religious view of evil has often emphasized arrogance and self-love, modern views have become more complex, and modern Western culture has come to regard self-esteem as a valuable resource and virtue. The difference in attitude is apparent in the connotations of common terms: self-esteem is seen as positive and desirable, whereas conceited or arrogant still carry a negative value. Yet both refer to what can simply be called egotism—the attitude of thinking very well of oneself.

This chapter will focus on revenge and egotism as causes of evil. In principle, revenge and egotism are two separate things. Revenge involves getting even for some wrong or loss, and egotism involves thinking well of oneself. Certainly, one can pursue revenge for something that has no element of egotism, and feelings of superiority could lead to violence even when there is no clear element of revenge. But such cases turn out to be relatively uncommon. Egotism and revenge probably overlap most of the time. Threats to self-esteem form the main category of things over which people seek violent revenge.

The link between egotism and revenge was shown by an important laboratory experiment conducted by Bert Brown. 4 This clever experiment, which was Brown’s doctoral dissertation, was designed to see when people would become so intent on getting even that they would be willing to incur costs to themselves. Participants in the experiment, all young men, were told to pretend that they owned a small trucking company. They could earn real money by driving their trucks along a road, in a sort of primitive video game. The catch was that one of them controlled a stretch of the road that both of them needed to use, and he had the option of charging the other a toll to use that section of road. One person thus had the opportunity to take advantage of the other. In the experiment, this person was actually a confederate working with the experimenter and merely pretending to be another subject. He used his advantage frequently, so that the real subject lost out on a fair amount of the money he could have earned.

In the second part of the experiment, the roles were reversed. Now the real subject had the opportunity to control that precious stretch of road and to charge tolls. Obviously, this gave him a chance to get even. The experimenter told the real subject, however, that if he charged tolls he would have to pay “road taxes” on a sliding scale. Low tolls carried small taxes and so were still profitable. High tolls, however, carried larger and larger proportional taxes, and in the extreme case the subject who charged the maximum toll would lose money: He would pay taxes exceeding his total income from tolls. Thus, the subject could get even in the sense of hurting the other guy, but it would cost him money rather than benefiting him. Moreover, the only reason he was doing the experiment was to get money; it didn’t make sense to spend that money just to punish somebody he’d never see again. It would be a costly form of revenge.

Most of the participants in the experiment did not want revenge that badly. They charged their opponent low tolls to recoup some of their losses, but they stopped short of the high tolls that would have cost them money, too. Thus, they sought only a limited form of revenge: They wanted to use their advantage to make back some of the money they had lost when the other guy had been in control, but they only wanted to hurt him as long as there was direct benefit to themselves.

There was, however, one crucial exception, in which people went all out to get revenge on the other person even if they themselves would lose real money on the deal. These people had been deeply affected by one further feature of the experiment. During the intermission, the experimenter told each subject that there was an audience of observers who were forming impressions of the subjects, and the experimenter told the subject what the audience had thought of him. Actually, these evaluative messages were also part of the experiment; they were prepared in advance and assigned to the subject at random, regardless of what he had done. Some subjects were told that, even though they had lost money when the other charged tolls, they still made a good impression for “playing it straight.” Others, however, were told that the confederate had made them “look like a sucker” by charging those tolls. Think of it: the other guy had made a fool of you, in the opinion of several other people who had observed the whole thing.

These summaries about how the subject had supposedly come across made all the difference. Over and over, the guy who believed that he had been humiliated, made to “look like a sucker,” went all out for extreme revenge. He charged the highest tolls even though to do so cost him money instead of bringing him profits. He was willing to give up some of his own money to punish the confederate who had embarrassed him. In contrast, those who were told that the audience still respected them did not seek the extreme revenge.

These experimental results have important and far-reaching implications for understanding the psychology of violence, oppression, and other evils. When someone does something bad to you, you are likely to seek to get even, but your efforts probably remain pragmatic and rational: You want to get back what you have lost, but that is normally the extent of it. You certainly do not want to lose any more money (or time or other resources) just to punish the person whose actions cost you. In contrast, however, if the person has not only taken your money but also hurt your pride, you will go to much greater lengths to get even. When responding to a blow to one’s self-esteem or public image, people will accept further costs and losses to hurt the person who humiliated them.

The laboratory experiment involved only a simulation, but the dilemma is comparable to one that is often faced by people who have suffered some grievance at the hands of another. Often the quest for revenge involves significant costs and risks to the self. An individual who pursues someone out of a grievance puts considerable time and effort into that pursuit, and attacking that person often carries the risk of being hurt or even killed in the process. Likewise, nations that start wars over blows to national pride incur the costs of war, including the deaths of soldiers, the often huge expenses of paying for war, and damage to property. There is also the risk of losing the war, in which case the costs might far exceed what was suffered in the initial provocation.

A common and important cause of evil is the quest to avenge blows to one’s pride. Dangerous people, from playground bullies to warmongering dictators, consist mainly of those who have highly favorable views about themselves. They strike out at others who question or dispute those favorable views. 5

But What about Low Self Esteem?

Before we proceed to examine the links between threatened egotism and violence, it is necessary to acknowledge that many people hold the opposite belief. My conclusion that violent people tend to have highly favorable opinions of themselves runs directly contrary to a well-entrenched view that low self-esteem is a major cause of violence. The argument runs something like this. Those who commit crimes and other acts of violence suffer from an inner sense of worthlessness. They believe that the world fails to appreciate them. By striking out, they are trying to gain esteem and prove their positive worth to a doubting world. If society could only provide these unfortunates with a good feeling about themselves, they would not act violently, and crime would be vastly reduced or even ended. This argument is plausible on the surface. It has wide-ranging appeal because it helps people to sympathize with those who commit evil acts and because it fits the attractive notion that we are all doing a good deed by loving ourselves more.

The view that low self-esteem causes violence and aggression has become commonplace. Many scholars assert it routinely, without even bothering to provide evidence or support for it. Consider just this smattering of examples from recent scholarly works that have reiterated that claim. David E. Long 6 said that low self-esteem and feelings of inadequacy are prominent traits among terrorists. Elijah Anderson claimed that low self-esteem is a major cause of violence among youth gangs. Claire Renzetti summarized the prevailing view that low self-esteem creates jealousy and possessiveness in close relationships, and these in turn lead to domestic violence (her work was on lesbian relationships). Edward W. Gondolf said that most researchers on domestic violence by men assume that low self-esteem prompts these men to beat their wives, although he added that the evidence to back up this assumption is very weak. John M. MacDonald said that armed robbers “lack self-esteem.” David D. Kirschner discussed several cases in which adopted children had killed their new fathers, and he proposed that the young killers suffered from low self-esteem. Martin Sanchez Jankowski said that violence among gang members resulted from “self-contempt.” Jack Levin and Jack McDevitt noted that low self-esteem is generally understood to be an important cause of hate crimes. Vernon Wiehe said that low self-esteem is one possible reason that children beat or hurt their brothers and sisters. Hans Toch said that men who get into violent fights with strangers suffer from low self-esteem. C. G. Schoenfeld proposed that the high crime rate among modern American black citizens is a result of the low self-esteem among blacks that can be traced back to slavery. R. Kim Oates and Douglas Forrest asserted that abusive mothers have low self-esteem. Erwin Staub’s book on genocide said that the traditional view among a broad assortment of researchers is that low self-esteem is responsible for all manner of violence. 7

Staub is right: That is surely the traditional view. But that doesn’t mean it’s correct. Could the link between low self-esteem and violence be a mirage?

There is ample reason to question whether low self-esteem is to blame for violence. Think of the obnoxious, hostile, or bullying people you have known—were they humble, modest, and self-effacing? (That’s mainly what low self-esteem is like.) Most of the aggressive people I have known were the opposite: conceited, arrogant, and often consumed with thoughts about how they were superior to everyone else.

If one looks away from one’s own acquaintances to the world’s most notoriously violent individuals, the same pattern can be seen. When embarking on their aggressive campaigns, Saddam Hussein and Adolf Hitler were enormously confident and arrogant, adored by millions of followers. Indeed, the Nazi claim to be the “Master Race” suggests that they believed in their collective superiority, not inferiority. Idi Amin was hardly a shy or humble person. Stalin and Mao had high opinions of themselves. One can easily go on listing such cases. Meanwhile, it is hard to find contrary examples. Few of history’s great conquerors, oppressors, or butchers were humble or modest or showed other clear signs of low self-esteem.

If low self-esteem causes violence, then one would expect that large groups or categories of people who have low self-esteem would also show high rates of violence. Indeed, it would be worth comparing the crime rates of groups that are known to differ in self-esteem. These comparisons almost uniformly point to the opposite of the low self-esteem theory. 8 Let us consider a few of them.

The obvious place to start is to compare men and women. Men have somewhat higher self-esteem than women, as reflected in the arrogance of “the male ego” and the female patterns of insecurity, lack of assertiveness, and depression. Yet on almost any measure of violence or aggression, men score higher. In laboratory studies using identical situations and provocations, men tend to respond more aggressively than women by about one-third of a standard deviation. Outside the laboratory, the differences are much larger. Men commit the majority of crimes and the vast majority (around 90 percent) of violent crimes. In fact, a woman’s chances of being severely beaten up or murdered by another woman whom she doesn’t know are negligible. A man’s chances of being similarly hurt by a male stranger are much larger, and among young men such violent contacts between strangers are one of the leading causes of death. The only kind of violence in which women approach or equal men is domestic violence, and we will return to this shortly. In general, there is no question that women are less violent than men.

Another test would compare depressed people with those who are not depressed, because there is fairly solid and convincing evidence that low self-esteem is correlated with depression. Certainly, mental illness in general can be linked to violence and aggression, and criminals score higher than the general population on several measures of mental illness. But depression is not one of them. According to the report of the National Research Council, 9 depression has not generally been linked with crime or violence (unlike other mental disturbances). The only exception was that there seemed to be some link to domestic violence, and even those findings were inconclusive or ambiguous. In particular, it seemed likely that depression was the result rather than the cause of family violence.

Psychopaths are another relevant group. They form a small minority of the population but commit a disproportionately large share of the crimes, especially violent crimes. Although some experts regard psychopaths as abnormal, they are not mentally ill in the usual sense. They function reasonably well in society, they are well in touch with reality, and their actions are freely chosen rather than being driven by compulsions or irresistible urges. Do these nasty, callous predators show any signs of low self-esteem? One expert, Robert Hare, who thinks they commit about half the serious crimes in the United States and Canada, describes them as having a “narcissistic and grossly inflated view of their self-worth and importance.” He adds that they regard themselves “as superior beings” and generally seem to think and act as if they were the center of the universe. 10 In fact, one reason they seem to feel no regret about using or exploiting other people is that they regard other people as inferior.

Comparing blacks and whites in the United States is a sensitive issue, partly because some possible conclusions may be unacceptable for political reasons. Yet those comparisons are especially valuable for examining the link between self-esteem and violence, for one important reason. The past century has seen a big shift in self-esteem between blacks and whites. For many years, white Americans were secure in their sense of racial superiority over blacks. It is generally agreed that this white self-confidence has eroded, partly due to collective guilt over having exploited and oppressed black people. In addition, various movements to boost black pride started around the 1960s. They seem to have succeeded very well. A recent overview of scholarly research studies on self-esteem concluded that, if there is any difference at all, it is black Americans who have higher self-esteem. Many studies have found no difference, and some have found blacks to score higher on self-esteem than whites. 11

Thus, the self-esteem of black citizens has risen substantially, relative to that of whites, during the twentieth century. And the shift in relative self-esteem has been accompanied by a shift in crime rates. But the shift goes directly opposite to the theory that low self-esteem causes violence. Although precise statistics from the 1800s are hard to come by, it is fairly clear that white people killed black people far more often than the reverse. Even into the 1920s, the pattern of whites killing blacks was more prevalent than blacks killing whites. 12 Recent murder statistics show a dramatic reversal of this trend. Today, blacks kill whites 5 to 10 times more often than whites kill blacks. 13 The meaning of this statistic may be debated, but it appears indisputable that there has been a major reversal in the statistical pattern of interracial murder.

The same shift can be found in statistics on interracial rape. Historians believe that, despite all the hype about black men raping white women (for example, in the Old South), such rapes were actually quite rare. In contrast, white men raped black women with much greater impunity and frequency, dating back to the days of slavery. 14 Even white Northern soldiers who were fighting to defeat the South and free the slaves committed rape against some of them. The Union soldiers by and large raped very few of the Southern (white) women in the areas they conquered, especially in comparison with other armies in civil wars and comparable circumstances. But they did engage in a certain amount of raping of black women. Somehow it just seemed OK, because black women were considered inferior beings and hence fair game.

Today, however, black men rape white women about 10 times more often than white men rape black women. 15 One scholar, Gary D. LaFree, compiled a great many studies of interracial rape statistics and showed an impressive pattern of temporal change. Earlier in this century, all studies found a preponderance of white-on-black rape. Studies done in the 1950s found that the numbers of white-on-black and black-on-white rapes were about equal. Since 1960, every single study has found black-on-white rapes to be more common than white-on-black. 16 The key point is that the sharp rise in black violence toward whites coincided roughly with the movements aimed at raising pride and self-esteem among blacks. High self-esteem apparently leads to more raping, contrary to the low self-esteem view.

Now, I don’t want anyone to use these statistics to fan the flames of racial antagonism. Personally, I do not see that there is any moral high ground in these numbers to be claimed by either group. Both blacks and whites have committed far too many horrible crimes, and both should concentrate on their own shame rather than pointing fingers elsewhere. The relevant point is this: Racial pride and feelings of superiority seem to go with violence toward others, and this is apparently true of both blacks and whites. Perhaps it is merely one of the sadder, uglier signs that basic human nature is the same in whites and blacks.

Parallel evidence about temporal patterns in violence and self-esteem can be seen by looking at people who suffer from manic-depressive (now called bipolar) disorder. 17 This illness is marked by wide mood swings. On some days, the person feels euphoric, energetic, eager to tackle new challenges and ready to conquer the world. On other days, the person feels hopeless, helpless, worthless, and miserable. Feelings of self-esteem ride right along on this roller coaster. Which phase is associated with violent, aggressive actions and hostility toward others? Mainly the manic state—that is, the one marked by exaggeratedly high self-esteem. 18

A last group worth examining is people who have consumed alcohol. The evidence about alcohol and aggression is extensive and quite clear. Alcohol is neither necessary nor sufficient to cause violence, so it is just a contributing cause (a moderator)—but it is a big and powerful moderator nonetheless. Numerous separate studies of murder, rape, and assault have repeatedly found that the majority of violent crimes are committed by people who have been drinking. 19 Laboratory experiments have likewise confirmed that alcohol intensifies aggressive tendencies. 20 That is, although alcohol does not by itself make people act aggressively, intoxicated persons will respond more aggressively when provoked than will sober persons.

The question then is what happens to self-esteem under the influence of alcohol. Several recent studies have found that alcohol makes people more egotistical. 21 After drinking, people rate themselves more favorably. In short, drinking alcohol causes a temporary boost in self-esteem.

Over and over, then, we find that groups with higher self-esteem are more violent and aggressive than others. When self-esteem rises, violence rises too. These patterns do not quite prove that high self-esteem causes violence, because they are mostly based on groups, and it could be that the violent acts are committed by the few people in the group who do not share the egotism of the rest. Then again, if low self-esteem really causes violence, it would be reasonable to expect that most groups with higher self-esteem would have lower rates of violence. But the opposite is the case.

Thus, the widespread and traditional theory that links violence to low self-esteem should be discarded. Many researchers have alluded to it, and some recent social policy in the United States appears to be based on it, but on close inspection not much is provided in the way of proof or evidence. The low self-esteem theory is contradicted by everyday experience and by large masses of statistics. Low self-esteem does not cause violence.

Ego Threats and Insecure Arrogance Is there is any connection between how people regard themselves and how they treat others? We have seen that groups that have a sense of superiority tend to be more violent than others. Does this mean that high self-esteem causes aggression?

No. At least, not by itself. Plenty of people have high self-esteem and don’t go about harming strangers or taking advantage of their neighbors. High self-esteem, by itself, is not always or inevitably a cause of violence. As we will see shortly, most violent people have high opinions of themselves, but most people with high opinions of themselves are not violent. Violent people are an important but distinct, atypical minority of people with high self-esteem.

The most potent recipe for violence is a favorable view of oneself that is disputed or undermined by someone else—in short, threatened egotism. The roots of violence lie in the gap between a highly favorable self-appraisal and a bad appraisal by somebody else. The person you hit is the person who has just told you that you are not as wonderful as you thought.

There are two possible ways to react to a bad evaluation. 22 One is to accept it as correct, which means revising your opinion of yourself downward. In general, people hate to do this. Damage to self-esteem is usually accompanied by unpleasant emotional states: sadness, depression, disappointment, anxiety, shame. These are all feelings that are focused on the self, and they are miserable.

The other option is to reject the bad evaluation as wrong. This choice allows you to preserve your favorable opinion of yourself, and it is the one that people prefer. It does leave the evaluation hanging out there, however: How could that person say that to you, if it is not true? The usual answer is that there is something wrong with that person. He (or she) must be obnoxious, unfair, biased, stupid, or unreasonably antagonistic toward you. The most common and appropriate emotional reaction to such an evaluation is anger. Anger is unpleasant, but it is directed outward at the other person, not at yourself. That is how aggression gets started.

This choice point can be seen almost anywhere people receive bad evaluations. Romantic rejection is as good a place as any to provide examples. Consider the fairly common case in which a young couple goes on several dates, but when the man wants to continue and get more serious, the woman declines and says they should stop dating. 23 There are two ways for the young man to react. One is to feel depressed and humiliated: He wasn’t good enough for her. He may lose confidence and withdraw socially for a while. He may wonder what is wrong with him, or he may ruminate about what he did wrong and why he didn’t measure up to her standards. He may contemplate his future in terms of less desirable women. These are depressing thoughts.

Alternatively, he may simply get mad at her and blame her. Her expectations were unrealistic, absurd, unfair. There was nothing wrong with him. This response allows him to go on thinking well of himself, and indeed he may believe that his next romantic partner will be just as attractive and even more desirable overall than the one who dumped him, because he tells himself he will make sure not to get involved with “another neurotic bitch.” If he had known from the start that she would turn out to be some kind of frigid, ambivalent, man-hating nut case, he wouldn’t have wasted that much of his time and money on her. Fortunately, such reactions do not lead to physical violence in most cases, but insults and other verbal abuse are common.

Psychologists have long recognized that emotions are linked to aggression, but theories about this link have changed repeatedly. A standard view for several decades was that frustration led to aggression, but closer study has shown that it is not that simple. Not all frustrations produce aggression, and not all aggression derives from frustrations. Another standard view is that anger leads to aggression, but again the evidence shows that some anger doesn’t produce aggression and some aggression doesn’t involve anger. 24

These facts can be explained by exaiming the bad evaluation and the choice of responses. There will be unpleasant emotional reactions in either case, because receiving a bad evaluation is just one of those experiences that is likely to make one feel bad. But aggression follows only from the reaction that denies the validity of the bad evaluation and produces emotions that are directed toward the other person. If you blame the other person for frustrating you, you may want to hit that person; but if you blame your own inadequacies for your frustrations, you are less likely to want to attack anybody else.

Envy provides a good example, because it can lead to either reaction. Envy is what you feel when someone else has something you want. The fact that somebody else got the promotion, the house, the girlfriend, or the award you wanted could mean that the other person was more deserving than you—or it could mean that the other person used some kind of unfair advantage.

Thus, envy presents us with a threat to self-esteem and a choice point. Researchers have found that the choice of response makes a crucial difference in whether hostility ensues. 25 If you decide that the other person got what you sought because he or she was more worthy or deserving, you may feel depressed or disappointed, and your self-esteem may suffer, but you do not tend to become hostile. In contrast, if you preserve your self-esteem by concluding that the other person got what you sought unfairly, unjustly, or inappropriately, then you are more likely to feel hostility toward him or her.

Riots, revolutions, and other violent uprisings by poor people also illustrate this difference. Poor people have probably always envied rich people, but they have not always reacted by burning, looting, and killing. It is injustice, not inequality, that breeds riots. It is mainly when poor people come to think that their poverty is unfair that they burst into violence.

Who Turns Violent, and When I have proposed that ego threats—that is, the combination of high self-esteem and an external, unflattering evaluation—are the principal cause of violence. This formula provides a useful key for predicting just which people are most likely to become violent and aggressive. Specifically, the people who are most prone to encounter ego threats are the most likely to respond violently. Anything about a person that makes him or her more likely to receive bad evaluations from other people will increase the odds of a hostile response.

Inflated Self-Esteem One simple conclusion would be that high self-esteem per se leads to aggression. Suppose on a scale of 1 to 10 you rate yourself as a 9. Then any time someone tells you anything else, from 1 to 8, it will be an ego threat, because the evaluation is lower than your self-appraisal. In contrast, if you only rate yourself as a 3, then ego threats are limited to ratings of 1 or 2. If somebody rates you as a 5, you will be pleased and flattered if your self-appraisal was a 3 and deeply insulted if you regarded yourself as a 9. By this reasoning, the higher your opinion of yourself, the more likely you are to get ego threats, and hence the more prone to violence you would be.

There is one flaw in that reasoning. Feedback is not random. It seems fair to assume that there is a large dose of reality underlying the feedback we receive. Maybe the person who thinks he’s a 9 is in fact so competent that he will never be evaluated as a 5—he will receive evaluations mainly of 8, 9, or 10. (If only life were so fair and consistent!) It seems likely that, on average, everyone receives evaluations that cluster around his or her true level. In that case, everyone would receive about the same number of ego threats.

There is one important exception to that argument, however. Yes, if you think you’re a 9 and you really are a 9, then maybe you will mostly hear favorable evaluations. But if you think you’re a 9 and you’re actually only a 6, then you are likely to receive ego threats quite often. That is, your daily experiences will tend to be telling you that you are a 6, and this will constantly upset you if you think you are a 9.

The point of this argument is that those who harbor inflated self-esteem will be likely to encounter a relatively large number of ego threats—and hence be prone to hostile, aggressive, or violent responses. It is conceited people who will be the bullies. People who think they’re better than they really are will be the dangerous ones.

Violent people certainly do show plenty of signs of inflated self-esteem, even apart from the few maniacs like Adolf Hitler and Saddam Hussein who seemed to think they were gods. Some remarkable comments emerged from Diana Scully’s interviews with convicted rapists. 26 She said many of these men spontaneously bragged to her about both their sexual prowess and other supposed accomplishments. Many of them described themselves as “multitalented superachievers,” a claim that seems quite out of touch with reality when coming from someone who is in prison. 27

The gap between self-concept and reality has become a new focus of research on domestic violence. Most of this research has examined violence by men, partly because male violence is a more serious social problem than female violence. Early studies assumed that low self-esteem must be a cause of domestic violence, and indeed some comments by victims did depict their male partners as suffering from low self-esteem. 28 Yet, as we have seen, one cannot rely solely on victims’ interpretations. A female victim of battering may say that her abusive husband suffers from low self-esteem, because that is much more optimistic and also better for her than to say that she has married an irresponsible, violent pig who lacks self-control. When researchers began to conduct careful prospective studies of family violence, however, the evidence for low self-esteem disappeared. 29

The new buzzword among researchers on family violence is status inconsistency. Status inconsistency refers to some serious contradiction among the various signs of the man’s status. For instance, a man might hold a Ph.D. while his job is driving a taxi. Several important and carefully conducted studies have found that status inconsistency is a typical part of the picture of the violent, abusive husband. 30

Status inconsistency is an important step forward in understanding domestic violence. I think, however, that the concept is misleading in one crucial respect: Not all status inconsistencies lead to violence. In fact, some kinds of status inconsistency seem to reduce family violence.

This problem with status inconsistency was apparent in the landmark study that introduced the concept. 31 The researchers certainly did provide a great deal of evidence to show the importance of some forms of status inconsistency. For example, conventional wisdom supposed that housewives would be victims of battering more often than working wives, but the researchers found the opposite to be true. The reason, they concluded, was that nonworking housewives do not threaten their husband’s superior status. But a woman who earns her own money could create status inconsistency for her husband, who might regard himself as the breadwinner but then find that his wife is bringing home a bigger check.

The most important findings, however, involved gaps between education and occupation (for example, career prestige and salary). In these findings, inconsistency had strong but opposite effects. On the one hand, men who had earned high qualifications but who had poor careers were exceptionally violent as a group. In fact, they were six times more likely than average to perpetrate severe violence against their wives. So far, so good for the status inconsistency theory: inconsistency breeds marital abuse. On the other hand, though, men who had poor qualifications but exceptionally successful careers—for example, someone who had dropped out of school but then worked his way up to a high executive position in a corporation—were six times less likely than average to beat their wives severely.

The status inconsistency is the same in both cases: high education and unsuccessful career, or low education and successful career. Yet the effects on violence are opposite. How can this apparent paradox be resolved?

Threatened egotism provides a key. The men who had impressive qualifications probably thought they deserved to be successful, and when life failed to confirm these expectations, they tended to turn violent and take it out on their wives. In contrast, men who had poor credentials most likely had much lower expectations. When their career success surpassed those expectations, they may have noticed the inconsistency, but their egos were not threatened. Thus, the violent husband is the man who thinks his daily life is not confirming his exalted opinion of himself.

A historical study of wife beating around the beginning of the twentieth century shows the same results and points to the same conclusion. 32 The historian, David Peterson, began with the standard view that the typical wife-beater would be an all-powerful family tyrant, but the evidence painted quite a different picture. Most of the abusive husbands turned out to be men who lacked money, education, and other resources or signs of status. In particular, many lacked status relative to their wives, such as if the wife came from a richer family or had a higher level of education than the husband. Peterson thought that this lack of status would lead to low self-esteem, and so he was puzzled to find that everything these men said indicated that they believed strongly that the man should be king in his own house. They believed in the traditional family concept, including especially the idea of male superiority. Peterson said that the implications for self-esteem were thus contradictory.

They are not contradictory, though, in terms of threatened egotism. In fact, they make perfect sense. The men Peterson studied believed strongly in male superiority, but they found themselves in a situation in which their wives surpassed them in some way. They probably feared that other people might think they were not kings in their household, because their wives had a better education or more money. They may have feared that their wives would not look up to them, as they thought a woman should. And so they dominated their wives physically.

A good illustration of this pattern is provided in a recent study of marital rape, published by David Finkelhor and Kersti Yllo. 33 Ross, the man in the story, was in his late 30s. He had a good education, but his business had not gone well, and indeed at the time of the study he had lost his insurance agency and was trying to start a new small business. He had not had much experience with girls, and he clung to his one high school girlfriend all through college, finally marrying her afterward. Her family was richer than his, and he felt that they looked down on him. “I wasn’t good enough because I didn’t go to Harvard or Yale” was how he recalled their condescending attitude toward him.

The marriage was a struggle right from the start. He thought that she wanted to control everything and that this desire caused her always to insist on something contrary to whatever he had decided. Reading between the lines, one can infer that he was just as intent on being the boss. Looking back after the divorce, he described the marriage as “an endless battle of wills”—and one in which she was usually the victor. They had many arguments and fights, and he began to perceive everything she said or did as an attack on his pride. She gloried in humiliating him, he thought.

She also withheld sex from him. In his view, her prudish Victorian upbringing had left her with only a minor interest in sex for her own sake, and so she used sex to manipulate him. She told him sometimes that if he wanted to have sex he ought to earn it, and he took this to mean that he wasn’t making enough money in her opinion. Once she discovered him masturbating and told him that it was disgusting and he should stop, but later on when she didn’t want to have sex, she would condescendingly tell him to masturbate.

One night they were having another fight. She was wearing her nightgown, and for some reason he became sexually aroused. Right during the argument he reached out for her breast. She slapped his hand away. That did it. He told her she was going to get it whether she liked it or not. “Oh, no you don’t,” she said, and she fought him as he seized her and tried to push her down on the bed. Finally she saw that she was outmuscled and resigned herself to it. “I had the best erection I’d had in years,” he said later. He forced himself on her. Afterward she cried and called him names, but he knew that for once he had won. “I’m not proud of it, but, damn it, I walked around with a smile on my face for three days,” he recalled.

There were a couple more marital rapes. Then they went for marriage counseling, and when that failed they divorced. Looking back, Ross felt he had done something wrong, but not too wrong. He emphasized that he had never struck her or harmed her. As for the rapes, he felt that he had received sufficient provocation to justify them: “a just cause,” he said. She had tried to emasculate him and take control of the marriage. Raping her was his main way of reclaiming the superior position that he thought a man should have.

Thus, one general category of violent people is made up of those who overrate themselves. Someone whose opinion of himself (or, less often, herself) is unrealistically positive is likely to be vulnerable to frequent ego threats. Whenever reality intrudes, it will tell him that he’s not as good as he thought. And he may be prone to respond violently against whoever tells him that. The alternative of lowering his opinion of himself is typically avoided whenever possible. Hence, conceited people will tend to be hostile and dangerous.

Unstable Egotism: Insecure Grandiosity Another form of high self-esteem that may contribute to violent outbursts appears in people who think well of themselves most of the time but who are vulnerable to frequent or large fluctuations in their self-esteem. For these people, that miserable sinking feeling that goes with a drop in self-esteem is all too familiar, and they are on guard to avoid it. Even a slight hint or mild implication that questions their personal worth may elicit a strong response. Fluctuating self-esteem makes a person hypersensitive to ego threats, and a basically high but somewhat malleable self-esteem is probably the most dangerous.

People with this pattern are particularly sensitive for the same reason that violence occurs when anger is directed outward to avoid a loss of self-esteem. If your self-esteem rides a roller coaster, so to speak—high one moment, low the next—then you are probably well acquainted with the risk of it dropping. If your self-esteem is mostly low but volatile, then perhaps there is no place to go but up, so a modest person with fluctuating self-esteem is not likely to be violent. But if you mostly think well of yourself and yet are vulnerable to fluctuations in that belief, you are vulnerable to losses in self-esteem.

It is the threat of losing self-esteem that makes the difference. A person with a firm, unshakably high opinion of himself is not going to be threatened by anything. No matter what happens, he will still think he is great. That firm belief will make him largely immune to ego threats. But there are precious few such individuals. Most people with big egos feel there is a pervasive risk that their good opinions of themselves could be ruined. They also worry that other people will get a bad impression of them, which they think would be tragic.

The evidence about the stability of self-esteem is quite convincing. Researchers led by Michael Kernis have studied such effects by measuring each person’s self-esteem on several occasions to track fluctuations. 34 With such measures, people can be sorted into four groups, based on whether their basic self-esteem is high or low and on whether it remains constant or is subject to fluctuations. The rates of hostility and defensiveness of these different groups can then be compared.

One of the four groups stood out as the least prone to hostile reactions, and that was the group with high and stable self-esteem. Such people seem to like themselves no matter what. Bad evaluations, failures at work, or insulting remarks by others do not seem to threaten their self-respect.

The most hostile group was the one with high but unstable self-esteem. These people think well of themselves in general, but their self-esteem fluctuates. They are especially prone to react defensively to ego threats, and they are also more prone to hostility, anger, and aggression than other people. 35

These findings shed considerable light on the psychology of the bully. Hostile people do not have low self-esteem; on the contrary, they think highly of themselves. But their favorable view of themselves is not held with total conviction, and it goes up and down in response to daily events. The bully has a chip on his shoulder because he thinks you might want to deflate his favorable self-image.

There is plenty of evidence to fit this view. We have already noted that people who show temporary, artificial highs in self-esteem are prone to be aggressive. Manic-depressive people are more aggressive when they are in the manic state, and alcohol gives a temporary boost to both self-esteem and violent reactions.

A classic study by Hans Toch 36 entitled Violent Men drew just such a picture of insecure arrogance and egotism, although Toch himself did not quite see it that way. The original study was done several decades ago, and its statistical basis would not pass muster today, because he wanted to propose several categories of violent men, but his data did not really support the view that the different categories in his theory were actually different. Looking at his data with modern statistical knowledge, one would say that he basically found one main category of violent men, plus a few exceptions. The main category can best be described as threatened egotism. These men encountered, sought out, or deliberately instigated challenges to their egos, such as by getting into arguments in bars or insisting on deferential treatment by policemen. As soon as anyone showed any disrespect, questioned them, or offended them in any way, they would respond with violence.

The same conclusion emerged from an interview study of British men imprisoned for violent assault. Leonard Berkowitz, who ran the study, was looking for evidence to support the then-popular theory that “subcultures of violence” promoted aggression. He did not find any such evidence. Instead, most of the men had gotten into trouble because they reacted with their fists to someone who insulted them. Berkowitz came away from the interviews with the strong impression that “their egos were fragile indeed,” 37 because they were so easily offended. A fragile ego is another term for a favorable but vulnerable self-opinion.

Many of these violent men react to what would seem to be a very slight or trivial offense. Indeed, the researchers in a number of these studies felt moved to wonder over how little it took to make these men hit or harm someone. The extreme, irrational sensitivity to a stranger’s slightly disrespectful tone or remark may be what caused some earlier observers to conclude that low self-esteem must be at work. But it is not low self-esteem. It is high self-esteem that is vulnerable to fluctuations. Once you know the miserable feeling of anxiety and sadness that comes from a sharp drop in self-esteem, you will be on the lookout to avoid any such drop. You won’t wait for a thorough and detailed attack on your worth as a person, because by then it will be too late to avoid that horrible feeling. Instead, you will want to stop any such criticism or attack before it gets started. As a result, you will overreact to any slight or incipient hint. The problem, of course, is that you end up lashing out at people who meant nothing bad or were only making a friendly joke. Sometimes the victims are surprised that you became violent and hostile over nothing.

The problem is undoubtedly most acute for the people who live with these hypersensitive egotists. Battering husbands differ from other husbands in precisely this hypersensitivity to blows to their esteem. In one study, researchers asked several groups of men whether they would be offended in various ambiguous situations, such as if a wife disagreed with her husband about something in front of other people. The abusive, battering husbands were much more likely to see these minor acts by the wife as attacks on the husband’s pride.

Romantic jealousy is another experience in which people become irrationally oversensitive because of implicit blows to their pride. Much violence between spouses or dating partners is driven by jealousy, and much of it is unwarranted. If a woman merely smiles in a friendly way at a man, her husband may think that she is sexually interested in the outsider—which the husband may find to be an attack on his own sexual adequacy. Accordingly, he may strike her.

Jealous violence is not limited to men, either. In a ground-breaking study of violence in lesbian relationships, jealousy emerged as major reason that some women beat their partners. Claire Renzetti, the author of the study, described the abusive partners as prone to “delusions of infidelity,” which made them think their girlfriends were betraying them. In one sad but revealing incident, a woman described how one of her partner’s friends had casually suggested that they have lunch. “You want me to die or somethin’?” she replied. If her abusive, possessive partner knew she had lunch with another woman, she would beat her up, or worse. 38

The ego threat, in fact, is especially strong when jealousy arises in same-sex relationships, as Renzetti pointed out. If you and your lover are both females, then another female could be interested in either of you. So when she flirts with your partner, she has implicitly rejected you. In a sense, then, the blow to one’s pride is doubled. Both your partner and the outsider have made some negative judgment about you.
