
In other respects, violent lesbians are quite similar to the violent husbands we discussed earlier. Status inconsistency is apparent in that the abusive women find that their circumstances fall short of their egotistical expectations. Renzetti observed that the violent lesbian typically wanted to be the boss and the dominant partner, but she found herself the one who had less money or less education. Hitting her partner was a way to claim the dominant position that she wanted but didn’t feel she could claim securely on other bases.

The link of fluctuating self-esteem to emotion is implicit in other studies that show shame-prone people to be the ones most likely to become angry and violent. Shame is defined as the emotion that occurs when one feels that one is a worthless, terrible person in general—as distinct from guilt, which is a feeling that one committed one particular wrong action. 39 People hate to feel shame, and those who are especially vulnerable to it are also the ones who are most likely to feel rage and hostility toward others. 40 The reason seems to be that getting mad at others is a way of avoiding or escaping the terrible feeling of shame.

The sequence goes something like this. Someone tells you that you are not very competent at something. If you are a shame-prone person, you start to experience that sinking feeling that the other person may be right and that maybe this is not the only thing you are bad at, and maybe you are just a worthless loser in general. You start to feel panic, anxiety, and misery, and your heart beats faster. To break free of those feelings, you reject the premise. You are not incompetent in the way the other person said. The other person had no right to say that to you, and he’s completely wrong. Your feelings are now directed outward at him, instead of at yourself, and the effects of your faster heartbeat and general arousal transfer into intense anger at the person who has so unfairly insulted you. You want to hit him.

Feelings of vulnerability about one’s own superiority are not limited to individuals. Whole nations show the same pattern. The political historian Franklin Ford offered this generalization based on his survey of political murder and terror across many centuries and cultures: “Ancient history—and later history as well—suggests that official terror is usually the mark of a regime that may appear brutally self-confident but is in fact insecure.” 41 The claim on superiority is important, but so is the fear that it could be undermined easily.

Still, insecurity carries a connotation of lack of self-esteem. I have proposed that violent, evil people tend to be marked by feelings of superiority but also a fear that they could lose their superior position. Could this mean that they have low self-esteem after all? We will now consider this question once more.

What about Deep Down Inside?

Violence emerges from a tension between two views of the self, one of them favorable and the other less favorable. Some readers might take this to mean that violent people really suffer from the low self-esteem that lies buried behind or underneath the veneer of confidence and superiority. Indeed, when I described my findings about the psychology of violent, evil people to various colleagues and students, some of them asked, “But aren’t they really suffering from low self-esteem deep down inside?”

The answer is no, for several reasons. One of them is the direct weight of the evidence. Several researchers who have devoted considerable study to violent individuals have explicitly addressed this question, and their conclusions are clear. Psychologist Dan Olweus spent years studying childhood bullies, who are aggressive toward other children and who often go on to become juvenile delinquents and then violent criminals as adults. Multiple studies with a variety of research methods found plenty of evidence of low self-esteem among the victims of bullies, but little or none among the bullies themselves. Moreover, there was no sign of hidden or secret feelings of low self-esteem. As Olweus wrote, “In contrast to a fairly common assumption among psychologists and psychiatrists, we have found no indicators that the aggressive bullies (boys) are anxious and insecure under a tough surface.” 42

Nor do members of violent youth gangs have low self-esteem deep down inside. Martin Jankowski, a sociologist who lived with several dozen of these gangs for more than a decade, made that clear. He too noted that some theorists had proposed “that many gang members have tough exteriors but are insecure on the inside. This is a mistaken observation.” 43 Individually and collectively, the gang members think very highly of themselves.

One clarification is necessary, because I have characterized violent people as insecure about their high self-esteem. Jankowski, Olweus, and others use the term insecurity by itself to refer to a broad pattern of low self-esteem, which is something quite different from holding high self-esteem that is vulnerable to fluctuations. My own usage of the term here refers to insecurity about the egotism, not insecurity in the sense of lacking egotism altogether.

Another way to look at the issue is to consider how people react to problems and setbacks. Researchers have established that self-esteem makes a clear and reliable difference in such reactions. People with low self-esteem tend to blame themselves when things go wrong. People with high self-esteem tend to blame external factors, such as other people, the situation, or various obstacles. 44 These attitudes are not too surprising, because they are likely to cycle back and affect self-esteem. Thinking that all your problems and failures are your own fault is a style that fits low self-esteem. Thinking that nothing bad should ever reflect on you is an integral part of high self-esteem. So which style do violent people use?

Quite simply, violent people seem to follow the high self-esteem pattern. Jankowski observed that the members of teen and young adult gangs always blamed something else for failure, rather than their own error or inadequacy. More ominously, the bloody purges of violent groups show the same pattern of finding scapegoats rather than blaming themselves. The Khmer Rouge, for example, were never willing to admit that they could be wrong or make a mistake. Whenever there was a failure anywhere, somebody had to be blamed as an enemy. 45

This blaming of enemies is one of the driving forces behind many deadly purges. Elizabeth Becker’s account of the Khmer Rouge is one prototype, but the same conclusion could emerge from examining the Stalinist or Maoist purges, which had much greater body counts. Becker put the tragedy in perspective. The Khmer revolution never really had a chance. They wanted to make their country self-sufficient by eliminating all foreign influence. In fact, however, Cambodia’s economy had only been viable by virtue of large infusions of foreign aid money, and once the Khmer refused foreign aid, there was no hope. The idea that modern city dwellers could be converted into successful rice farmers in the countryside was absurd, and the chances for a moderately large population to feed itself (let alone grow enough food to make the officially forecast profits) without modern technology were likewise minuscule. Inevitably, there were shortages and other failures. But it was not permitted to blame the party’s plan. Instead, the only permissible explanation was that enemies had sabotaged the people’s efforts. And so they began to shoot people—people who were in fact mostly well-meaning, hard-working, loyal individuals—because any person in a position of responsibility was suspected of contributing to the failure. Saboteurs had to be found, and since hardly any real saboteurs existed, innocent people were arrested instead. And executed.

There is also a subtle but important logical flaw in the argument that violence is caused by hidden low self-esteem. It is clear that genuine low self-esteem does not cause violence. The accumulated mass of research findings is quite convincing about this. After all, there are plenty of people who have low self-esteem that is not hidden, and they tend to be nonviolent.

Thus, anyone who wants to salvage the low self-esteem theory has to argue, oddly, that overt low self-esteem is nonviolent and only covert low self-esteem is violent. In other words, they have to say that low self-esteem is bad only when you can’t see it. Aside from the theoretical vacuousness and apparent absurdity of that argument, it begs the question. If low self-esteem is only linked to violence when it is hidden, then one must look at the hiddenness itself as the decisive cause. What is hiding the low self-esteem is, of course, the veneer of egotism and pride. Low self-esteem is only violent when it is combined with a surface pattern of arrogance, confidence, or egotism. Thus, we are back to where this argument began. The favorable opinions about the self are the decisive ones in causing violence.

Playing to the Audience We have focused on how self-esteem affects violence, but sometimes the self’s opinion is not the only one or even the most important one. When there is an audience, people often worry about what the audience may think. Even if they are unruffled by a private insult or disrespectful treatment, they may turn violent if they think someone else will witness the incident and think less of them for backing down.

A man gets on a bus in a Brazilian city. He is in a bad mood. He pushes his way to the middle of the bus. A younger and smaller man, the one who later tells the story, is standing in his way. The older man resents the younger man’s clean shirt, or maybe he is just frustrated with people standing in his way and feels an impulse to take it out on this particular one. He gives the young man a rough push in the back with his elbow.

The young man turns and looks at the other man. In a fair fight, he would probably lose, so getting into a fight is not a good idea. But he has his own angers and frustrations, and he doesn’t want to back down. He looks the other man in the eye with an intimidating, dangerous look that he has practiced for just such occasions. The older man is a little surprised at this show of fearlessness. The young man asks him what he wants. The older man, despite his seeming physical superiority, lowers his head in a slightly submissive gesture of apology. Nothing further is said. What could have turned into a violent or even deadly argument is instead defused and ends peaceably. 46

When the young man told the story to the anthropologist Daniel Linger, he made one crucial point. When he spoke to rebuke the older man, he did so in a very quiet voice, so that none of the other bus passengers could hear what he said. This was probably the only way that the incident could have ended without violence, in his view. In effect, the other man backed down and accepted a small humiliation, but he would not have done so if the other passengers had seen it. As the young man put it later, “If the thing becomes public it can get much worse, because then it isn’t just between us two: Then you’ve got the obligation to give some satisfaction to the people who are watching.” 47

Concern over the opinions of others is often a driving factor in violent, aggressive, or other evil behavior. Indeed, we saw earlier in this chapter that the opinions of the audience made all the difference in how far people would go to seek revenge. 48

You might think that murders would be private affairs because killers would not want witnesses, but some studies have found that a high proportion of them occur in the presence of other people. A fairly extensive study of California homicides by David Luckenbill found that an audience was present in more than half the cases. 49 In some cases, audiences egged on the people who were arguing, such as by asking, “Are you going to let him get away with saying that?” Sometimes the audience even gave the killer the weapon.

Still, the most important function of the audience is probably just that it makes the offense harder to ignore. People seem to feel that they cannot ignore, dismiss, or otherwise “take” an insult if other people see it.

Audiences lend social reality to events. If no one else knows about it, you can pretend it never happened. 50 Self-esteem can usually bounce back. But people are very concerned with what other people think of them, and if someone else knows about an ego threat, the option of ignoring it is lost. There is no longer any way to pretend it didn’t occur.

People are sometimes sensitive to the broader implicit audience of everyone around them who might find out some day. Thus, different patterns of culture and society can produce very different levels of proneness to violence. Richard Nisbett, in his work on regional cultures in the United States, points out that the South traditionally had fewer routes to individual success than the North, because educational and industrial institutions were slower to develop in the South. As a result, he thinks, Southerners—particularly young white men—developed a greater tendency to focus on the need to gain and defend personal prestige by fighting. 51 This is one explanation for the higher rates of murder and violent crime in the South. It is not simply that the South is lawless; its crime rates are comparable to those of the North in other respects, and in some cases lower. But personal violence is high, partly because Southerners are more prone to think that physical retaliation is called for whenever someone insults or offends you.

The Logic of Revenge: When Getting Even Isn’t Even Revenge is based on some concept of equity. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; the wrongdoer should suffer to the same extent that he or she has hurt the victim. People who favor capital punishment generally want it used to punish murderers and comparably evil people. Killers should be killed, is the attitude. After all, if capital punishment is merely a rational policy of deterrence, why not use it to punish embezzlement, plagiarism, tax fraud, and other such crimes?

Revenge is the flip side of the Golden Rule of doing unto others as you would have them do unto you. Revenge does unto someone what he has already done unto you.

In social transactions, however, the computation of fairness is far from an exact science even when practiced by the most disinterested, objective judge. When practiced by people who are centrally involved in an upsetting episode, it is even more elusive—far more. The social problem with revenge is that retaliations will tend to exceed the original transgressions, often by a great deal.

As an example, consider this story told by George Anastasia in his account of the Philadelphia Mafia. 52 Nicky Scarfo was a ruthless and ambitious young gangster (who later became the chief underworld boss in the city). The older bosses saw him as potentially useful but also as difficult to control. To punish him for overstepping his authority, they sent him to work in Atlantic City, a relatively small-time operation then. He busied himself with various local projects, including involvement in both legitimate and illegitimate businesses. His nephew, Philip Leonetti, wanted to get into cement contracting work, and Scarfo got him a good job in a contracting company. Leonetti learned the ropes from Vincent Falcone, who was also in the cement business.

The young man did exert himself to learn the business, but either he did not work hard enough or he lacked the aptitude. That, at least, was the judgment of Falcone. Falcone ceased to be helpful to Leonetti and was heard to make various insulting remarks about Leonetti and, more important, about Leonetti’s uncle. Some of these remarks were repeated to Scarfo, who began to dislike Falcone. Another cement contractor told Scarfo that Falcone was now going around saying that Leonetti was incompetent and Scarfo was crazy. Scarfo replied that he was going to kill him.

And he did. He invited Falcone for drinks at a friend’s apartment, supposedly for a friendly business discussion and relaxation. Following Scarfo’s plan, while the five men were sitting with drinks in their hands and watching football on television, Leonetti quietly pulled out a gun, pointed it at the back of Falcone’s head, and shot him. Scarfo made a few obscene jokes about the body on the floor. Leonetti fired another bullet into the heart for good measure. Then Scarfo produced the blankets and rope he had stashed for this purpose, and they hog-tied the corpse (“I love this, I love it,” Scarfo is alleged to have said while they were working on the body) and rolled it up in the blanket. They carried the roll downstairs and put it in the trunk of the victim’s car, where it was found the next day. Meanwhile, that night, Scarfo and the others headed for the casinos to have a good time. Scarfo was ready to forget the whole episode, except that he wasn’t entirely satisfied. “If I could bring the motherfucker back to life, I’d kill him again,” he remarked to his buddies.

Out of Proportion to the Offense This example is revealing because the revenge seems so disproportionate to the initial offense. After all, who has not occasionally said that someone was crazy as a form of mild insult? The term crazy in its colloquial sense of being wild and irrational would not be entirely amiss when applied to Scarfo as he was depicted in Anastasia’s book.

The accusation of craziness was certainly not contradicted by his response of having Falcone killed, any more than the murder proved that Leonetti had talent for the cement contracting business. It was not a rebuttal to false accusations, in any sense. Indeed, killing someone who has called you crazy would seem to prove the accusation right, not wrong. But of course Scarfo was not trying to provide convincing proof of his sanity. He was getting revenge.

The story about Scarfo is especially relevant because the killing was revenge over a threat to his esteem. It is easy to articulate a principle of an eye for an eye, but how does one determine the equivalent of a blow to one’s ego? The legal business of defamation and libel lawsuits reflects the problem of determining the cash equivalent of an insult or loss of face. Undoubtedly, some people’s images matter more than others, and so identical insults might have different financial implications. We saw already that the Mafia, as a protection business, depends crucially on image, although being thought to be “crazy” might be either a liability or an asset in such a context.

In addition, a deeper obstacle blocks the equity of revenge in cases of ego threat. Even if it were possible to calculate precisely how much retaliatory suffering would be fair recompense for humiliating someone, that person might not be calm and rational enough to make those calculations. A blow to one’s pride produces anger, rage, and other emotions that are not conducive to thoughtful assessments of fairness.

Movies (like other art forms) have long embraced the theme of revenge. Usually, killers are hunted down and killed in turn, often by the friends or loved ones of their victims. In some cases, however, the revenge is disproportionate, and this does not seem to bother movie audiences very much. One standard theme, for example, involves a woman who is raped by several men and then later tracks them down and murders them one by one. The literary critic Carol J. Clover says that this genre began with the low-budget classic I Spit on Your Grave, but the theme can also be seen in big-budget films such as Sudden Impact.

A popular series of revenge films began with Death Wish. Charles Bronson, already an accomplished avenger from a series of Westerns, played a peace-loving modern citizen whose aversion to killing was so strong that he had been a conscientious objector in the war. Then street punks broke into his apartment, murdered his wife, and raped and traumatized his daughter. Bronson became a vigilante, traveling alone at night through dangerous areas in the hope that street punks would accost him, to which he would respond by shooting them. In some vague fashion, killing these street punks operated as revenge for his wife’s death, although he killed plenty of people who had had nothing directly to do with her murder.

Of course, revenge does not always involve death or even crime. In everyday life, people find many small and legitimate ways of getting back at those they think wronged them. Divorce cases provide many examples of such seemingly small but gratuitously nasty acts of retaliation.

A couple I know went through an unpleasant divorce, and part of the agreement was that the man was to take possession of the house they had owned jointly. The woman was living there while they were separated, and so she had to vacate the house on a certain day. The man arrived on the appointed day anticipating that he might have to face some unpleasant words from her, but she was already gone. In fact, she had left a week earlier. When he went in, he found that she had left the thermostat turned up to the maximum temperature—and left all the windows wide open to the cold winter air. The heating bill had been assigned to him, and it cost him the equivalent of two months’ salary. Obviously, this gained the woman nothing of material value, but it certainly cut deeply into the meager savings he had left after the split.

Sometimes, revenge may seem to have divine sanction. In a famous passage in Deuteronomy, the Judeo-Christian God speaks of taking “vengeance upon my enemies. I will make my arrows drunk with blood, my soul shall devour flesh, blood of slain and captives, the heads of enemy princes.” 53 The killing of captives is regarded today as a war crime, yet the author of Deuteronomy believed that God not only would approve such an atrocity but would boast about committing it.

The Spiral of Revenge The logical structure of revenge is, at its center, a simple reversal of victim and perpetrator roles. The victim becomes the perpetrator, striking back for what he or she has suffered.

The exchange of roles contains considerable danger, however, because of the crucial differences in perspective between victims and perpetrators. Foremost among these differences is the gap in magnitude: Offenses seem much greater to the victim than to the perpetrator. This will almost inevitably lead to disproportionate responses, especially if a cycle of retaliation develops.

Suppose you disgrace me by telling some very unflattering story about me to a number of important people. As victim, I see the incident as very damaging. I think the story was untrue or at least unfairly exaggerated and out of context, and I fear that people will avoid or reject me if this story becomes misinterpreted as evidence that I am incompetent or untrustworthy. To you, however, the offense was probably small. You merely repeated a story that you thought was accurate in the main facts. If I retaliate in some violent fashion, such as by destroying your car or breaking your leg, you are likely to think that this is far beyond what is appropriate. And so just when I think we are even, you think you have a major grievance for which you are entitled to revenge. At your next opportunity, you may seek to injure or kill me. Such an attack may make you believe that the score is settled, but to me (or my associates who survive me), your attack is an outrage and a rekindling of matters that had been settled. Now my side has a grievance to avenge, just when you thought the matter was settled.

In this way, grievances can snowball and indeed can be passed down in families for generations, as in the famous feuds and vendettas of history. Because of the magnitude gap, the victims will maximize their own suffering and the perpetrators will minimize the harm they inflict. And so each time they exchange roles, they will think that there are unpaid debts that call for ever more severe retribution.

The myth of pure evil is also an important factor. Victims will tend to see the people who have hurt them as evil—as committing wicked deeds for no valid reason and getting sadistic pleasure out of breaking rules or inflicting harm. To respond with zeal, maybe even going slightly beyond the extent of one’s original suffering, seems appropriate if one is dealing with an evil character. There is no sense in practicing forbearance, restraint, or mercy if one is dealing with a truly evil person.

Suppose Adolf Hitler came back from the dead, ran a red light, and bumped into the back of your car. Undoubtedly, you would want to sue him to the maximum extent allowed by law, and if your lawyer suggested exaggerating your injuries a little you would probably be willing to do so. (In contrast, if Gandhi came back and dented your fender, you’d be likely to forget the whole thing.) Extreme measures seem appropriate when one is retaliating against a thoroughly evil person. Unfortunately, because victims tend to see those who harm them in extreme terms, they will unusually be prone to think that extreme retaliations are appropriate.

The Goal of Revenge I have pointed out that revenge often brings little or no direct benefit to the avenger. The goal is not to get back what belongs to one or to recoup losses. Rather, the goal is more often seen in such vague terms as teaching the miscreant a lesson. Unfortunately, this attitude also may promote extreme measures, because people believe that vivid and dramatic lessons are more likely to be learned than subtle ones.

Most people who seek revenge are clearly looking to teach somebody a lesson. To return to the Mafia, they sometimes use symbols to indicate what observers or others should learn from a particular killing, such as in the famous practice of stuffing cash into the mouth and anus of a corpse. 54 One would think that when killing is motivated by financial disagreements, the killers would want to keep all the victim’s (presumably disputed) money that they could find, rather than wasting it. But the grisly display of cash is intended as an explanation and an implicit warning. It means that the victim got too greedy, such as by cheating his associates or the organization by skimming too much cash from an ongoing operation. It tells others what they can expect if they let personal greed get in the way of organizational duties and loyalties.

Adding extra brutality to teach someone a lesson will often backfire, however. It does certainly create a basis for the victims to feel that they now have a legitimate grievance, and so they may become all the more eager to resist or strike back. In World War II, the bombings of Pearl Harbor, London, and Dresden were all expected to weaken the morale of the target populations and push them to give up. Instead, these bombings inflamed the resistance of the victims and increased their determination to fight.

The bottom line is that revenge can contribute to violence and cruelty because the avenger, who is perpetrating harm, acts with the clear conscience and self-righteous zeal of the victim. If you are only striking back, you seem to have a right to do so, and so you do not blame yourself for your actions.

Suffering and Satisfaction: Why Does It Feel Good to Get Even?

The whole point of revenge is to make the other person suffer. The victim of revenge is therefore in a very poor position to hope of getting off lightly. The avenger’s experience is similar to the sadist’s in that the harm is done to bring pleasant, positive, satisfying feelings to the perpetrator.

The victim’s plight is made worse by the magnitude gap between victim and perpetrator views. In revenge, the perpetrator is inflicting harm to reach a certain level of satisfaction, and the victim has to suffer enough (assuming that’s possible) to provide that satisfaction. Because victims suffer more than perpetrators gain, the victim of revenge will probably have to suffer far more than the perpetrator realizes.

One of the few options the victim has is to apologize, as sincerely and thoroughly as possible, for the original (provoking) offense. Research has established that apologies do reduce victims’ vindictive feelings. Indeed, showing that one feels guilty seems to operate as a kind of “down payment” on one’s suffering, so that people will think that a perpetrator deserves to suffer less if he or she feels guilty than if there is no sign of guilt. Given the extremes that revenge can take, it makes sense that people have learned very well how to apologize and express remorse or other feelings of guilt.

As we have seen, much of the violence in revenge occurs when the original offense brought humiliation. Therefore, treating others with respect may also be a way that one can reduce or deflect the brunt of another’s quest for revenge against one.

No doubt the perpetrator’s satisfaction and the magnitude gap are responsible for the remarkable excesses of cruelty that are sometimes observed. Robert Ressler, the FBI’s leading expert on serial murderers, has noted that many of these killers are driven by some fairly vague desire for revenge. Most commonly, the killer is a man who wants revenge against females in general for some grievances that he may have formed while still young. The satisfactions of revenge are presumably the only way to explain what Ressler described as literal “overkill” in some of these murders, such as cases in which the victim was stabbed 200 times or in which the victim’s head was cut off after she was already dead from other wounds. Obviously, there is no practical reason to continue stabbing someone who is already dead. But perhaps the killer continues to get some pleasure or satisfaction by continuing to inflict damage, thereby prolonging the moment of revenge.

Still, that brings up the question of whether avengers really do get the satisfaction they seek. Because of the magnitude gap, retaliation that would satisfy an avenger would normally have to be so much greater than the original offense as to be almost impractical.

Revenge for damage to one’s image or esteem would seem to be much more achievable—although it, too, is likely to seem excessive to anyone else. A good example is Scarfo, the Philadelphia gangster who killed a man for calling him crazy and criticizing his nephew’s cement-working skills. One suspects that avenging an insult by killing the insulter would be satisfying to the person insulted, although nearly everyone else might think it is far too extreme. It is noteworthy, however, that even in that story the gangster seemed less than fully satisfied, as reflected in his remark that he wanted to bring the man back to life to get the satisfaction of killing him a second time.

Serial killers seem to find the same dissatisfaction, according to Ressler and other experts. We will return to this point in Chapter 7, but for now I will note that serial killers often report that they found the actual killings less than satisfactory. Indeed, Ressler believes that the lack of satisfaction is paradoxically one reason for the serial killings. If the killer’s desire to get revenge against his mother or some other offending woman were satisfied by killing the first victim, there would be no need to kill more of them. According to Ressler, however, the first killing is often so unlike the killer’s fantasy of it that he is upset and decides not to do anything like that again. After a while, however, he begins to think that he must have done it wrong and that these procedural errors were the reason it failed to bring the satisfaction he envisioned, and so he begins to plot another murder.

Many avengers want their victims to know who is hurting them, and why. Part of this is undoubtedly due to the aspect of “teaching them a lesson,” in the familiar phrase. In other words, the revenge should operate to discourage the person from mistreating you that way again. But it goes deeper than that. People want their victims to recognize the revenge even if there is no need for a lesson, such as in the extreme cases in which the victim dies.

A memorable story from Annette Lawson’s book on adultery shows how someone can take some satisfaction in revenge even if the target never realizes that revenge has taken place. The story is about a middle-aged woman whose marriage had various conflicts and arguments. When her husband wanted to punish her for what he considered wrongdoing on her part, he adopted the strategy of just refusing to speak to her. She found this quite painful and upsetting, as do many people who are given the “silent treatment.” But from his point of view, the beauty of the weapon of silence was that it defused all her weapons. Whatever she yelled at him or said to him would merely increase her own punishment, because he would not reply.

And so to strike back at him she devised another tactic, which was to have an affair. The woman described with vivid pleasure the satisfaction she gained from lying next to her husband in bed during one of his silent treatments. He thought he was punishing her, shutting her out, but she could smile to herself that just hours earlier that same day, another man had lain in that same bed with her—and not only spoken to her but paid plenty of other attention as well. Indeed, she made a point of wanting her lover to come into her marital bed, as opposed to having a rendezvous in a motel, because that increased her sense of having won a victory over her cuckolded but unsuspecting husband. 55

This brings us back to the broader issue of just what vindictive violence accomplishes. We have said that a blow to one’s esteem drives people to attack the person who humiliated them. But how does violence restore their esteem? Or does it? In practical terms, of course, revenge often brings little benefit and is costly. Capital punishment of a killer does not bring the victim back to life, and capital punishment as currently practiced in the United States costs the taxpayers more than life imprisonment. There must be some important nonmaterial satisfactions in revenge, and when revenge is associated with humiliation (as it usually is), we might assume that some benefit to the ego is involved. But how?

There are a few obvious cases in which the threat to self-esteem concerns one’s physical prowess. When one gang member insults another as a poor fighter and the other responds by fighting, it is easy to see that winning the fight provides visible proof of who is the better fighter. In such cases, the violence does contribute directly to restoring esteem.

Additionally, some cultures regard the outcome of a fight as proof of who was in the right. During the Crusades, the Moslems, whose culture was more advanced than the Christians’, were fascinated and amused to see the Christians settling disputes with a trial by combat. To the Moslems, this was an absurd superstition. The Christians, however, believed that God would not allow the person who was in the wrong to win the fight.

In most cases, however, the fight is irrelevant to the esteem threat and the surrounding dispute. Whether you are a seventeenth-century aristocrat fighting a duel or a modern teenager in a gang-related fight, the same irrelevance remains: Hurting or killing someone who has insulted your mother does not prove your mother’s virtue.

It does, however, establish whether the person has the right to humiliate you, and this may be the key. Winning a fight establishes a palpable physical dominance over the other person. Stripping away the layers of ritual and material concerns, many violent interpersonal conflicts are about relative prestige. In actuality, of course, the other person really doesn’t know or care much about your mother. The point of his insult was to make you look bad. By hurting and defeating him, you deflect the challenge to your image. You make him look bad.

A recent article on black street gangs by sociologist Elijah Anderson added a further dimension to the understanding of esteem and aggression. In his analysis, there is a limited and fixed amount of prestige to go around, making what social scientists call a zero-sum situation. The term zero-sum comes from game theory and refers to games in which players’ outcomes add up to zero. In most two-player games, for example, there is one winner and one loser, and a win (+1) plus a loss (-1) add up to zero. In contrast, there are non-zero-sum games and situations, in which everyone might win or everyone might lose. Putting together a jigsaw puzzle with other people would be one example.

By saying that esteem in gangs (or in the ghetto generally) has a zero-sum character, then, Anderson was making a key point: The only way that one person can gain esteem is if someone else loses it. Anderson emphasizes that poor black communities and other disadvantaged groups may feel this way because there seems to be far too little esteem and respect to go around. Hence, it is necessary to raise oneself up by knocking others down.

There is not a great deal of systematic research on the idea that esteem or prestige fits a zero-sum pattern in groups, but there are certainly enough observations to suggest that some people (at least) think that way. Thus, people may resent someone else’s successes or air of self-confidence, because whatever esteem is claimed by someone else is unavailable to you. If someone moves up a few notches in status, then you and several others may have to move down.

These resentments may lie behind the “tall poppy effect” 56 described by the famous Australian social psychologist Norman Feather. The tall poppy effect refers to getting pleasure or satisfaction from the downfall of someone high up. Certainly this effect is not confined to Australia; Americans, too, love to read about the downfall of the high and mighty. Undoubtedly, many Americans felt some pleasure or satisfaction when President Nixon resigned in disgrace, or when the arrogant billionaire Donald Trump filed for bankruptcy, or when various celebrities were exposed or arrested.

A more sinister side of the zero-sum pattern can be seen in the studies on rape. Several of those studies asked rapists how they had chosen a specific victim, and among the many comments there was usually something that suggested a desire to raise oneself up by bringing someone else down. One of these men would see a woman walking along, happy and self-confident, and he might get the feeling that she thought she was better than others, and in particular better than he. He would then follow her and rape her, to disabuse her of any such feelings of superiority. “I felt like I had put her in her place,” 57 these men say afterward. Or, as another rapist said, “I wanted to knock the woman off her pedestal, and I felt rape was the worst thing I could do to her.” 58 Another thought he was offering a positive explanation that would reduce his guilt when he said, “I didn’t want to hurt her, only to scare and degrade her.” 59 The same sort of motive may have been behind the pattern of raping black women that the Ku Klux Klan seems to have (informally) adopted during the period after the Civil War, when the freed slaves represented a threat to the comfortable sense of superiority that white Southerners had nurtured for a couple of centuries. 60

At present, it is not known how pervasive zero-sum thinking is and how often it leads to violence. It is, however, an accurate description of the situation whenever there is a fixed hierarchy, such as in some fighting groups or gangs, and whenever the number of people is limited and there is little or no movement into or out of the group. Such groups are the prototype of the male dominance hierarchy in a fighting tribe or gang: One can move up only if others move down. Fortunately, most of the world does not currently operate on this principle.

The Trivial Victim Favorable self-images can lead to violence and evil in more ways than just the seeking of revenge over an insult or humiliation. In particular, regarding oneself as superior can cause people to be indifferent to the suffering of others. Sometimes people don’t care about others because they think those other people don’t matter. The highly conceited person may hurt or exploit others out of plain indifference.

Yet to wonder what makes people insensitive to the suffering of others is perhaps to approach the problem backwards. One remarkable thing about human beings is their capacity to feel empathy with the suffering of others, even if this empathy is confined to a small group. In fact, there is some evidence to suggest that people mainly feel empathy toward those who are most similar to themselves. The majority of guilt occurs in the context of close relationships between family members, other relatives, and friends. Empathy and guilt are both linked to the communal sense of feeling that one belongs to a certain group of similar people. 61

Hence, people restrain their selfish impulses more when dealing with those close to them than when dealing with strangers. You feel guilty about neglecting to return your mother’s phone call, but you feel much less guilt over neglecting to return a call from an insurance agent.

Thus, scruples seem to be felt most acutely toward members of one’s own group. Other groups are generally regarded as inferior, or at least as less important, and so one does not feel as much regret over mistreating them or taking advantage of them. Most people have several levels of identification: a strong one with family, a weaker one toward special groups and organizations to which they belong, another weak one toward nationality, and an even weaker one toward the human race in general.

And so one danger of egotism is that people see nothing wrong in hurting others who are sufficiently different and inferior. Indeed, as we will see when we examine the processes of justification, one way to make oneself feel better about hurting people is to devalue them. Some categories of killers denounce their victims as vermin or as other subhuman creatures, whose killing is thus compared to the extermination of insects.

The extreme case of lack of empathic concern over hurting others can be found in the psychopath. Robert Hare, in his book on psychopaths (revealingly titled Without Conscience), depicted them as fitting the following image: “A self-centered, callous, and remorseless person profoundly lacking in empathy.” 62 They look down on other people as means to an end or as problems to be solved, not as fellow human beings with whom they can share community spirit or intimate bonds of mutual caring. Socially, they are users in the most explicit and heartless sense of the word: They use people to get what they want. They take what-ever they can get and then they move on, and the people left behind with broken hearts or empty wallets are regarded, if they are thought of at all, as suckers.

Perhaps the quintessential example of this attitude can be seen in Hare’s account of an interview with a young man who had swindled his own mother. He had persuaded her, a widow, to get a second mortgage on her house, and then he took the money for himself and left her trying to pay it off with her paltry wages from working as a checkout clerk. When asked about his mother, the psychopath (interviewed in prison) expressed loving concern: “She works too hard. I really care for that woman, and I’m going to make things easier for her.” But when asked about the money he had stolen, the man forgot his concern about his mother: “I’ve still got some of it stashed away, and when I get out it’s party time!” The interviewer was shocked at the man’s failure to connect his mother’s overwork with his own intention to spend the money he had stolen from her on his own fun, and so tried to point out that the stolen money could greatly ease the mother’s burden. The man replied, “Well, yeah, I love my mother, but she’s pretty old, and if I don’t look out for myself, who will?” 63

Obviously, such an attitude is extreme. But self-serving is often at the expense of others, and people must have an implicit policy about how to balance their own welfare against the welfare of others. The greater the egotism, the more that balance shifts in favor of self.





