CHAPTER

6

True Believers and Idealists “It’s always the good men who do the most harm in the world,” Henry Adams said with reference to Robert E. Lee. 1 The point is overstated—it would require quite a stretch to define Saddam Hussein or Idi Amin, let alone Hitler or Stalin, as good men. Yet there is an important kernel of truth in the statement. Good men with lofty principles and admirable intentions have occasionally done a great deal of harm. Many of the greatest crimes, atrocities, and calamities of history were deliberately perpetrated by people who honestly and sincerely wanted to do something good. This chapter will focus on the seeming paradox of how doing good can lead to evil.

The truth of Adams’s point lies in the very thing that makes “the good men” good: their moralistic, virtuous idealism. Under normal circumstances, morality, virtue, and idealism are powerful internal brakes that prevent people from harming others. Morality supports self-control and, by doing so, helps to prevent evil. In Chapter 4, we saw that these internal barriers seem to be circumvented in instrumental evil. Somehow they get turned off.

In idealistic evil, on the other hand, moral virtue and idealism remain in force—but they support the committing of violent or evil deeds. That is what often makes idealistic evil especially bad: The traits of inner conscience and strength of character operate to spur the perpetrator on to more severe and intense deeds. It is not simply that it becomes acceptable to hurt others—it becomes one’s sacred obligation to do so. When inflicting violent harm goes from being a right to being a duty, it is fair to expect that the violence will become relentless and merciless.

The role of fanatical idealism can be seen when violence loses its practical, instrumental benefits. A chilling example was furnished by the Khmer Rouge after they gained control of Cambodia. Conceivably, one might argue that the mass executions of educated or “intellectual” Cambodians (in some areas, “intellectual” was defined broadly enough to include anyone who wore glasses) had some practical advantage of silencing opposition to their power—but that would not explain a need to target expatriates. The Khmer Rouge announced to the world that they needed the skills and knowledge of educated Cambodians who had left the country and called upon them to return to serve their country and build a better society. Many responded to the call, out of homesickness and patriotic obligation, even though they must have had some worries and fears about what was going on in Cambodia. In reality, the Khmer Rouge had no use for these people but regarded them as enemies, and they were quickly imprisoned and executed. In some cases, the returning Cambodians were met immediately upon arrival and taken directly from the airport to the prison and torture center. It is hard to see any pragmatic motive for such killings. It is not hard, however, to believe that a group might do such things out of a passionate belief that its noble cause requires the elimination of people who have been identified as its enemies.

Noble Ideals, Evil Actions How can virtue and idealism lead to cruel, violent, or oppressive acts? How can good cause or create evil?

On the face of it, there seems to be a contradiction in saying that good acts can be evil. But this contradiction is easily resolved. It is only necessary to recall that evil is in the eye of the beholder. It is sad, but hardly impossible, to recognize that some people who commit evil deeds are motivated by high ideals and a zealous desire to make the world a better place, as they see it. It is mainly from the perspective of their victims, and perhaps neutral observers, that these acts are bad.

Religion provides one persuasive example. Most people who do what their gods and their spiritual leaders tell them feel certain that they are doing what is right and good, even if this includes hurting others. An important trend in the past few years has been violence at abortion clinics, even to the point of murder, perpetrated by people who have strong religious beliefs that abortion is evil. They think God wants them to beat or kill a physician who is performing abortions, or even a receptionist who works at the clinic.

People with very different religious beliefs may not share the perpetrator’s faith in the divine justification of such acts, however. God is the ultimate good, and what God tells you to do is therefore unimpeachably in the service of good. But someone who does not believe in your god will doubt your divine authorization, and your acts are suddenly judged by different standards. Because most readers of this book will be familiar with the Judeo-Christian tradition, let us consider several examples of acts that may seem good and proper when viewed from inside that tradition but could easily seem cruel and evil to anyone who does not accept its basic assumptions.

The Bible contains ample evidence of stories that seem morally questionable and objectionable if one abandons the assumption that anything God commands is automatically good. The story in which God tells Abraham to kill his son Isaac, relenting only at the last minute when Abraham is already standing at the altar holding a knife over the poor boy’s throat, creates a remarkable image of what one scholar has called “God as a despotic and capricious sadist.” 2 Certainly to anyone who doesn’t share the belief in divine legitimacy, Abraham is a child abuser who is about to commit a horrible act of deadly violence against a defenseless family member. That Abraham must be a real sicko, you’d think, if you saw that story on the news today, even if it had the same happy ending. But to devout believers, Abraham’s willingness to kill his son was a good thing, a positive proof of his moral faith in God.

Later, the Israelites believed that God gave them the land of Canaan, and it appeared that extensive and violent ethnic cleansing was necessary to accept this gift. The native inhabitants of Canaan had to be subdued brutally and in many cases massacred. After a while, the Israelite armies developed the habit of mutilating the genitals on the corpses of their defeated enemies, cutting the foreskins off their penises and bringing the lot in a bag to the king or queen. Without the sacred context—which is to say, in the eyes of anyone who does not fully accept the Judeo-Christian religion—the massacres and slaughters of the Old Testament are no less evil than many of the genocidal holocausts, atrocities, and collective brutalities of history.

Yet the difference to the perpetrators is crucial. Earlier we considered the example of Genghis Khan, whose violence was largely practical and instrumental. He offered cities in his path the choice of immediate surrender followed by merciful treatment, or resistance to a siege which, if the Mongols prevailed, would be followed by a massacre of the inhabitants. The cruelty was a pragmatic policy that helped to discourage further resistance by other cities. Moral scruples were irrelevant except perhaps to restrain the brutality here and there. In contrast, the massacres committed by the Israelite troops were intended to serve the glory of their God and to carry out his instructions. The perpetrators’ moral scruples encouraged brutality and might even have intensified his cruelty.

The Crusades were an extremely important instance of divinely sanctioned brutality involving millions of people over hundreds of years. Devout Christians heeded the Pope’s call to do God’s work in the Holy Land, which meant to wrest control of it back from the heathens. From the first knights who set out in the 1100s, to St. Louis and other participants in the later Crusades, it is clear that many (although certainly not all) of these Christian soldiers were guided by the highest motives of religious duty. Some of their fellows were apparently selfish and lacking in religious motivation, and sometimes the violence used by the Crusaders was excessive, but most Christians shared a firm belief in the basic goodness of the Crusades. Even the term crusade has retained its positive meaning in Christendom as a large movement in the service of high principles and attacking the forces of evil. Dwight Eisenhower titled his memoirs of the American invasion of Europe during World War II Crusade in Europe. 3 Today the media speak of crusades against crime, drugs, and other social ills.

Yet anyone who is not dazzled by the Christian faith is certain to see a much darker side to the Crusades, and the label of evil is difficult to resist. This is true even for the supposedly good Crusades, let alone for the moral nadir reached by the Fourth Crusade, to which we will return later. The most idealistic and well-intentioned Crusades were marked by frequent and remarkable atrocities. 4 Prisoners and hostages were massacred. Villages were destroyed. Noncombatants were slaughtered, and there were multiple reports (whether true or untrue) of Christian soldiers roasting and eating Muslim babies. Captives, including noncombatant religious figures, were tortured and mutilated.

In the fourth month of the desperate siege of Antioch, early in the First Crusade, the neighboring town of Aleppo sent an expedition to try to break the siege. Poor leadership rendered the traditional cavalry tactics of the Arabs ineffective and left them fighting hand to hand against the Christian knights, who in their heavy armor easily outclassed them. After the victory, the Christian soldiers hacked off the heads of the Aleppo soldiers, piled them into catapults, and shot them over the walls into Antioch. They hoped this would discourage the inhabitants of the city and prompt them to open the gates and surrender. (It didn’t.) The climax of the First Crusade came in the siege and conquest of Jerusalem, the Holy City. After the Christians managed to break into the city and subdue the garrison, there was a long and frenzied massacre of the miserable Muslims living in the town. While this was going on, the frightened Jews gathered their entire community in the main synagogue to pray. They didn’t know what the Christians had in mind for them after the killing of the Muslim enemies was done. They had not opposed the Christian forces, and so they had some hope for mercy, but this did not pan out. The Christian soldiers barricaded the doors of the synagogue, stacked wood against the building, and set fire to it, burning alive most of the frightened people inside.

Although these Christian atrocities cannot be condoned, they can be understood. The crusading soldiers were mainly uneducated people serving their God and trying to stay alive. They had endured hardships far beyond their imagination; most of them had walked all the way from central Europe. Now this great victory seemed to prove that their several years of struggle had been the right thing all along. Of course the heathens should all be killed; God didn’t lead us through those years of desperate ordeals just to come and shake their hands.

Through the ages, religious wars have been marked by a similar intensity of cruelty. Religion has shown exceptional power to divide people and set them against one another, even contrary to their mutual interests. At the time of the Crusades, for example, there were many Christians living in the Holy Land, and many of them sided with the invaders against their own countrymen, thus providing valuable assistance to the very people who nearly destroyed their way of life. Religious differences have continued to produce violent battles inside countries, occasionally escalating into terrible civil wars. The Thirty Years’ War devastated much of Germany as Catholic and Protestant troops marched back and forth, destroying the lands where the other version of their faith was practiced. In our own century, sectarian violence has produced a seemingly unstoppable sequence of bloody incidents in Ireland and India, both of which split apart under the force of savage religious differences. Sadly, even those divisions failed to bring an end to the violence. Religious differences have also fueled the savage brutality in Bosnia, Serbia, and the other pieces of former Yugoslavia.

The grisly record of religious violence reveals the core paradox of holy war. The idea of a holy war is that one resorts to military violence in the service of sacred, spiritual ideals. One might hope that a divinely inspired war would be somehow “better”, less evil, than ordinary wars. Leaders who call for a holy war mean to set their undertaking apart from ordinary, mean-spirited wars, and in particular they claim that holy war occurs on a higher plane. Yet the record suggests that holy wars are often dirtier, more brutal, and fuller of cruelty and atrocity than ordinary wars. The usual effect of religiosity is to make war more brutal, not less.

Indeed, as we move into the twenty-first century, it may be necessary to have two sets of rules of war: one for ordinary wars and another for holy wars. If your opponent declares a holy war, you are likely to be treated to much greater brutality. Declaring a holy war seems to mean that the ordinary rules, such as the Geneva convention, are suspended.

A key to understanding this link between idealism and violence is that high moral principles reduce the room for compromise. If two countries are fighting over disputed territory and neither can achieve a clear victory on the field, they may well make some kind of deal to divide the land in question between them. But it is much harder to make a deal with the forces of evil or to find some compromise in matters of absolute, eternal truth. You can’t sell half your soul to the devil.

This refusal to compromise is evident in the same examples we have discussed. The Thirty Years’ War was one of the most miserably ruinous wars ever fought, especially if one adjusts its devastation to account for the relatively primitive weapons in use. On several occasions, the war-weary sides were both ready to negotiate an end to it, but ideological commitments to one or the other version of Christianity scuttled the deal and sent everyone back to the battlefield. Indeed, the war had started as a local affair, but it escalated beyond hope in 1620 (the third year of the war) when Emperor Ferdinand II abolished religious tolerance and set out to impose strict Catholic practice and belief everywhere. 5 Ferdinand was himself a sincere and zealous Catholic who spent much of his time attending Mass and making pilgrimages, and whose nonmilitary actions were just as supportive of the Church as his warlike ones.

Absolutism played a key role in the Crusades, too, needlessly extending the brutality and suffering on both sides and, ironically, contributing to their ultimate failure. 6 The First Crusade conquered much of the coveted Holy Land, including Jerusalem, but the Christian forces that stayed there were too weak to defend all of the conquered region. The local Arab powers were often at odds with one another, which is why they had not been able to mount a unified defense against the invaders at the start. After a while, they seem to have accepted the Christian nation as simply one more local power, and it was drawn into the intrigues and wars between the neighboring lands. Adjusting to the reality of political life in the area, the Christians entered into trade and even military alliances with various Muslim powers, which were more worried about one another than about the small Christian state, especially after they got Jerusalem back and pushed the Christians to the coast.

Unfortunately, the arrival of new crusading forces usually spelled trouble for these agreements and alliances. The new arrivals persisted in seeing the issue as Christian against Muslim. Eager to fight for Jesus, they would attack Muslim friends as readily as Muslim foes. Ironically, the existence of a Christian nation in the Holy Land might have lasted much longer had it not been for the destabilizing influence of these new Christian troops from Europe.

The Christian country dwindled in size as the Muslims slowly conquered back a city here and there. The last Christian stronghold in the Middle East was Acre, which had been held by the Christians for two centuries. It was a center for trade with Christian Europe, and as such the Muslims might well have tolerated its remaining in Christian hands for a long time to come. But the arrival in 1290 of Crusaders from Italy brought trouble. Lacking any military target, they began killing peaceful Muslim peasants and merchants in the city itself. After an especially brutal massacre, the distant sultan insisted on justice. The rulers of Acre might yet have saved the town for Christendom if they had turned over the murderers to the sultan’s courts as he demanded, but such accommodation with the heathen enemy was unacceptable to the Christian rank and file, and so they refused. The sultan vowed that not a single Christian would remain alive in Acre, and although he died during the expedition, his son pretty much fulfilled his vow, supervising the final conquest and destruction of the city. 7 That was the end of Christian power in the Middle East.

Ends Justify Means Idealism leads to evil primarily because good, desirable ends provide justification for violent or oppressive means. Evil is not likely to result when people firmly believe that ends do not justify means. If they evaluate their methods by the same lofty standards by which they judge their goals and purposes, evil will be held in check.

It is easy to adopt a virtuous pose and insist upon rejection of the view that ends justify means. To do so is hypocritical, however. Most people regard lying as wrong, and yet they will tell someone she looks nicer, younger, thinner than they think she does, or they will lie to protect a secret (or a surprise birthday party), and indeed their utterances depart from the truth in many respects. They may think that killing is wrong, yet killing to protect oneself or one’s family or one’s country is often seen as acceptable. They may support freedom of speech and condemn censorship, yet they may approve censorship of violent pornography, hate speech, or other objectionable material. 8

Idealistic evil thus shares an important dimension with instrumental evil: solving problems. Undoubtedly, idealistic, virtuous people would prefer to implement their commendable goals using only the highest, most respected, and virtuous methods. Unfortunately, these methods often seem inadequate, too slow, or ineffective. Something, or someone, creates a major obstacle that blocks something wonderful from coming true. Violence is a way of removing that obstacle.

Rarely has this point been put as bluntly as by Sir Alfred Milner, the British High Commissioner for South Africa at the turn of the century. This man was a dedicated servant of the British Empire who, along with others, saw the chance for the empire to absorb the entire southern tip of the African continent, which for decades had been divided among several powers including independent Boers (Dutch and other immigrants) and the native Zulus. This would bring glory and wealth to the empire he served, as well as help his country keep a step ahead of its main rival, the French.

Milner’s predecessors had managed to start a war with the nearby Zulu empire, permitting the seizure of a great deal of land that, when the unsavory details came to light, was relinquished by the Crown and so passed into Boer hands. Milner’s plan was to stir up a war between England and the Boers, which would enable his country to conquer the entire area. He succeeded in this, and in later years he was known to boast that the Boer War was “his” war. 9

A thoughtful and far-sighted man, even before the war started Milner looked ahead to what would come afterward. It should be easy enough for the disciplined British troops to defeat the unorganized Boer rabble (although it turned out to be much more difficult than anticipated), but it would then be necessary for everyone to learn to live together under British rule. The needs and claims of the various parties had to be sorted out, and there would not be enough land and other resources to go around.

Milner came up with a simple and elegant solution: The various factions of British and Boer settlers could all get more or less what they wanted, but very little would be left over for the native black population. The white factions would reconcile their differences at the expense of the blacks. Milner explained this solution to a colleague in 1897: “You have only to sacrifice ‘the nigger’ absolutely, and the game is easy.” 10 This ran contrary to the bulk of policy directives from Europe, where the Crown expressed concern that its colored subjects should benefit from British rule. But Milner saw that sacrifices had to be made, either shared ones by all parties (in which case no one would be happy), or drastic ones by one party. He opted for the latter.

It did not work out entirely as Milner had planned, but he had been correct about the necessity of accommodating the Boers to end the war, and the final agreement did conform to his plan of reconciling the white interests at the expense of the blacks. The painful history of South Africa in the twentieth century was decisively shaped by that historic compromise. 11 The native population lost land, sovereignty, and rights. In a final compromise with the Boers, a crucial word was added to the section of the agreement about giving blacks the vote. It was to be agreed that the natives would not be allowed to vote in elections until the introduction of self-government, which seemed reasonable enough at the time, except that the Boers were opposed. Milner added the word “after”: no vote until after self-government, which imposed no obligation to share voting rights when self-government arrived in 1906–1907. The word after was sufficiently indefinite as to mean “never” for practical purposes. 12

In retrospect, it would be easy to portray Milner as a racist out to degrade and exploit the native people of South Africa, but that would not be a full explanation. Milner’s goals were compatible with at least some of his own nation’s high ideals. He wanted to expand the empire he served and to strengthen its position, and so he stirred up a war to make that come true. And then he wanted to achieve a workable peace in which the strong parties who could ruin things might find a way to live together, and so he settled on sacrificing the weakest group to please the strong ones. The motives of patriotic loyalty and peace are lofty ones. The disastrous evil he brought on the native people was presumably just an unfortunate side effect of the way he solved the problems that stood in the way of his idealistic ambitions.

The use of violent or oppressive means to solve problems is a common feature in both instrumental and idealistic evil. There is an important difference, however, and that is the extent to which the ends justify the means. The thief does not generally claim that his desire for money makes his use of violent or illegal means right. In contrast, the idealist may feel that the means are justified. The goals of instrumental evil are generally acceptable ones, such as the desire to have money or power, but they are not normally endowed with sufficient moral force to make people think that it is right and good to use violent means. Idealism can make the methods seem right and good, or at least acceptable.

Because of the importance of perceiving the means as morally acceptable, there may be a strong ongoing need for justification in idealistic evil. The person is doing something that would normally be regarded as wrong, such as killing or hurting people. Somehow, the person must sustain the belief that it is right. This is often done by focusing on the goodness of the overriding goal. Throughout history, many soldiers have faced this dilemma. They have enlisted to fight for a cause or a country or another ideal in which they strongly believe, and then they are confronted with the ugly, sordid reality of combat. This includes killing other young men at close range on a cold day when you are soaked from the rain and have diarrhea and are tired from lack of sleep. It’s all miserable, but it’s all for a good cause, and so you do your duty and you do your best.

When the means turn even more cruel, such as victimizing defenseless people, the psychological burden on those who carry out the means becomes even greater. Their views are preserved in history only rarely, but these few cases enable us to understand how they struggled inwardly with doing what seemed and felt wrong in the service of what they knew was right.

Some examples survive from the extraordinary terror-famine that occurred in the Ukraine between the two world wars, as recorded in Robert Conquest’s historical account. 13 The peasant farmers of the Ukraine had been an important source of Russian grain for centuries. Knowing well how to farm, they resisted the collectivization of farming that the Communist government prescribed. Force was used to move them to the collective farms as well as to destroy any allegedly “rich” peasants, a category that gradually expanded to encompass nearly everyone who was minimally competent or successful at farming. Rather than shooting them or executing them in other ways, Stalin’s group created a policy of systematically confiscating all their food, including the seed grain. This measure, carried out fully over a period of many months, led to mass starvation. Starvation is a slow and awful death for the victims, but it does spare anyone from having to pull the trigger. Conquest estimated that this terror-famine killed 11 million people. Several additional millions died in labor camps. 14

The unpleasant part of the work was carried out by local party members who conducted house-to-house searches for any remaining food. This was hard work, partly because it brought them into face-to-face contact with their victims. These moments brought them closest to the equivalent of pulling the trigger. One of these young party activists recalled the difficulty of taking the last food from starving peasants. He said that one of his friends in the group could not bear it. The friend asked him, “If this is the result of Stalin’s policy, can it be right?” In other words, these means seemed so wrong that they even cast doubt on the end. The activist recalled that he “let him have it hot and strong and the next day he came to me and apologized.” 15 Such doubts were not permitted, and presumably the man would be regarded as lucky to have had a friend who would provide moral leadership so that he could continue to carry out his small duties in the genocidal operation.

Another party activist was more explicit: “With the rest of my generation I firmly believed that the ends justified the means. Our great goal was the universal triumph of Communism, and for the sake of that goal everything was permissible”—which, he added, included “to lie, to steal, to destroy hundreds of thousands and even millions of people, all those who were hindering our work or could hinder it, everyone who stood in the way.” He said they believed that to hesitate or entertain moral doubts was a sign of weakness, of “intellectual squeamishness” and “stupid liberalism.” He said he managed not to lose his faith, although sometimes it was tough when he was rooting out the last morsels of food that some miserable family had. He had to force himself to close his ears against “the children’s crying and the women’s wails,” reminding himself that this was all part of the “great and necessary transformation of the countryside.” He reminded himself repeatedly that in the end everyone would be better off—except for class enemies, of course. 16 Still, he said, “It was excruciating to see and hear all this. And even worse to take part in it.” Grimly he kept telling himself that to give in to pity was wrong. He was doing his duty for the fatherland and the Five Year Plan. It was unpleasant but it was unquestionably the right thing to do. 17 That faith kept him, and thousands like him, going.

Those who carry out brutal commands need to have plenty of such thoughts to fall back on. Otherwise, as suggested by the first activist’s friend, the apparent evil of the method contaminates the utopian ideal itself. Another activist in Conquest’s account recalled how he felt “emptied of hope” when he finally realized that all this cruelty was indeed part of the official policy. 18 Up until then, he had managed to believe that the cruelest acts were merely the excesses of brutal individuals who went too far. (The Soviet authorities encouraged this perception by periodically prosecuting and even executing the most zealous of those carrying out the policy, saying that they had not intended such “excesses.”) Yet after a period of time, this activist eventually could no longer sustain that belief. “The shame of it had been easier to bear as long as I could blame … individuals,” he said. 19 Still, although his faith in the Communist ideals was shaken, it recovered. He learned not to let these horrors bother him. In the end, his faith was strong enough to allow him to go on serving the state while it went on cruelly murdering millions of its citizens. This is an impressive example of the power of faith in the highest human ideals.

License To Hate A powerful and important factor in idealistic evil is the attitude toward the victim. We have seen hints of this attitude already. Some perpetrators reported feeling guilty if they had any doubts or felt any sympathy toward the victims. Idealistic evil permits and sometimes even demands that its agents despise their victims.

The logic behind this attitude is built into the situation, and it is difficult to resist. If you think that you are doing something that is strongly on the side of the good, then whoever opposes you or blocks your work must be against the good—hence, evil. This conclusion is far more than just a convenient way of rationalizing one’s violence toward certain people. It is central to the idealist’s basic faith that he is doing the right thing. The enemies of the good are, almost by definition, evil. To perceive them as any less than that—to allow that one’s opponents have a legitimate point of view, for instance—is to diminish one’s own side’s claim to be good. One is not fighting the good fight if the enemy is good, too. Therefore, to sustain one’s own goodness, it is essential to see the enemy as evil.

Thus, idealism usually ends up conferring a right, a license, to hate. As we will see shortly, people do not generally need a great deal of urging to despise the groups that are arrayed against them, and so it would be too much to say that idealism is fully responsible for creating such hatred. But idealism does permit it. Once the collective understanding of good declares that it is correct to hate a certain category of others, people will readily oblige.

One consequence of this apparent duty is that it will tend to put the more extreme and fanatical members of the group into the positions of moral leadership. Consider the activist in the Ukraine who “let him have it hot and strong” when a colleague expressed some doubts or sympathy for the victims. The members with the firmest sense of hatred will end up being the ones that the others look to for support and guidance. Yet the activist who “let him have it” harbored his own private doubts, which suggests a very potent split between public statements and inner sentiments. He privately agreed with the other young man’s doubts about the legitimacy of the whole process, but what he said publicly was to have no pity.

The duty to hate continues to be a source of vexation in modern society, despite the society’s apparent commitment to tolerance, understanding, and moral relativism. For years, Americans felt comfortably entitled to be hostile toward Communists, from the Soviet and Chinese enemies who seemed ready to attack us with lethal weapons to home-grown Communists. The McCarthyist “Red scare” and persecutions of the 1950s emerged in part because it became safe and appropriate to direct hostility toward these internal enemies. Now, with the fall of the Soviet Union, one is no longer supposed to hate those poor Russians, and the adjustment is difficult for some dedicated American patriots.

Ironically, the very effort to tolerate and value diversity constitutes a license to hate those who disagree. One of the core paradoxes in the recent social evolution in the United States is how the broad desire to overcome prejudice and ethnic antagonisms has resulted in a society that seems more fragmented and prejudiced than ever. Each group firmly believes that it holds positive, inclusive, desirable values, and so other groups are gradually assumed to be inimical to these positive values. And if the other group is opposed to the good, then by definition it must be evil. Each group feels attacked by others, as in the current debate (as this is being written) on the future of affirmative action programs that support preferential hiring of members of disadvantaged groups. Each side perceives the others as selfishly and unfairly trying to benefit at its expense. In other words, both minorities and whites can see themselves as holding the values of fairness and equality and the other side as opposed to those values—and hence, wicked. Along the same lines, the 1995 World Conference on Women was held in China during the time this book was being written, and the American delegate Betty Friedan (author of The Feminine Mystique, one of the most influential works in the women’s movement) felt compelled to argue in a national publication against the conference’s strident and oppositional tendencies: “countering the hatred of women with a hatred of men” was a bad strategy, she emphasized, recognizing that such category antagonisms evolve all too readily. 20

In many cases, the consequence of one’s own presumptive goodness is more than a license to hate one’s opponents: It is a positive duty to hate them. Sometimes it is difficult to ascertain how much this matters, because people are often willing to hate without needing much encouragement. Still, when dealing with members of the group who might have doubts or otherwise lack sufficient feelings of animosity, the others may feel entitled to put pressure on them to get with the program and summon up the appropriate degree of hostility. If you do not hate Satan, then there is something wrong with you.

Jeffrey Burton Russell discussed a topic of medieval debate: “Are we to hate the Devil as much as we love Christ?” 21 The answer was presumably no, but it was a close enough call to be worth debating. A good Christian’s emotional duties were said to include both hatred and love, directed toward the appropriate targets. The duty to love Christ is supreme, but the duty to hate the Devil may be almost as strong.

There is ample evidence that perpetrators of violence learn to detest their victims. Thus, state torturers are selected partly on the basis of their ideological purity, and they are taught that their victims are part of a dangerously powerful movement that aims to destroy their country. 22 They learn (and one must assume that they are willing to accept) that their enemies in general are evil, and so even if they can see that the particular individuals they are torturing have little useful information to offer and are ultimately just human beings in pain, the torturers can still feel it is appropriate to make them suffer. These prisoners belong to the evil group.

Likewise, terrorists are generally fervent Utopians who see “the establishment” (the government they oppose, and its supporters) as evil. 23 President Clinton called the terrorists who bombed the Oklahoma City courthouse in 1995 “evil” for committing America’s worst act of terror. Yet to them, or at least to many people like them, the government is evil. Terrorist groups attract people who are hostile to authority. (This is ironic, because terrorist groups tend to be quite authoritarian, with the leader having close to absolute power in the group.) Terrorists, too, feel that pity for one’s victims is an unacceptable sign of weakness and a source of shame.

Terrorists have an interesting special problem of self-justification. They tend to choose random targets such as buses or public libraries, full of what most others regard as innocent victims. Terrorists cannot afford to accept that view, however. Acknowledging that the group really did kill innocent victims would undermine their faith in the goodness of their own cause. Hence, terrorists tend to adamantly reject the idea that those people are innocent. Sentiments such as “anyone who is not with us is against us” are popular with such groups, because they conveniently allow the group to despise all their victims as enemies. Likewise, terrorists tend to adopt very broad categories of enemies. If they regarded only the top government officials and the police as their enemies, they might find it difficult to avoid victimizing innocent people. But if they broaden the category to include anyone in the society who is not actively opposed to the government, then few innocents remain, and they can plant their bombs in public places without a guilty conscience.

Western history’s most durable example of the license to hate is probably the attitude of Christians toward Jews. This antagonism has led to oppression and violence for 2000 years, and the twentieth century can hardly claim to have witnessed a diminution of it. Group rivalries and hostilities are nothing new, yet somehow anti-Semitism has been bitter and brutal over an exceptionally long span. How have so many Christians, whose religion is ostensibly based on love, come to hate and persecute so many Jews? What made it acceptable, typical, or even at times obligatory to hate Jews?

That question formed the center of a recent book by Joel Carmichael. 24 There are several parts to the answer. In the first place, of course, Jesus and his followers were Jews, and so the early Christians tended to think that the rejection of Jesus by those who remained Jews was especially unforgivable, because Jesus lived among them and preached to them. Christ’s truth had been revealed to them, and they had rejected it, which seemed to prove that they were in league with the forces of evil (unlike, say, Greek pagans who simply did not know any better). The Jews particularly distanced themselves from the Christian sect during the century after Jesus’ death, when they had their own rebellion against Rome. The perception of the Jews as a people who had been given a special chance by God but rejected it undoubtedly had more personal and psychological roots as well, such as the fact that the new Christians were being rejected by some of their countrymen, including their relatives and friends.

Moreover, the Christians were understandably aggrieved by the execution of Jesus. Whoever kills the epitome of religious goodness and truth must certainly be evil, and someone had to be blamed. In fact, the Romans had executed him, with some minor complicity by the Jewish authorities, who were relatively powerless anyway. Yet after the death of Jesus, his followers found many Roman citizens interested in their religion and ready to convert, unlike the Jews, and so they wanted to find some version of the truth that would not antagonize the Romans. Thus developed the historically weak but psychologically attractive view that the Jews were responsible for Jesus’ crucifixion.

Over the years, two parallel views of evil Jewishness developed. One was secular and mundane, depicting Jews as greedy. (Because of job discrimination and New Testament prohibitions against Christian money-lending, Jews were often pressured into occupations such as lending money and financing trade, which provided the basis for Christians to think that the Jews they encountered fit this stereotype.) The other view was cosmic and metaphysical, centering around the belief that the Jews had supernatural powers and were connected with exotic, unchristian, secret forces. The fusion of these two beliefs ran through the Christian perception of Jews for many centuries.

The belief that Jews enjoyed access to vast secret powers that were inimical to Christendom was important because it should have been obvious to anyone that Jews were actually relatively weak and powerless. Their country was conquered and destroyed, their people were scattered, they lived in ghettos, they had no weapons or political power, and they were subject to sporadic persecution by Christian (and secular) authorities that they were largely unable to resist. To believe, despite all these outward signs of weakness, that the Jews possessed dangerous mystical powers was not easy, but it became possible by virtue of the putative secret forces.

For centuries, the biblical figure of Judas was a major prototype of the Jew. He had betrayed his Savior for a mere thirty pieces of silver, a trivial amount of money. That event captured the supposedly greedy, money-loving aspect of Jews, as well as the disloyalty and treachery. It also suggested that Jews would do evil simply for the sake of doing evil—because the amount of money was relatively small; one surmises that betraying Christ presumably should have been worth immense riches. After all, had Satan made an offer, it seems safe to assume that the price he put on Jesus’ head would have been a high one.

Doing evil for its own sake brings up the myth of pure evil, and that is an important aspect not only of the demonization of Jews but also of idealistic antagonisms in general. Idealists, perhaps in proportion to their ideological passion, tend to assimilate their enemies into that myth. As I have already said, idealists and Utopians cannot easily acknowledge that their opponents have a legitimate, acceptable claim on being good themselves, because to do so would undermine their own claim to be on the side of good. The inability to see the other side as legitimate is consistent with what we saw in Chapter 2 as a general pattern among victims: They refuse to attribute good or even innocuous or acceptable motives to the perpetrators who harm them. This refusal leads directly to the myth of pure evil. If the other side has no good or decent motive, then it must be motivated by the sheer perverse wish to do evil for its own sake.

The Treatment of Victims There are important implications of idealistic evil for the victims. Idealistic perpetrators believe they have a license, even a duty, to hate. They perceive the victim in terms of the myth of pure evil: as fundamentally opposed to the good, for no valid reason or even for the sheer joy of evil.

One implication is that ordinary restraints that apply even to severe conflicts may be waived. Holy wars tend to be more brutal and merciless than ordinary wars, and the reason for this is now apparent. When fighting against the forces of evil, there is no reason to expect a fair fight—and hence no reason to fight fair oneself. Idealists think they are up against a dangerous and powerful opponent who will stop at nothing to spread evil in the world, and so desperate and extreme measures are appropriate.

In a sense, this solves the problem of how ends justify means. If you are up against Satan, you should not expect the ordinary rules to apply. Murder may be acceptable if you are killing the most wicked and demonic enemies of the good; indeed, the state does that by executing the worst criminals and traitors. And the Bible is full of examples of how killing was all right when done in God’s name and in the service of divinely sanctioned causes. After all, it is only because of broad conceptions of goodness that murder is seen as wrong. If Satan is your enemy, you know that the fight is not going to be conducted in line with those notions of goodness. Satan cannot be expected to obey Christian morals and similar rules.

Another implication is that the victim’s options are slim. In instrumental evil, the victim can get off relatively easily by conceding whatever it is that the perpetrator wants. In idealistic evil, however, what the perpetrator often wants is that the victim be dead. The victim’s suffering is not one of many means to an end, but an essential condition for the (ostensible) triumph of good, and that leaves the victim with much less latitude to make a deal.

Isn’t It Just a Rationalization?

Whenever people attribute their violent or oppressive actions to high, pure, morally admirable motives, suspicion arises as to whether they are not simply concocting fancy rationalizations for what are at bottom self-serving motives. An adequate understanding of evil must look below the surface at idealistically motivated violence. It could be that the idealism merely dresses up or conceals what is in fact another form of instrumental evil: people using immoral means to do what is best for themselves. The veneer of idealism might be no more than a dishonest or hypocritical ploy to conceal selfishness.

It is abundantly clear that such hypocrisy has occurred. Individuals and groups have often sought to hide their greedy or grasping motives under such high-sounding assertions. For example, the European conquest of Africa was often justified (or rationalized) in terms of what Kipling, in another context, called “the white man’s burden” of sharing the benefits of his culture with backward peoples. Europeans spoke often of bringing the “three C’s” to Africans: civilization, commerce, and Christianity. Yet these were hardly the sole motives. The glory of empire and the anticipation of profits and riches were decisive, despite the fancy talk of bringing benefits to the natives. And once it became clear that the expected benefits were not forthcoming, the Europeans lost much of their interest in maintaining African colonies. Apparently, it was one thing to bring true religion and Western culture to the dark continent while turning a profit, but quite another when it turned out that Europe would lose money in the deal. These ideals still apply, of course, and Europe is still trying to do some good in Africa these days (with uneven success), but the sense of urgency for major involvement goes down when it is discovered to be a money-loser instead of a big money-maker.

At the individual level, it is even clearer that self-serving motives often operate under the guise of ideals. Historians of various ideological repression campaigns typically record that petty local grudges and animosities often lie behind the denunciations that feed a purge. This was true in the Spanish Inquisition, and it was still true in the modern Stalinist and Khmer Rouge purges. The notorious punishment of Lyons during the French Terror was run by a man who had a personal grudge against the wealthy people of Lyons. He had been an aspiring actor and stage manager there many years earlier, and he had not received the admiration that he felt was due him. He thought the local folks in general had treated him shabbily when he was down on his luck. Under his vindictive leadership, the Terror became much harsher in Lyons than in other regions of France.

Yet it would be a serious error to conclude that genuine idealism is always absent or irrelevant as a factor in promoting evil. The cases of deception and hypocrisy are important, but there also seem to be ample cases in which the enthusiasm for lofty or utopian ideals is indeed genuine.

One piece of evidence for this fact is that many violent utopian movements have been marked by a puritanical hostility to pleasure. When the brutal Khmer Rouge took over Cambodia, for example, they did away with most of the joys and pleasures of normal life—even for themselves. According to Elizabeth Becker, the leaders did live a more comfortable life than the miserable near-starvation of the rural peasants, but not by a great deal. She describes them as “a dour, puritanical group of people” 25 who rarely smoked cigarettes, abstained from alcohol, and regarded “unauthorized” romance as deserving of the death penalty. They occasionally smiled but were never seen to laugh aloud. They seemed fanatical about being clean and orderly at all times. (Their long years of desperate life in the jungle may have prepared them to adore cleanliness, just as it accustomed them to live without much in the way of sensual pleasures.) She says that they generally provided good examples of the “strict life” they sought to impose on the rest of the population. Pol Pot, the leader, was captivated from an early age by the ideal of purity, and the Khmer Rouge elite seemed to concur.

A similar picture emerges of the European Fascist leader Francisco Franco, who presided over the winning side in one of modern history’s most brutal civil wars. The Spanish Civil War was marked by systematic mass executions of prisoners and civilians, machine guns being turned on refugee columns, and various other atrocities, some punctuated by the eerie chant of “Long live death!” Peter Wyden summarized several descriptions of Franco as a man followed a “puritanical life-style,” which meant “no drinking, no smoking, no cards, no women,” 26 and as being generally a “pleasureless” individual.

The Chinese Cultural Revolution, which may have had the highest body count of any mass murder campaign in the bloody twentieth century, was also puritanical. The only jewelry allowed to be worn by anyone in the country was the little pin-on button with the likeness of Chairman Mao. 27

In America, the Ku Klux Klan had a similar attitude during its heyday. William Simmons, the man who revived the Klan in the early 1900s and brought it to its all-time peak, urged Klansmen to live by a higher ethical code than other people, with special emphasis on sexual purity. The Klan sought to raise the moral purity of politics and other local affairs, and the women’s Klan campaigned vigorously against liquor, vice, wife-beating, and other immoralities. 28

The Nazis are of particular interest, too. It is clear that many of them benefited from the brutalities they inflicted on Jews and others who fell into their power. Yet they also maintained a commitment to an idealism that took self-denying, even puritanical forms. As we will see in Chapter 10, the SS leaders insisted that their brutal work be done in a sober, puritanical fashion that would support their claim to having high, pure motives. Although the reality was certainly not as scrupulous and selfless as the leaders contended, it is nonetheless probably true that the prevailing attitude was to avoid the taint of self-serving motives while carrying out these horrible deeds. As with Stalin’s and Mao’s purges, there was a general effort in the SS to keep the proceedings in the context of serving the noble cause and the beloved fatherland, as opposed to killing people for the sake of stealing their meager possessions.

Indeed, the SS was in every way an elite. 29 It was designed to be, and it regarded itself as, the purest and best of the organizations serving the country and party. Getting into the SS was quite difficult, and various criteria were imposed to ensure that only superior beings qualified: One had to have impeccable ancestors; be at least a certain minimum height; have a facial appearance that was free from any resemblance to Jewish, Slavic, Mongol, or other proscribed ethnic backgrounds; and so forth. (Himmler forecast that in 120 years, all the officers would be blond.) One’s personal past had to be impeccable, too: no legal or moral problems, including sexual misbehavior. Early on, entry requirements had been lower, but this was rectified by expelling many thousands of SS men who seemed to fall short of the new, higher criteria, such as alcoholics, homosexuals, self-seeking people, those who were not of pure Aryan descent, and some ordinary ruffians. The slogan “SS man, loyalty is your honor” was inscribed on their uniforms. In his influential book about the SS, Heinz Höhne describes them as “an Imperial Guard of strict puritans.” 30 The quest to be a superior class of people was fairly successful in many ways. In 1946, after the war, the Catholic archbishop of Freiburg acknowledged that he and others had generally considered the SS to be “the most respectable of the Party organizations.” 31 Yet the SS were precisely the ones who manned the concentration camps and death squads.

And that is the key point about the SS: The people designated to carry out the most brutal and wicked actions were the ones who had been chosen and taught to be an elite force, superior in character and virtue to everyone else. It was not the dregs and thugs, but the finest flower, who committed the most horrible deeds. 32 In a strange way, the SS have some resemblance to the comment that it is the good men who do the most harm in the world. In their own view and in the view of their colleague organizations, they were the best, the noblest. They were therefore the logical ones to use for making sure that mass murder was carried out in the most decent and morally proper fashion, in the official view.

Beyond Individuals One far-reaching difference between idealistic evil and other forms of evil is that idealistic evil is nearly always fostered by groups, as opposed to individuals. When someone kills for the sake of promoting a higher good, he may find support and encouragement if he is acting as part of a group of people who share that belief. If he acts as a lone individual, the same act is likely to brand him as a dangerous nut.

One reason for the importance of groups in idealistic evil is the power of the group to support its high, broad ideals. Abstract conceptions of how things ought to be gain social reality from the mere fact of being shared by a group. Without that group context, they are merely the whims of individuals, and as such they do not justify the use of violent means. To put this more bluntly: It is apparently necessary to have someone else tell you that violent means are justified by high ends. If no one of importance agrees with you, you will probably stop short of resorting to them. But if you belong to a group that shares your passionate convictions and concurs in the belief that force is necessary, you will be much more likely to resort to force. People seem to need others to validate their beliefs and opinions before they put them into practice, especially in a violent and confrontational way.

This is one of the less recognized aspects of the much-discussed experiments done by Stanley Milgram. In those studies, an experimenter instructed an ordinary person (a volunteer) to deliver strong electric shocks to another person, who was actually a confederate posing as an unsuspecting fellow subject. These ordinary people complied with instructions and delivered many severe shocks to the victim, far beyond the predictions and expectations of any of the researchers involved in the project.

As Milgram noted, many of the participants were upset about what they were doing. They showed signs of stress and inner conflict while they were pressing buttons that (supposedly) gave painful and even potentially harmful or lethal shocks to another person. As we will see in the next chapter, such distress is the normal reaction to hurting others.

Despite their inner distress, however, the vast majority of participants delivered increasingly severe shocks, up to the maximum level possible. A crucial factor was the presence of a fellow human being assuring them that their actions were justified and, indeed, were their duty. They had nothing to gain by inflicting harm, nor did they get any prestige or other advantage from hurting the victim, but their actions did presumably serve the commendable goal of advancing scientific progress. The presence of the experimenter to represent the community of scientific researchers was a central aspect of this experiment. By pressing the button, the subject participated in the group’s worthy enterprise.

The importance of the interpersonal dimension was indicated by the effect of physical distance. In later replications of the study, Milgram varied how close the subject sat to the experimenter as opposed to the victim. Being closer to the victim made the subject less willing to deliver hurtful shocks. Being closer to the experimenter (the authority figure) made subjects more willing.

In most cases, of course, such extreme acts are committed by devoted members of the group, rather than by temporary recruits. Thus, they share the group’s beliefs and ideals and are presumably willing to do what will further the positive goals of the group. The group is an important source of moral authority. Individual acts may be questioned, which usually means questioning them in terms of how well they fit into the recognized goals and procedures of the group. But the group itself is above question.

This pattern of deferring to the group’s moral authority is seen over and over again in violent groups. Consider again the Khmer Rouge. Like many Communist parties, it was a firm believer in the practice of self-criticism by individual members. But this meant examining one’s own acts (and thoughts or feelings) to see whether they corresponded to the proper party line. Criticism of the party itself was strictly off-limits. 33

Criticism sessions in Western Communist groups showed the same pattern. Individuals sat around and scrutinized themselves to see how they fit or failed to fit the official party line, but they never questioned the party line. 34 When the party adopted a new position, individual members scrambled to agree with it and to convince themselves that they had believed this all along. Arthur Koestler cynically described the process from his days as a Communist: “We groped painfully in our minds not only to find justifications for the line laid down, but also to find traces of former thoughts which would prove to ourselves that we had always held the required opinion. In this operation we mostly succeeded.” 35 Whether one looks at religious warriors, members of Fascist or Communist groups, or modern members of street gangs, one finds the same pattern: The group is regarded as above reproach. The members of the group may sometimes think rather poorly of one another, but the group as a whole is seen as supremely good.

Why do groups seem to have this effect? Although several factors contribute, it is necessary to begin with the fundamental appeal of groups. Probably this appeal is deeply rooted in human nature. The human tendency to seek a few close social bonds to other people is universal, and nearly everyone belongs to some sort of group, whether a family or a mass movement. People who lack close social ties are generally unhappy, unhealthy, and more vulnerable than other people to stress and other problems. Some theorists have argued that the tendency to form small groups is the most important adaptation in human evolution, ranking even above intelligence, and so natural selection has shaped human nature to need to belong to groups. 36

The need to belong may be universal, but it is not always equally strong. One factor that seems especially to intensify the need is competition with other groups. Thus, one could debate the evolutionary benefits of belonging to a group, noting that the advantages of sharing others’ resources could be offset by the pressure to share one’s own resources with them. There is no doubt, however, about the competitive disadvantage of not belonging to a group when there are other groups. If there is some scarce resource such as food that a group wants and a lone individual also wants, the group is almost sure to get it. Thus, the need to bond with other people may be stimulated by the presence of a rival or enemy group.

This tendency toward intergroup competition fits well with what we have already seen. The words Devil and Satan are derived from words meaning “adversary” and “opponent,” which fits the view that rivalry or antagonism is central to the basic, original understanding of evil. 37 Evil is located in the group that opposes one’s own group. The survival of one’s own group is seen as the ultimate good, and it may require violent acts against the enemy group.

Are Groups Nastier than Individuals?

The tendency toward intergroup competition sheds light on one aspect of what some researchers have called the discontinuity effect; that is, the pattern by which a group tends to be more extreme than the sum of its individual members. In particular, higher levels of aggression and violence are associated with group encounters than with individual encounters. People generally expect that a meeting between two individuals will be amiable, and that even if they have different goals or backgrounds they may find some way to compromise and agree. In contrast, people expect that a meeting between two groups will be less amiable and less likely to proceed smoothly to compromise. Laboratory studies support these expectations and indicate that groups tend to be more antagonistic, competitive, and mutually exploitive than individuals. In fact, the crucial factor seems to be the perception that the other side is a group. An individual will adopt a more antagonistic stance when dealing with a group than when dealing with another individual. 38

Probably the easiest way to understand this difference is to try a simple thought experiment. Imagine a white man and a black man encountering each other across a table in a meeting room, one on one, to discuss some area of disagreement. Despite the racial antagonism that is widely recognized in the United States today, the meeting is likely to proceed in a reasonably friendly fashion, with both men looking for some way to resolve the dispute. Now imagine a group of four white men meeting a group of four black men in the same room. Intuition confirms the research findings: The group dispute will be harder to resolve.

There is nothing sinister or wrong with wanting to belong to a group, of course. Groups may perpetrate evil, but they can also accomplish considerable good (and without doing any harm in the process). Groups can accomplish positive, virtuous things that go beyond what individuals can do. Groups do provide a moral authority, however, that can give individuals sufficient justification to perform wicked actions. Moreover, when groups confront each other, it is common for the confrontation to degenerate into an antagonistic and potentially hostile encounter. In these ways, the existence of a group can promote evil and violence.

Yet that is not the whole story. We will now consider how groups can be strengthened by their own violent actions. Evil can make a group draw closer together, which in turn increases the potential for further evil.

The Group Itself as an End So far, we have considered groups that see themselves as pursuing high ideals and goals. But sometimes the group becomes an end, a positive value, in itself.

Part of the emphasis on keeping the group together comes from the awareness of outside, opposing forces. But having an enemy is not a full explanation. Idealistic groups tend to place a heavy stigma on people who leave the group. Ex-members or apostates are seen as especially dangerous, and it is common for groups to regard them as the worst and most dangerous people in the world. Arthur Koestler recalled how the Communists regarded those who quit the party as “lost souls, fallen out of grace.” As long as he belonged to the party, to talk to such a person or listen to him, even just to argue with someone who had left the party, was forbidden: “trafficking with the Powers of Evil.” 39

A similar pattern can be seen in the French Terror. Preserving the unity and integrity of the new Republic and its government became an end in itself, and the worst hostility was directed toward traitors among the leaders. Historian R. R. Palmer pointed out that many leaders of the Revolution had strong personal and ideological hatreds of the upper classes or various other groups, but they did not usually direct murder campaigns against these enemies. Instead, the guillotine was reserved for traitors, or at least those who came to be seen as traitors. The Terror was “primarily a weapon for enforcing political allegiance,” in Palmer’s summary. 40

A moving account of how an idealistic group closes up against anyone who leaves was provided by writer Richard Wright, a black American writer who joined the Communist party and then left it (thereby unintentionally joining the “Powers of Evil,” as Koestler called them) in the 1930s. He joined because he shared the values and goals of the Communists, who seemed intent on standing up for the oppressed and disadvantaged workers of the world against the system that beat them down and took advantage of them. Gradually, however, Wright began to feel uncomfortable about belonging to the group. He was shaken when one of the new members rose quickly to power in the group and led a purge of some members who had seemed to Wright quite sincere in their loyalty. Then, by accident, it was discovered that this new leader was a mental patient who had escaped from an institution. Wright thought, “What kind of club did we run that a lunatic could step into it and help run it? Were we all so mad that we could not detect a madman when we saw one?” 41

Wright found that his own ambitions to write about the experiences of American Negroes were not approved by the party, which began to tell him where to travel, what to work on, and whom to have as friends. Gradually, he came to feel that belonging to the Communist party was too stifling. His objections to the party were all linked to its procedures and rules; he agreed with its values and objectives. Finally, one day at a meeting, he got up and said that although he agreed with the party on ideological grounds, he wished to be dropped from the rolls of active members, so that he would not be bound by the party’s decisions and commands. He said that he hoped he could continue to find ways to help the party in its efforts.

He sat down amid silence. One of the group leaders moved that discussion of Comrade Wright’s statement be postponed, and the others went along. Wright walked out feeling that a great weight had been lifted from him and feeling happy that he had been able to leave in a friendly, reasonable, decent manner, without bitterness, accusations, or recriminations.

A few days later, however, he spoke with some other members of the group (who had missed the meeting where he asked to be dropped from the rolls), and they said the official story in the group was that Wright was in league with a Trotskyite clique and was trying to get other members to leave and betray the party. Wright was shocked to hear this. He offered to resign officially from the party, as opposed to being merely dropped from the rolls of active membership, but the others in the group said no: “No one can resign from the Communist Party!” 42

Over the following weeks and months, he was amazed and saddened by the way that all his friends in the group shut him out of their lives. Some refused to speak with him; others insulted him to his face, calling him a traitor and a renegade Trotskyite. Because he felt he shared their beliefs and values, he expected that they would remain friendly, but this was apparently out of the question. Wright recalled lying in bed at night, sadly telling himself that “I’ll be for them, even though they are not for me.” 43

The low point came on May Day of 1936. May Day is a major Communist holiday, and it was to be celebrated in Chicago by a parade in which many of the workers’ unions, including Wright’s own, took part. He arrived too late for his own group, but an old friend and Communist comrade saw him and invited him to march with them. Gratefully, he fell in and began to march along, enjoying the solidarity with the Communists who shared so many of his values and beliefs. Abruptly, however, other marchers recognized him and began to shout abuse at him as a traitor to the cause. He protested that he wanted to march, but the others insisted that he leave the ranks. Finally, they picked him up and literally pitched him headlong out of the ranks of marchers. He had to use his hands to break his fall, or else his head would have smashed against the curb.

Similar attitudes can be found in many groups. In most, presumably, the rejection of apostates does not reach the point of physically throwing them through the air, but the rejection is still severe and often painful to the person leaving the group. Sometimes, indeed, the treatment is even more severe. David Rapoport’s account of the Islamic terrorist group Al-Jihad quoted its writings to the effect that permanent, lethal hostility toward apostates is obligatory: “An apostate has to be killed.” 44

Hostility toward apostates is hardly a modern phenomenon. In Dante’s Inferno, the very lowest pit of Hell is reserved for traitors, which suggests that in Dante’s time the sin of betraying one’s group was regarded as the ultimate wickedness. Satan himself lived there as the original traitor: He had betrayed God, heaven, and all the forces of good. 45

Thus, it seems fair to say that an idealistic group typically regards the people who quit the group as the extremity of evil. Although one might think that the group would reserve its strongest hostility for its clear enemies, instead it directs it toward those who leave the group even if they claim to remain sympathetic to its values and goals and wish to remain friends with its members. The implication is that people who leave the group represent an even greater threat than its enemies. If other members were to interact with them, perhaps they would leave too, and the solidarity of the group would be undermined. Keeping the group together with a strong sense of separateness and commitment is in many cases a more fundamental and urgent goal than accomplishing its stated purposes or defeating its actual external enemies.

What happens is that the group evolves from being a means to being an end. The group may start off as a method of advancing several high ideals and valued goals. Gradually, however, the group itself seems to take on the value that was initially attached to those goals. What is good for the group becomes right, almost regardless of whether it has any clear positive link to the group’s original goals. The transition may occur without anyone noticing it very much, if only because the group members probably believe that the group is essential for the idealized goals to be achieved. But if we wish to understand how a new ruling party that is devoted to liberation and equality can turn to repression, terror, and inequality, we must recognize that people often begin to transfer their adoration of the ideals to the group itself. Once the preservation and advancement of the group becomes accepted as a valued end in and of itself, the restrictions on violent means and measures will often diminish.

Can Evil Serve Good?

This chapter has looked at how evil means can be adopted to serve good ends. It is clear that many people with lofty ideals and good intentions have perpetrated enormous cruelty, crime, and suffering on others. Yet it is worth pausing once more to ask whether these evil means can ever succeed in bringing about the positive, idealistic goals that they are supposedly serving.

Certainly there have been some spectacular failures. One can debate whether the utopian dreams of the Khmer Rouge or the Nazis were themselves good ends, but there is no doubt about the failure of their violent means to create their “paradise.” Moreover, the evil means they adopted played an important role in causing their failure. The Khmer Rouge and the Nazis gained national power for a brief time by virtue of their violent means. It was their continued and escalating violence that gradually brought outside powers to intervene against them, thereby dooming any chance for them to set up the society they wanted.

The French Revolution provides a more compelling and fascinating case, in part because so many of its ideals are ones we continue to espouse today. The famous trio of goals in their revolutionary slogan—liberty, equality, and fraternity (that is, community)—are above reproach, and indeed it would be a peculiar and unappealing utopia that rejected these ideals.

However impeccable the ideals of the French Revolution were, one must conclude that the violent means the new regime adopted were by and large a failure, at least if one judges them in terms of the desired effects sought by the people who resorted to them. The Terror failed to bring an end to political dissent. True, many dissenters were killed, but there were always more, and in any case those who remained alive simply fell into hostile factions once their common enemies were eliminated. As historian R. R Palmer wrote, each purge was supposed to be the final one, after which peace and harmony were expected; but inevitably, new enemies were found and new purges seemed necessary. 46 He adds that the year of terror left France more divided than ever, even though all that suffering was supposed to bring about unity.

The Terror certainly failed to cement the power of the people who implemented it; indeed, many of them became its victims. Even Robespierre, the fanatical idealist who presided over many extreme measures that he hoped would safeguard the Revolution, ended up on the guillotine himself. Like so many others, he was executed in the hope that, since he had supposedly been the tyrant responsible for the Terror, finally the ideals of the Revolution could be implemented. Although the Terror came to an end, the Revolution did not succeed. Indeed, that is the broader failure of the entire Terror: The Republic it was supposed to protect was soon utterly gone. The monarchy was restored a few years later. The very idea of the Republic was discredited in France for more than a century afterward, being ironically associated in the minds of the people with repression, violence, persecution, and other evils. 47 The means ended up tainting and corrupting the ideals they had been intended to promote and protect.

Likewise, the original idealism of the Crusades is undeniable, but so is the deplorable outcome. What had begun as service to religion and God gradually evolved into the self-serving pursuit of wealth and power. The Western church, centered in Rome, gradually came to see the Crusades as an opportunity to break the power of its great Christian rival, the Eastern church and empire centered in Constantinople (Byzantium). According to the historian Steven Runciman, this policy shift can be documented barely 10 years after the first Crusade set out, which is very early in the history of the Crusades. 48 A century later, the extremity was reached in the Fourth Crusade, “the Crusade against Christians,” 49 which early on abandoned any pretense of fighting against the infidels. The Crusaders sailed to Constantinople, which had been a friendly stopover on the way to the Holy Land for earlier Crusades. This time, however, the Crusaders took over the city and nearly destroyed it in an orgy of pillage and destruction. They carried many of its treasures back to Europe, and even today tourists visiting Venice and other centers admire some of the great works looted from Constantinople by that evil expedition.

I have emphasized the major developments and important outcomes of the Crusades, but there is a minor story that is also worth considering. When the First Crusade approached Jerusalem, the city prepared to defend itself, and one precaution taken by the Muslim governor was to ask all the Christians living in Jerusalem to leave. Most of them, of course, belonged to the Eastern Orthodox church, and they complied with the order. Their priests took along the holiest relic of the Jerusalem Christian church, a large piece of wood that supposedly had been part of the True Cross (the cross upon which Jesus was crucified).

After the city fell, the local Christians began to return to their homes. The Crusaders owed allegiance to the Roman church and were intolerant of the beliefs and practices of the Eastern Christians, and they set about suppressing them. The local Christians quickly began to realize that they had been better off and enjoyed more religious freedom under Muslim rule than they would under the new regime of supposedly fellow Christians.

The newly elected Roman Catholic head of the Jerusalem church, Arnulf, wanted the sacred relic that the departing Orthodox priests had taken. But the Orthodox priests had already begun to recognize that the new Christian regime was hostile to their faith and their rights, and so they refused to give it up. Arnulf had several of the priests tortured, until finally they revealed where they had hidden the piece of the True Cross. 50

This small event is noteworthy for several reasons. In the first place, it is troubling that a spiritual leader, sort of a junior pope, would subject other Christian priests to torture. Even more remarkable is the reason: to get them to reveal the whereabouts of a sacred relic. Today, of course, we know that most of the alleged relics of the True Cross were frauds. But setting aside these modern insights, it still seems amazing to think that a leader of the church would expect to benefit from a holy relic obtained by means of torture. One must assume that Arnulf believed his religion, and one can hardly avoid the conclusion that he thought his God would let him reap the rewards or enjoy the powers that the pieces of the True Cross would provide, rather than punish him for having profaned it by torturing the priests to whom God had entrusted it. In short, one must conclude that Arnulf thought God would think that Arnulf’s ends justified his means. Even when torturing Christians was the means.

One could go on listing examples, but the main ones covered in this chapter are sufficient to illustrate the general conclusion that evil means do not reliably promote good ends—in fact, they often seem to corrupt and undermine the ideals they were intended to serve. In the long run, the ends often fail to justify the means, and instead the means tend to contaminate the ends. Resorting to oppressive violence is thus a doubtful and self-defeating way to promote ideals or utopian dreams.

Still, the question remains: Can evil ever serve good? The general pattern may be that evil means fail to promote and often seem to thwart the ends they serve. But are there some cases in which good ends can result from wicked means?

Undoubtedly, it is sometimes necessary to resort to violence to protect oneself against wicked enemies. Despite reluctance to shed American blood in Europe, America and its allies found it necessary to fight two world wars to keep liberty and democracy alive. Still, most people would not regard those as evil means. Fighting to protect oneself from a vicious attack is hardly a resort to evil.

It certainly does appear that evil actions can sometimes promote good causes. Europe did benefit from the Crusades, at least in terms of cultural stimulation and increased trade. By the same token, the present United States exists partly as a result of the cruel conquest and destruction of the people who lived here before the European settlers arrived and took over. Yet such benefits are indirect; they are not what the wicked means were used to create. The Crusades were not undertaken to increase trade with the Middle East or to gain exposure to other cultures that might end up stimulating the cultural traditions of Europe. They were undertaken to make the Holy Land a safer place for Christian pilgrims and, more broadly, to promote the reign of Christianity in the world, and in this they largely failed.

As this book was being written, the United States celebrated the 50-year anniversary of the end of World War II, and the celebration was somewhat diminished by the 50-year anniversary of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Those bombings, like the involvement of the American labor movement with organized crime, may be good prototypes of the benefits of evil for good causes. The two bombings killed around 200,000 people, mostly noncombatants, yet they helped to end the war and bring victory to the side of freedom and democracy. In retrospect, the war’s outcome seems beneficial to both the United States and Japan, which today is a prosperous and well-respected country. Yet the resort to such extremely violent means tainted the victory and left the victors with some guilt and doubts. The American diplomatic policy of advocating nuclear arms control has always been weakened by the bombings. American insistence on the evils of nuclear weapons is diminished by the fact that America remains the only country ever to have used such weapons in war.

The American labor movement was weak and vulnerable in its early days, and the brutal tactics of management and strikebreakers put it in jeopardy. Forming a covert partnership with organized crime enabled some unions to prevail in their street battles and, indeed, to succeed earlier and better than they otherwise would have in the broad campaign to improve the lot of the American worker. Yet there was also a significant cost. Various union leaders were jailed or killed, and it was difficult to keep organized crime from gaining ever greater control over some unions. Indeed, the unions lost some of their respect and prestige by virtue of their links to criminal organizations. It is clear that the labor movement has achieved positive ends, and the evil means may have helped. But the cost was substantial.

That brings us to the bottom line. Evil means can sometimes be adopted in defense of good causes that are under attack by others—but that scenario is most commonly the rationalization by which good causes generate evil. Moreover, evil means tend to have unforeseen consequences, side effects, and backlashes that often end up weakening or undermining the very idealistic goals they have been employed to promote. And it also appears that evil means tend to contaminate and discredit the noble causes that resort to them.

The resort to evil means in service of noble ends is a Faustian bargain that often does far more harm than good. It may seem that one puts oneself at an unfair disadvantage not to adopt the most destructive and seemingly effective means at one’s disposal, and leaders are often faced with the tragic possibility that their noble cause will be defeated because they were unwilling to use the strongest means available. Yet such evil means carry less obvious dangers, and leaders who resist them deserve an extra measure of respect.

One such leader was Abraham Lincoln. During the Civil War, the Southern army insisted that arming black soldiers was illegal and that they would execute white officers who led black troops. They did in fact carry out a few executions of officers they captured, and the Northern military command requested permission to execute some captured Rebel officers in what seemed to them a fair reprisal. Lincoln said no, because he foresaw a downward spiral that would lead to ever more killing of prisoners. 51 By unilaterally refraining from such a reprisal, he prevented that downward spiral, and he also saved his cause from the moral damage that would have resulted from such measures.

But leaders like Abraham Lincoln are exceptional. The temptation to resort to violent means in the service of a good cause is common, and many a good cause has suffered contamination and worse by yielding to it.





