CHAPTER

7

Can Evil Be Fun? The Joy of Hurling In 1941, a young German journalist was stationed as a naval correspondent in Liepaja, one of the territories overrun by the Germans. One day the journalist received a pass that enabled him to witness the shooting of Jewish civilians. Writing about the event later, he passed over the plight of the Jews and the killing procedures, because he said those had already been sufficiently described elsewhere.

What interested him was the behavior of the killers, or as he more delicately put it, “the people who had to carry out such an action.” He said there was no single pattern of response, but a broad range. At one extreme, some of the security policemen were crying during the killings because they could not cope with the horrible reality. These later spoke to him of suicidal despair and the hopeless feeling of being unable either to disobey the orders or to carry them out. Others, however, seemed to have a more positive attitude, to the point that they kept a score sheet with the number of people they had shot. The journalist reflected that it was hard to tell the two extremes apart in any other way than their actions at the time. “Who today can determine which were those who wept as they carried out their duties and which the ones who kept a score-sheet?” 1

Certainly one must think that those who made a game out of killing people are the clearest examples of evil. Victims’ accounts sometimes even refer to the perpetrators laughing and enjoying themselves as they beat and shoot helpless people. The perpetrators themselves, at least the ones who later write about the experience, tend to emphasize the disgust, guilt, and depression that attend it.

Enjoyment of hurting others is one of the central features of the myth of pure evil. It is repeated in countless movies and other entertainments. Indeed, the James Bond novels and movies depend on it, for most of them include a sequence in which Bond is captured by the villain, who devises some clever and entertaining way to kill him, except that Bond manages to escape. The James Bond fan cannot help but reflect that if Bond were ever to fall into the hands of a less sadistic and more practical villain, who would shoot him on the spot, the series would end abruptly. Yet somehow writers (and presumably audiences) continue to find it plausible that each new villain ends up being thwarted by his own sadism.

If people could widely and commonly derive pleasure from hurting others, there might be little need for the rest of this book. The myth of pure evil would be essentially correct in its notion that bad people hurt others for the sheer pleasure of doing so. Why look further for explanations? Some people are violent and cruel for the fun of it. End of story.

This explanation is plausible. In fact, it has ardent supporters. The idea that human nature includes an aggressive instinct, or the similar idea that aggressive impulses are based on an innate genetic factor, is essentially an assertion that people are programmed by nature to want to inflict harm. That presumably implies that they get some kind of pleasure or satisfaction out of doing so, just as satisfying any of the other innate appetites (such as for food, drink, and sex) brings good feelings. These views have been asserted by some of the finest minds of the twentieth century, including Sigmund Freud and Konrad Lorenz.

Yet do people really enjoy killing? We know that it is not safe to rely solely on either victim accounts or fictional depictions for insight into the minds of evildoers. It will be necessary to consider the perpetrators’ perspectives and accounts and to look very closely at the evidence before concluding that people enjoy inflicting pain on others. Of course, the perpetrators’ accounts are also unreliable, especially when they are trying to rationalize their actions or reduce their blame after the fact. Perpetrators know the myth of pure evil, too, and they know that to admit to having enjoyed torturing or killing someone will put them in a very bad light. Most of them know that they’d better say they were reluctant and upset and that they didn’t believe in it and are sorry they were forced to participate.

Still, there are some who will speak frankly and describe what it was like at the time, even to the point of whether it was fun. At this point, another problem emerges: Victims and bystanders will seize on such accounts and emphasize them, possibly overgeneralizing or overinterpreting what is said. Even the journalist’s quotation that started this chapter deserves a second look. He didn’t say the men actually enjoyed the killings, only that they kept a score sheet. It could be that they were simply keeping track of the chore or had become inured to such duties and were trying to enliven a dull, slightly distasteful task.

The question of whether people enjoy harming others—and, if they do, the question of how much evil can be explained by this pleasure—is the single most elusive and vexing problem in the entire topic of evil. This chapter will take a hard but open-minded look at the evidence. Probably the best sign of open-mindedness is frequent revision of one’s opinion. The conflicting, inconsistent evidence has gradually led me to conclude that sadistic pleasure is genuine, unusual, acquired only gradually, and responsible for only a minority of evil. When it does come into play, however, it can make the victim’s plight immensely worse.

For want of a better term, sadism can be used to describe getting enjoyment or pleasure from hurting others, as well as the desire for that pleasure. Unfortunately, the term sadism is also sometimes used to describe a pattern of sexual behavior involving dominance over others, and that narrower, more precise and specialized usage is not what is meant here. 2 Moreover, I particularly do not wish to claim that true sadistic pleasure is inherently sexual or indeed is related to the pleasures that accompany such sexual transactions. The present question is the more far-reaching and urgent one of whether human evil is driven by the pleasure of harming others.

What It Feels Like to Hurt Someone Most people have some experience with hurting others. It is not usually a pleasant experience, contrary to the sadism theory. Back when parents used to use corporal punishment to discipline their children, one common line was, “This hurts me more than it hurts you.” We (the children) didn’t really believe it, but in retrospect at least there can be little doubt but that well-meaning, loving parents suffer when they hurt their children, even for a good cause.

More broadly, it seems safe to say that most people find it deeply upsetting to inflict harm, pain, or death on another person. The cheerful sadism that is often found in victim accounts and in the movies, where enemy soldiers laugh with pleasure while shooting, pillaging, raping, and torturing helpless victims, almost vanishes when one looks at the perpetrators’ own stories and experiences.

One of the biggest surprises to emerge from World War II was the reluctance of American soldiers to shoot at the enemy. That war was marked by an unprecedented involvement of social scientists and other mental health professionals who sought to learn about the reactions and coping mechanisms of soldiers in combat. To their surprise, they found that about one in every four American soldiers could not bring himself to aim and shoot his gun at enemy soldiers during a battle. Such reluctance is especially remarkable because there is no apparent moral issue. In battle, a soldier’s job is to fight the enemy, and he is bound by duty and obligation to do so. Hardly anyone maintains that it is immoral for a soldier to try to kill the enemy in battle, and of course soldiers are aware that the enemy is trying to kill them, too. Yet many soldiers could not pull the trigger. It seems there is some deeply rooted gut reaction that inhibits many people from shooting someone even when it is appropriate or possibly vital to do so.

A famous instance of this reluctance was documented during the Spanish Civil War in the 1930s. 3 George Orwell, who like many Western writers and intellectuals volunteered to fight against the Fascists, was dug in across from the enemy trenches, but the rifles were not effective at long range and so the men had to hide in no-man’s-land and snipe at the enemy. On one occasion, Orwell’s group fired upon small group of Fascists who were out of their trenches. Orwell took careful aim at a soldier who had been relieving himself when the shooting started and had turned to run off, holding up his pants with his hands. Orwell could not bring himself to shoot him. “A man who is holding up his trousers is not a ‘fascist.’ He is visibly a fellow creature,” said Orwell. Of course, he did not have time to think through such reasoning in the split second in which he had the chance to fire. His comment was probably made later as an articulation or rationalization of the sudden, unexpected gut reaction that made him unwilling to shoot.

Our own generation is more familiar with the sufferings of Vietnam veterans, such as the widely recognized posttraumatic stress syndrome. To be sure, some of the stress and suffering of these soldiers is a result of having been exposed to severe dangers, distressing losses of comrades, and feelingly helpless, at the mercy of unseen but deadly enemies. Other Vietnam veterans, however, suffer from the stress of having been perpetrators rather than victims. After the war, they were tormented by nightmares and anxieties about the things they did, rather than the things done to them. In one study of Vietnam veterans who sought therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder and related problems, 30 percent of them were found to be motivated by problems connected with their own violent actions. 4

In March 1968, American soldiers massacred the inhabitants of the village of My Lai, in what is almost certainly the most discussed American atrocity of the Vietnam War. Considerable information is available about the incident, and although it seems that some of the American boys acted callously or vindictively, many were deeply upset during and after the incident. One private was guarding a group of about 40 villagers when Lt. Calley told him “you know what to do” with them. When Calley returned about 15 minutes later, he was angry to see the private still guarding them, and he asked him why they weren’t dead yet. The private said, “I didn’t know we were supposed to kill them.” Calley helped line the villagers up, and the two GIs shot them with their automatic weapons. The private and other witnesses later testified that he had been crying while he fired at the people. He said he felt “all broke up” by the act of killing the civilian prisoners. 5 Some other soldiers were unable to bring themselves to shoot, and they either directly refused the orders or contrived ways to avoid them. Reportedly, one man deliberately shot himself in the foot as a way of getting excused from the killing duties. 6

Another relevant group is police, because police officers sometimes must shoot someone in the line of duty. Unlike soldiers, who are often drafted into service, most police officers have voluntarily sought that career and worked hard to gain that job. Sometimes they find themselves in situations in which dangerous, armed criminals must be shot, both for self-protection and to protect the public. Such shootings are thus eminently justified by professional duty, the need to protect the public, and self-preservation. Yet these officers too often find themselves having nightmares or other disturbances afterward. In recent years, most police departments have instituted mandatory counseling for all officers who have shot someone, as a way of helping these men and women cope with the stresses that arise from such an act.

Moral scruples should also be irrelevant when the victim desires to be hurt. Such cases are presumably rare, but that makes them all the more interesting. The anthropologist Gini Graham Scott spent several years studying people who desire sadomasochistic sex play. According to her research, one common problem is that a person desires a submissive, masochistic experience but is unable to persuade the spouse or romantic partner to take the dominant role. 7 (Most people start off desiring submissive experiences, and so the desire to be spanked is far more common than the desire to spank someone.) Again, a deeply rooted reluctance to hurt someone seems to be operating in such cases. If your spouse desires to be tied up and spanked by you, why should you refuse? Even if you do not have a strong personal desire to do those things, you should be willing to do them if only to give your partner the sexual enjoyment that he or she anticipates. But many people refuse. Or they cannot bring themselves to go through with it even if they want to consent.

To turn from the safe and consensual back to the horrific, the Holocaust has provided probably the most extensive evidence about how otherwise normal people respond to sudden demands to perform horrible deeds. Systematic killing of civilians began during the eastward thrust of the German troops, when special units were detailed to execute certain categories of people living in the captured areas. The killing procedures were still evolving at this point and were subject to local variations, but the broad pattern was roughly as follows. The unfortunate civilians were notified to be in the town square at a certain time. They were marched off in a group to a place near the execution site. Some were detailed to dig a pit. Then they were led to the killing site in small groups. They were ordered (perpetrators prefer the word instructed) to undress and stand in line. Soldiers with machine guns then mowed them down. Those who were not killed instantly had to be dispatched with a pistol shot to the head or other vital organ or stabbed to death. When one group was completely dead, the next one was brought along, and the procedure was repeated.

Apparently, many of the soldiers were very distressed by this duty. From a soldier’s point of view, it might be regarded as fairly easy work: It is far safer than combat and spares them from the helpless vulnerability of the modern battlefield. Yet the military psychiatrists found themselves called upon to treat a broad range of psychological disorders, comparable to those resulting from the stresses of combat. Anxiety and depression were common, as well as nightmares and other sleep disorders. 8 There were also physical problems similar to those produced by stress in general, especially vomiting, diarrhea, and other gastrointestinal disturbances. One psychiatrist who treated many of these problems estimated that about 20 percent of the soldiers assigned to kill prisoners suffered some of these psychiatric problems. 9 Presumably, many more felt some suffering but did not seek treatment. Although the basis for such an estimate is far from clear, the figure of 20 percent does suggest that the suffering was very common and yet certainly not universal. One must wonder how many of the other soldiers felt no qualms, as opposed to how many merely kept their problems to themselves.

The massacre of Jews at the small town of Jozefow, Poland, is vividly described through the perpetrators’ eyes in Christopher Browning’s book, Ordinary Men. 10 These perpetrators were older reserve policemen who had been called up for active duty to maintain order in the occupied country. They didn’t expect to be shooting at civilians, except maybe occasionally during a mutual shoot-out with resistance partisans or bank robbers. One morning they were roused very early and assembled in the dark to be given the day’s orders by the old major, “Papa” Trapp, who was visibly upset. He meandered through some explanations of duty and wartime necessities and the obligation to follow orders even if they were unpleasant. And then he told them that the day’s job would be to kill all the Jews in the nearby village, except for a few able-bodied males who would be sent to a work camp.

The procedure used for this killing operation turned out to be especially hard on the perpetrators, and substantial changes were made in later operations of the same type, as the police group became experienced in this kind of unpleasant duty. The first time, though, the victims were marched off to a waiting area. Each policeman then had to select one person from the group, march him or her (more were women) off to the killing site, instruct the victim to lie face down on the ground, aim his gun right up close at the back of the victim’s neck, and shoot. The extremely close contact with the victim—individual selection, walking together as a pair, and then shooting from close proximity—undoubtedly increased the horror of the act. Like the troops at My Lai, the policemen at Jozefow found ways to resist and evade the duty. Some refused outright or politely asked to be reassigned. Others sneaked away or managed to avoid both refusal and participation.

Despite the point-blank range, the killing operation was greatly delayed because many of the men repeatedly missed their targets. The Germans developed a special word for the problem, calling it “shooting-past.” The technical obstacle of shooting-past seems to represent the same kind of inner inhibition that blocked the American soldiers from shooting at their enemies on the battlefield. At the moment of truth, one simply could not bring oneself to kill this person. The poor woman is lying face down on the ground, your gun is aimed right at the back of her head, inches away, and when you force yourself to pull the trigger somehow your hand jerks the gun away and you fire into the ground near her head, missing her completely. You’ll have to shoot at her again, unfortunately; the job doesn’t go away just because you’re weak. No doubt she makes some unnerving sound at this point, too. All of this would be extremely upsetting.

After the killing was completed, the men returned to their barracks for the night. This had been their first experience with such grisly duty. Many could not eat, but most of them drank alcohol very heavily. There was little conversation. Many men had nightmares, and the barracks atmosphere was further disturbed in the night when one man woke up from a bad dream firing his gun into the ceiling.

From the safe vantage point of a half century and a continent away, one may think that of course the policemen should have suffered severe moral qualms about what they had done. They were, after all, participating in a genocidal crime that has defined the cultural conception of evil ever since. But Browning reports that when the policemen testified about the incident years later, they did not generally cast their personal struggles in terms of ethical principles or moral scruples. Even those who managed to escape the horrible duty failed to claim that some personal trait of character or ethics motivated them. Instead, he said, these men “overwhelmingly cited sheer physical revulsion against what they were doing as the prime motive.” 11 The perpetrators’ accounts of the massacre, even the ones that condemned it most thoroughly, tended not to express the horror in the moral terms in which we now discuss the Holocaust and similar events. They emphasized instead the disgusting, gruesome nature of the task, such as the sound of the screams, the feeling of being splattered with a victim’s brains, or just the horrible gut feeling of killing a person. The first day of mass murder did not prompt them to engage in spiritual soul-searching so much as it made them literally want to vomit.

Similar evidence comes from observations of other perpetrators. Normal American citizens who participated in Stanley Milgram’s famous experiment were instructed (ordered) to press buttons that they (falsely) believed were delivering painful electric shocks to another person, and although the subjects complied with their instructions, they showed many signs of stress and distress. At the other extreme, serial killers cannot be assumed to be normal or healthy at all, but they, too, often show negative reactions to their killings (especially their first ones). They report finding the experience disappointing and upsetting, and the long gaps between their early killings are due to the fact that they decided not to repeat the horrible experience (although they changed their minds later). The famous serial killer Ted Bundy said he never really achieved the satisfaction he expected from killing, and in fact his murders usually left him feeling empty, depressed, forlorn, and hopeless of ever finding emotional satisfaction. Other serial killers have reported the same feelings of emptiness and depression afterward. 12

Last, professional torturers hurt others as a job, but they, too, often find it stressful. In one of the few studies of such professionals, researchers found that after the Greek military regime fell, many former torturers came forward to describe their own problems and sufferings. These resembled the posttraumatic stress patterns we have already seen in other groups: nightmares, depression, severe irritability. 13

Thus, there is a convergence of evidence from many sources. Hurting someone is generally unpleasant, and it often evokes severely negative reactions. This is not to diminish the sympathy that the victim deserves, nor does it diminish the culpability of people who do bad things. The present question, however, is concerned with what it feels like to inflict harm on another human being, and the answer appears to be that it is quite upsetting. At least, that is how most people react the first time or first few times. As we will see, it does become easier with repetition.

Moreover, the distress associated with hurting or killing seems to be different from the moral or spiritual objection that might be expected. It is not that people feel that their principles have been violated, although some may indeed have such objections. Rather, it seems to be more of a gut reaction.

Why Do They Laugh?

Satan laughs when human beings suffer. By the same token, it is a standard pattern in movies and other entertainments to depict the villains laughing with pleasure at the pain and suffering of their victims. We have seen that reactions to hurting others often involve disgust, depression, and sympathy, which seem the very opposite of amused enjoyment. How can these views be reconciled?

The problem is all the more acute because victim reports do sometimes claim that their tormentors were laughing. For example, Mevludin Oric is a Muslim villager who accidentally survived a massacre by Serb soldiers in July 1995 when his cousin and best friend, who stood next to him, was shot and fell on top of him. Mevludin passed out from terror, lying soaked in his friend’s blood under the pile of corpses, and therefore the Serbs did not finish him off. He recalls the actions of the Serbian soldiers: “They were laughing like crazy men—they must have been on drugs, that’s all I can think.” 14 He said that right up until they opened fire, he could not believe the soldiers would shoot him and his unarmed, innocent friends.

Undoubtedly, one major reason to emphasize the laughter is the myth of pure evil. Victims can quickly and effectively make their point about the evilness of their captors by reporting this laughter. (In Mevludin Oric’s account, the myth is also invoked in the seeming incomprehensibility of the action, as well as in his ascribing their wicked acts to the alien power of drugs.) Yet it would stretch credibility to suggest that victims entirely invented the notion that their captors were laughing. Presumably, there must be some truth to the matter. Does laughter prove the existence of evil sadism? And if not, why would people laugh in the presence of others who are suffering and dying?

My own conclusion is that laughter is not very conclusive proof of sadistic pleasure, although it is revealing of how the perpetrator is feeling. People may laugh for a variety of reasons. Indeed, humor is one defense against a shocking or disgusting task. Thus, for example, an important part of medical training is growing accustomed to seeing injured bodies, and medical students are renowned for pranks and jokes featuring body parts from cadavers, such as hiding a severed hand in a lunch box. Such humor helps to overcome the normal reactions of shock and disgust that a physician cannot afford.

Nor are these reactions confined to medical students. An experiment by Bella DePaulo and Matthew Ainsville videotaped people’s facial reactions to a series of slides, and one of the slides involved a repulsive photograph of an accident victim. 15 Males often responded to the disgusting slide with a smile (although females hardly ever did). It was not a smile of pleasure, but rather one that suggested embarrassment and an effort to distance oneself from the shocked or offended reaction. Still, something similar may be at work among people who find themselves working in a place where torture or execution is occurring.

Laughter may also arise from nervousness or uncertainty about how to react. In Milgram’s experiments, some of the participants laughed when they followed instructions to deliver painful electric shocks (or so they believed) to another person who was banging on the wall and shouting for them to stop. Milgram reported “the regular occurrence of nervous laughing fits” that “seemed entirely out of place, even bizarre.” And he was not just talking about the occasional nervous giggle. For three participants, the laughter reached the point of “full-blown, uncontrollable seizures.” In the postexperimental debriefing conversation, many of the subjects were embarrassed by their laughter and loss of control. They “took pains to point out that they were not sadistic types, and the laughter did not mean that they enjoyed shocking the victim.” 16 Milgram concurred that this laughter was not a sign of pleasure or amusement but rather reflected some effort to cope with one’s distress at a pressure-filled, upsetting situation in which one was hurting someone. A similar reaction may be evident in the way people sometimes laugh to break the tension, during a moment of anxiety or uncertainty or even during a frightening movie. But victims may not make such fine distinctions between different kinds of laughter, especially when the mere fact of laughter will strengthen their account by indicating that their tormentors are evil.

Laughter may also occur out of sheer pleasure over doing a job well. Jerome Kagan’s book on self-awareness in two-year-olds included the observation that many young children spontaneously smile when they succeed in mastering a new skill or task, indicating a presumably natural or innate source of pleasure. 17 It may be true that most acts of harming a defenseless victim would not involve much skill. But some would.

Torture, in particular, is a craft involving particular procedures and goals. The journalist Elizabeth Becker found the notes of a young Khmer Rouge cadre who had worked as a torturer in the infamous Tuol Sleng prison. These were private notes and were probably not intended for the outside world, so they may have been more candid than usual. He quoted his instructors as saying that “the purpose of torturing is to get answers. It’s not something we do for the fun of it.” The instructor went on to talk about the danger of losing control and lashing out at a prisoner in a blind rage, such as when frustrated. But then he made a remarkable statement: On some occasions, the enemy prisoner will “respond in a way that fits with the desires of our questions, [and] we get so happy we laugh and have a good time.” 18

Is that a rationalization? It seems unlikely. An instructor speaking to trainees about torture would probably want to provide accurate guidance about what to expect, and his comments were never intended to be published for the broader world to see. He was not trying to make torture look good.

And it is certainly plausible that groups of men (and perhaps women) would sometimes laugh with pleasure when they are succeeding at a difficult task. Thus, there is nothing inherently funny about football or basketball, and in fact these are difficult, strenuous games that require exhausting exertion and hold the risk of serious injury. Yet near the end of an important contest, one can often see the players on the winning team smiling and laughing. Although it seems a grotesque stretch to propose that a group of torturers would experience the same sort of pleasure, it is actually quite plausible, provided that they managed not to be too distressed over the suffering of their victims. And as we will see in the next chapter, that numbness or lack of empathy is often sought and cultivated in such work. Thus, torturers might end up laughing or seeming to enjoy themselves in a way that their victims could easily misinterpret as sadistic pleasure. They would be laughing in spite of the violence, rather than about it.

The analogy to a sports game brings us back to the quotation at the start of this chapter, in which the journalist noted that some of the German soldiers assigned to shoot civilians kept a score sheet to record their kills. This report is not unique. Other sources have documented that Nazi killers occasionally made games out of the activity. Some required the naked prisoners to run across a field while the troops shot at them, thereby increasing the marksmanship challenge. One of the police battalions guarding the Warsaw ghetto was encouraged by the captain to take pot shots at Jews near the wall of the ghetto. Scores were kept, top shooters were rewarded, and “victory celebrations” were held whenever a high score was reached. 19

Yet making a game of killing does not prove that the killing itself was pleasant. Rather, it suggests a shockingly callous attitude toward the deaths. A callous develops for a purpose, however, which is to reduce sensitivity. If the killing were especially unpleasant, people might try to make it into a game to make it more bearable. Focusing on the game and the score would detract attention from the moral worries and the disgusting unpleasantness of the duty. Many people seek to enliven tedious, unpleasant jobs by elaborating them into games. 20 We certainly have every right to disapprove of killers who treat the killing as a sport, but we cannot infer that they did so out of love of killing. The reason may have been the opposite.

A final reason to laugh is the humiliation of another person. Humiliating, degrading experiences are sometimes funny to watch, and indeed a great deal of comedy is based on just that principle. Stand-up comedians tell stories about embarrassing things that happened to them, and televised comedy shows often get laughs by depicting events that make fools of their protagonists. Undoubtedly, many victims of oppression or torture are degraded, and their oppressors might at some point begin to find these scenes funny. Thus, to see a dignified, powerful adult man reduced to naked, fearful helplessness might possibly have an element of amusement in it, especially if he urinates involuntarily or begs to be released or unexpectedly makes an odd squeaking noise in response to pain. Sympathy for the victims would preclude seeing any humor, but one must recall that the attitude of the captors often precludes such sympathy. Imagine, for example, that Adolf Hitler were captured alive and pissed his pants in fear. It might be funny.

Powerful people sometimes do enjoy the humiliations they inflict deliberately on their victims. For example, sometimes perpetrators require their captives to sing, which has no instrumental or material benefit to the captors but does embarrass the victims. During the Stanford Prison experiment, in which college students were randomly assigned to work as either guards or prisoners in a simulated prison, the guards at one point required a prisoner to sing “Amazing Grace” by himself while the other prisoners did push-ups. 21 Likewise, in a recent television documentary, gang members described one of their capers in which they forced a robbery victim who was riding with them as a prisoner to sing several songs for their amusement. In such circumstances, the singer knows that he or she is being deliberately humiliated, which affects the singing and makes it more difficult to hold the tune—thereby intensifying the amusement of the captors who can play at being music critics and comment on the false notes or resolute style of the singer.

There are plenty of reasons that people may laugh during the victimization of others without indicating that they are deriving direct amusement and pleasure from hurting someone. Probably, most group tasks contain some occasions for laughter, if only to break the tension, and these occasions may arise even when the group task involves oppressing or hurting a detested enemy who is now safely cowed and in one’s power. Still, victims probably attend specifically to such laughter and accommodate it to the myth of pure evil. To them, it provides welcome proof that their oppressors are sadistic, wicked individuals.

And so I don’t doubt that killers and torturers and other people sometimes laugh when inflicting harm. But that doesn’t prove that they enjoy the harm. There’s plenty of evidence that most people don’t.

Then again, maybe some of them do.

The Fascinating Spectacle of Violence Now let us look for positive indications that people sometimes get pleasure directly from harm or violence done to others. A first and very clear set of evidence concerns the interest in viewing violence. People seem to enjoy the spectacle of other people being hurt or killed, when they are not taking part.

The conclusion seems indisputable. If nothing else, it is clear that people enjoy entertainments based on harm and violence. The majority of movies by Eastwood or Stallone or Schwarzenegger have some humor, some plot devices, some acting, but people don’t see them for those reasons; rather, they go for the violence. They enjoy the humor and all that as extras. Many films have little to offer except violence, but they draw millions of viewers, and indeed slasher films such as Halloween, Nightmare on Elm Street, and Friday the 13th have often managed to beget multiple sequels. Nor is this appetite confined to North America: Many of Hollywood’s blood-and-guts films are popular around the world.

The ongoing national debate about violence in movies and television is over the tough question of whether media violence is a cause of real violence. What is all too easily overlooked is the fact that media violence is essentially an effect, a consequence. People want to see violent movies. Movies are made to make money, and so the moviemakers film what people want to see. If people did not want to see violence, there would be very few such movies, because no one would pay to see them. But people do want to see them. Apparently, lots and lots of them.

Movies are hardly the only source of violent entertainment. The more literate segment of the public reads books, and many of these books deal with violence. Over the past decade, a new genre of “true crime” books has become big business. These books take actual violent events and describe them in detail. An early instance of this genre was Truman Capote’s In Cold Blood, a slightly embellished account of a true story in which a pair of convicts broke into a midwestern family’s house to rob them and, finding nothing much to steal, slaughtered the entire family. At the time, the book created quite a sensation, but by now one can routinely expect such a book on nearly every gruesome crime.

The fascination with the spectacle of human suffering goes beyond any interest in crime or violence itself. Almost invariably, people stop to look whenever there is a chance to see an injured human being or some other serious suffering. Many traffic jams could be avoided if people did not all slow down to look when driving by an accident: It is the slowing down for the sake of rubbernecking that causes the cars behind to have to wait. Likewise, when there is a fire, neighbors and strangers gather to watch.

This fascination with violence should not be attributed to any special depravity of modern society, because it is not limited to modern times. The violent entertainments of the Roman Colosseum are well known but not usually appreciated in context. Today, people tend to condemn them for their anti-Christian violence or exploitive operation, but such criticisms (although legitimate) miss the point from the perpetrator’s perspective. The Romans did not have cable television movies with Steven Seagall wreaking havoc on dozens of enemies. To see a spectacle of violence, they had to put real violence on stage. Hence the gladiators, the wild animals, and the rest. The lions were not introduced to the Colosseum to provide a special punishment for the hated Christians. Rather, the Christians were put there for the sake of the lions. The audience wanted to see somebody (anybody) being mauled and eaten by lions, and so suitable categories of criminals were used to furnish the victims. The Christians were simply one of these unfortunate categories of criminals.

Indeed, public executions have always been an important spectacle. Once again, the modern sensitivity tends to side with the victims and condemn such practices, but these modern attitudes differ from how people at the time regarded them. Criminals were evil, and seeing a criminal put to death was probably comparable to seeing a villain in a modern movie killed by the hero. It signified a morally good, correct act of justice, and some enjoyment of the scene was appropriate.

Popular historian Barbara Tuchman recorded a story in which a medieval French village purchased a condemned criminal from another village so that they could stage the execution in their own town. 22 Tax money and public funds were as tight then as now, and it is surprising that one municipality would expend some of its budget on punishing a criminal who was under the jurisdiction of another. Yet the purchase makes sense if one understands that the execution was a major public entertainment, like a concert or play. Such rural villages had few entertainments to offer the citizens: no televisions, radios, stereos, video games, board games, or other amusements. To see a criminal put to death might be the most interesting and exciting thing to see all year, and possibly the only such thing. If the village had money, why should they be deprived of such a stimulating event, simply because they had no criminal of their own to execute?

Some of the greatest spectacles were provided by the major religious persecutions such as the Spanish Inquisition. From the public’s perspective, the high point of each phase of the Inquisition was the auto-da-fé, 23 in which the convicted heretics were put to death. These were treated as great events and were sometimes timed to coincide with major celebrations, such as the one in 1632 held in honor of the Spanish queen’s giving birth to a baby princess. Typically, the auto-da-fé was announced well in advance, and people would come from many miles to the city to see it. Getting a room the night before an auto-da-fé was more difficult than finding one in South Bend the night before the Notre Dame homecoming football game is today. The festivities included a parade of the guilty, the collective recital of Christian vows by all the audience (comparable perhaps to the singing of the national anthem at modern sports events), the pronouncing of sentences, the individual responses to the sentences, and then the executions. The actual executions sometimes occurred at a different place, requiring yet another procession.

The worst condemned heretics were burned alive. Others who repented at the last minute gained the mercy of being garrotted (strangled with a rope) before their corpses were thrown on the flames. To be burned alive, of course, is an especially nasty way to die, and it was common for the condemned to recant when facing that fate. Still, garrotting was not popular with the audience, and some crowds jeered and booed if too few heretics remained alive for the actual burning. 24

Thus, people do enjoy the pleasure of watching other people suffer and die. The spectacle of violence holds a fascination that seems to transcend time and culture. This does not prove that people can enjoy inflicting the harm themselves, but it is difficult to dispute the fact that they can get some pleasure out of seeing others hurt. At the very least, one can say that inflicting harm on others would be a way of bestowing on oneself the well-tested pleasures of being able to observe someone suffering.

Empathy, Children, and Psychopaths One day at the beach near our home, a group of schoolgirls found that a big fish had swum into the small space between the pier and a cement beach wall and had trapped itself. The fish was in a pool of water, but in front of it the water ended, it could neither turn around nor back up. As it happened, a woman came by walking her dog, and the four girls appealed to her to help them save the fish. When she described the incident later, the woman said that her normal response in such a situation would be to fetch her husband to perform such a gross task as picking up a big fish. But on this occasion, she felt some pressure to be a role model to the girls, and that ruled out the option of running off to get a man to do the icky part.

She also had to cope with her dog, which was part wolf and quite ruthless in such situations. In the dog’s checkered past, she had killed many squirrels, groundhogs, and other small creatures, and she had not refrained from biting the occasional human either, usually without bothering to alert them by barking first. This monster dog had the preposterous name of Lucy. Lucy did not like the big fish, not at all. Whenever the woman managed to get the fish freed up a little, it would move forward a couple inches, and then Lucy would start forward herself as if to kill the fish, and the woman had to tell Lucy to keep back. The big fish and Lucy remained in constant, unsmiling eye contact, while the woman tried to find a way to get the fish turned around, to save its life as the girls wanted.

Finally she succeeded in picking up the fish and turning it around. As she recalled, the fish was big and heavy and scaly and slimy and flopping, each of which increased the difficulty of lifting it. The girls cheered. Lucy was disappointed. The woman went home to shower and change her clothes.

One response to this story is to reflect that the big fish was very lucky to have been discovered by a group of girls rather than a group of boys, who probably would not have settled on saving it as the most appealing response. In fact, though, the woman recalled that it had been a somewhat close call even with the girls, because a couple of them expressed interest in throwing stones at the fish and poking it with sticks. But somehow the spirit of helping it prevailed. The point, though, was that it would not have taken much for the children to have killed the fish. Doing something was the key; whether they saved it or killed it was not such a big deal. The fish presented a problem and a potential adventure, and tormenting or killing it would have been one very feasible response.

Are children sadistic? Certainly, killing a big fish would be in character. Children do plenty of things that harm or kill other creatures. They pull the wings off flies or moths. When a couple of boys discover an anthill, they may spend the better part of an hour stomping all the scurrying black or red critters to death. Some children throw frogs into the air to see them go splat on the pavement. Some fire slingshots or BB guns at birds, rabbits, or squirrels. A recent news story reported that a group of 11 boys and girls, from 8 to 14 years old, chased a small horse into a barbed wire fence where it broke its leg, then beat the animal with sticks until it died. 25 Children also pick on one another, and although this does not usually reach the point of maiming or killing, it is acutely unpleasant to the child being tormented or humiliated, even just by malicious teasing.

Yet all of this does not seem to add up to pure sadistic pleasure, as normally understood. Curiosity and a spirit of play tend to guide these activities, not a fully emerged enjoyment in the suffering of others. Indeed, what generally brings these activities to a halt is the intervention of adults, who tell the child to imagine how that would feel if someone did that to you: Put yourself in the other’s place. As the child develops some empathy with the victim, the cruelty subsides.

Empathy is an important inhibitor. The capacity for empathic response emerges quite early in life, but it takes years for empathy to be developed and refined into a common response—and to be strong enough to keep people from inflicting harm.

Because empathy has to be developed, there are wide variations in how much people have. Young children may have only a rudimentary version. Sensitive, fully socialized adults, in contrast, may be able to feel sharp empathic pain simply by reading about the suffering of total strangers in distant parts of the world.

Other adults are less sensitive. At the low extreme are the psychopaths, who seem in many respects to be utterly lacking in empathy. Indeed, the disregard for other people’s rights is regarded as one of the defining features of the antisocial personality disorder (the new name for psychopathy in clinical diagnosis). Research psychologist Robert Hare, who has specialized in studying psychopaths, defines such individuals in the following terms: They are superficial, impulsive, egocentric, grandiose, and deceitful. Compared to other people, they lack remorse, empathy, guilt, responsibility, emotional depth, and self-control. 26

As children, psychopaths often take the lead in petty cruelties to animals and bugs and seem to be more fascinated and less troubled by the sufferings of the tiny creatures than their friends are. Later, as adults, they treat other people with almost the same indifference. “Do I feel bad if I have to hurt someone? Yeah, sometimes,” said one psychopath who was in prison for kidnapping, rape, and extortion, when interviewed by Hare, “But mostly it’s like … uh … [laughs] … how did you feel the last time you squashed a bug?” 27 Moreover, it looks like such answers are sincere, not just bravado. They really just don’t feel much about it.

Psychopaths do get some amusement from the sufferings of their victims, although this does not seem to be a driving force. One man in Hare’s study had been imprisoned after a burglary. He broke into a house and was searching for valuables when an older man came downstairs and began “yelling and having a fucking fit,” as the psychopath recalled it callously. He struck a few hard blows to the old man’s head and throat, “and he like staggers back and falls on the floor. He’s gurgling and making sounds like a stuck pig,” 28 he said, with a laugh. In response, he kicked the man in the head repeatedly until the old guy fell silent. Another man described a fight in which his opponent pulled a knife on him, but he got the knife away and “rammed” it into the opponent’s eye. He recalled the opponent’s response with amusement: “He ran around screaming like a baby. What a jerk!” 29

Normal human beings (as opposed to psychopaths) seem at least able to accept harm to animals without feeling much regret or empathic pain. Hunting and fishing represent popular pastimes that revolve around the killing of animals. Of course, there is room to question how much of the enjoyment is based on killing, and hunters are often rather testy about this topic, but it is clear that the killing at least fails to detract from a pleasant experience.

Several years ago, legal restrictions on hunting caused the moose population in the northeastern United States to expand dramatically. To control the overpopulation, a few states passed emergency measures allowing hunters to shoot them freely. The usual challenge of hunting was mostly absent, because after years of legal protection, the moose had lost most of their fear of humans. They were tame enough to stand right next to you. Yet many hunters still found enjoyment in shooting them. Newspapers had photos in which a hunter would walk right up to a moose, aim his rifle point blank at the unsuspecting, tame moose’s head, and shoot it. Such incidents suggest that the killing itself furnished some pleasure, because there was little need for the stalking and other skills that many hunters cite as the central focus of the pleasure.

Taken together, the evidence does indicate that some people can inflict harm without great suffering. The implication may be that people only learn to be deterred by empathy. Many children start off being able to inflict harm without suffering a great deal of remorse, and psychopaths never seem to acquire the empathy and other factors that make one adverse to cruelty. This is not to say that they enjoy cruelty, but they do not necessarily find it to be objectionable and upsetting, either.

How can these observations be reconciled with the earlier evidence that people are often distressed and disgusted by their first experiences of inflicting harm on other human beings? There are two possible answers. One is that people are different. Only some people are upset, while others have no inner regrets or problems. The other is that the capacity for empathy does not always come into play.

There is some evidence for both answers. Let’s begin with the psychopaths. Psychopaths do not seem to feel much regret over the suffering of others. “How did you feel the last time you squashed a bug?” as the one said. Such individuals seem to be incapable of feeling sympathy with people who suffer, including their own victims. (They may become fairly adept at pretending to have sympathy, however, to manipulate people into trusting or forgiving them.) Now to the second explanation. It appears that most people develop a capacity for empathy, and this capacity deters cruelty. The fact that it appears between childhood and adulthood does not necessarily mean that it depends entirely on socialization, because it may have to wait until natural processes of maturation make certain abilities available. Empathy depends heavily on the ability to take on another person’s perspective and imagine what that person is thinking and feeling. Such mental gymnastics develop only gradually. Thus, it is likely that empathy increases slowly with age, through both cognitive development and the influence of teaching and socialization.

Still, it seems that many people can disconnect their empathic responses and the inhibitions they bring. Some people become woefully upset at cruelty to animals, to the point of becoming vegetarians, protesting against hunting, shouting at people who wear fur, or demonstrating against research that involves the death of laboratory rats. Other people have no problem with these types of harm to animals. The difference is not a matter of the presence versus the absence of empathic sensitivity in general. Indeed, Adolf Hitler was a vegetarian and abhorred hunting and other forms of cruelty to animals, yet he initiated and presided over one of the greatest mass murder campaigns in history, and he remained coolly detached even from the sufferings of his own most loyal soldiers and followers.

The key point is that this empathic sensitivity seems to be selective. People may feel a great deal in some situations and toward some targets, but they seem to lack it utterly in others. And people are surprisingly flexible in their capacity to feel sensitive and empathic toward some and not toward others.

Can People Really Enjoy Hurting?

Now we turn to the heart of the matter: what perpetrators say about getting enjoyment from hurting people. Most perpetrator accounts do not include such statements, and far more perpetrators describe how their fellows or colleagues enjoyed hurting than say that they themselves got pleasure from it. Still, references to pleasure from hurting are too common in perpetrator accounts to be dismissed or ignored.

One of the classic, definitive works on violence was Hans Toch’s detailed study of violent offenders and violent policemen. He sorted the men in his sample into several categories based on their motives and patterns of behavior. He labeled some men “bullies” based on the fact that they found pleasure in the suffering of others. Such a man would “go out of his way to be unfair, unmerciful, and inhumane in his violence.” 30 When the victim shows signs of weakness or suffering—the point at which most violent predators regard their victory as secure and cease their violence—the bully intensifies his attack, as if the fun were just beginning. Such individuals seem to be rare—only a small minority (6 percent) of Toch’s sample fell into this category—but they do exist. Moreover, some of Toch’s observations suggest that bullies are made, not born, at least to the extent that violent patterns increase over time. “Violence is habit-forming,” he concluded. 31

Some American soldiers in Vietnam appear to have learned to enjoy inflicting pain and harm on their enemies. Interrogation of captured Vietnamese typically included some physical coercion, at least to the extent of hitting or slapping them. The American captors would generally start out treating this procedure as just another routine duty, but some would begin to discover a sensual pleasure in the work. Indeed, one scholar has proposed that “unless one sets out to do so, it is actually difficult to avoid the development of an involving esthetic in the sounds and rhythms of repeatedly slapping another person.” 32 In some cases, the interrogation developed into a frenzy that caused the prisoner’s death. Torturers from other cultures and other parts of the world report the same kind of problem. The premature death of prisoners due to overzealous torture is considered a common cause of unsuccessful interrogation all over the world. Thus, it is apparent that people can get carried away to the point of enjoying beating a helpless enemy prisoner.

Killing itself is sometimes pleasurable. In the words of one American veteran of Vietnam, “There is incredible, just this incredible sense of power in killing five people…. The only way I can equate it is to ejaculation. Just an incredible sense of relief, you know, that I did this. I was very powerful.” 33 He said he felt like a successful hunter.

Indeed, it appears that several serial killers got their start in Vietnam. The notorious murderer Arthur Shawcross described his tour of duty in Vietnam as one of the best times of his life. He had free rein to kill men, women, and children, and he not only killed them but tortured and mutilated his victims, sometimes even dismembering them or in a few cases roasting and eating parts of the carcasses (there is some question about whether the last actually happened, although he admitted it). Years later, he said, “I was never happier.” 34 Another serial killer, Joe Fischer, got his start in World War II and was pleased to learn that killing brought medals and other rewards. He found that “killing felt too good to stop,” 35 and so he continued to murder after returning home from the war.

Obviously, serial killers are far from typical, and most people would like to believe that they are genetically twisted in some way and should not even be considered in the same breath as the rest of the human race. But the deeds of serial killers cannot be reduced to explanations based on extraordinary genetic configurations. Some cultures and eras produce far more serial killers than others, and in particular something about modern culture seems to bring out such acts. At best, one may suppose that there are certain (genetic or other) predisposing factors that are activated by experiences that help one discover the pleasure in killing. Modern warfare provides one such place to learn that killing can be satisfying.

There are similar reports from other wars. In the Spanish Civil War, good-natured and idealistic young men who volunteered to fight for freedom against the Fascist menace sometimes succumbed to an “emerging taste for blood” 36 in the phrase of one journalist. In a revealing incident, a man encountered someone he had known for years as “a cheerful fellow fond of youngsters” sitting in a bar drinking coffee one morning. The fellow said he had been up all night and boasted that he had “accounted for” eleven Fascists himself, and indeed his group of “lads” had killed more than 100 prisoners that night. The man asked him why he was participating in such killings. “Well, someone has to,” the younger fellow replied, almost automatically providing the standard justification, but then he added in a more thoughtful tone, “The worst of it is, you know, that I’m beginning to like it.” 37 Of course, the fact that this story was told indicates that someone thought it was unusual, perhaps rare. But was it rare in its frank honesty, or in its enjoyment of killing?

During the nineteenth-century colonial wars fought for control over Africa, the brutal violence led some men to discover pleasure in it. The Europeans had substantial advantages over the African natives in weaponry and tactics, and so some of them came to feel relatively safe. The campaigns of Carl Peters, in particular, show ample evidence of violent treachery (such as killing African rulers with whom he had signed a peace treaty), and he openly confessed that he found “intoxication” in killing Africans. 38 On the other side of the planet, one scholar summarized his research on the conquest of the Americas by saying that the early European conquerors “never ceased to take delight in killing just for fun,” as indicated by numerous reports of gratuitous sadism against the native peoples. 39
