
The twentieth century has seen more of the same. A British House of Commons select committee recorded that natives were being cruelly treated on the notorious rubber plantations of Argentina. Some of the cruelties represented punishments that, although excessive, seemed at least to have some practical intention behind them. Others, apparently, were merely for sport. The committee reported that company officials would “amuse themselves” by shooting at Indians. To celebrate Easter Sunday or other holidays, they would douse Indians with kerosene and set them on fire “to enjoy their agony.” 40 Such reports do not prove that these sadistic practices were the norm, let alone universal or even widespread. But they did occur, at least occasionally.

It is doubtful that the committee’s evidence proved that enjoyment was the motive. Still, the gratuitous cruelty suggests an element of sadistic pleasure. The inference from gratuitous cruelty is important, because it allows us to see proof of sadism without having direct assertions of pleasure and enjoyment. Consider the serial murderers, for example. Some of these individuals frankly admit to having gotten pleasure from the experience, such as David Bulock, who told a New York state judge that “killing makes me happy,” 41 or Charles Schmid, who said it made him “feel good” to murder young girls and bury their bodies in the desert. 42 Even such remarks cannot be taken without a little skepticism, however, especially insofar as once one is a prisoner of the legal system, one may recognize the impossibility of providing a viable explanation for these horrendous crimes. In front of the judge, these killers may begin to realize how monstrously evil their acts appear to an outsider, and so they may claim enjoyment as a way of expressing defiance to conventional morality and its judgments on them.

Hence, signs of gratuitous cruelty are helpful as converging evidence. To be sure, it seems already gratuitously cruel to kidnap a stranger and kill him or her, and so the mere fact of serial murder could be taken as proof of the existence of sadism. Then again, these perpetrators might conceivably have some motive or reason for the acts according to their own twisted logic, by which the killings are seen as necessary or rational. But when the cruelty involves torture or other acts beyond the killing, then sadism is difficult to dismiss.

Henry Lee Lucas was one of the most notorious and sadistic serial killers, and his acts seem hard to explain without invoking sadism. Squeamish readers may wish to skip ahead. At the height of his murderous career, Lucas was not satisfied with merely killing his victim or even with destroying the corpse. He liked to mutilate the bound and struggling victim before killing her and before he even made it clear to her that she would die. He would use a chain saw or other cutting tool to chop off her fingers and toes, forcing her to watch her body being destroyed piece by piece. 43 She would presumably realize that even if this horrible nightmare were to end and she were to escape or be saved, she would already have suffered permanent physical damage and would be a cripple for the rest of her life. Plus, of course, the pain of having one’s fingers sawed off would be intense. If Lucas was going to kill her anyway, there was no need to go through the additional steps of carving her limbs off—unless he enjoyed it.

Another serial killer, Arthur Shawcross, likewise recounted actions that go so far beyond killing that one can only assume he enjoyed them (as is confirmed by the way he boasted about the events later). One of these occurred (supposedly; it is difficult to verify) when he was fighting in Vietnam, and he captured a young woman and a teenage girl who had hidden some ammunition. He could have killed them both right away, but instead he wanted to prolong the experience. He tied up the girl and forced her to watch while he killed the woman, cut off her head, carved her body up like a steer, roasted parts of the body over the fire, and ate some. After the girl had miserably watched the fate of her unfortunate friend, he did the same to her. 44

Less extreme criminals also show some signs of getting pleasure and enjoyment from tormenting their victims. There was a telling moment in a recent public television special about teen violence. A sad-faced young woman was being interviewed in the youth prison facility where she was serving a multiyear sentence. She now felt remorse for her crime and victim, and she described the incident in a voice that occasionally showed danger of breaking with emotion, and with a hint of moisture in her eyes. She and her friends had abducted a man at gunpoint, planning to rob him. They discovered he only had $20, which disappointed them, but they had decided in advance that they would have to kill him to prevent his being a witness. He had begged them to let him take them to where his elderly parents lived so that they could rob the parents. They had kept him begging for his life for several hours, had tortured and humiliated him, and had finally indeed robbed his parents, too, although they had not killed him. She added that they had done similar things previously without getting caught. When the interviewer asked her why, she shrugged and said it was mainly for the fun of it. Fun? asked the interviewer immediately. The girl’s face lit up and a wistful look of pleasure came into her eyes. Oh yes, she said, seeming surprised that he did not understand this. With a marked tone of nostalgia for lost pleasures that one now knows must never be repeated, she spoke of driving around, robbing (“jumping”) people with guns. It was fun. But she knew that such pleasures were now forbidden and unwanted, and she fell silent.

Similar comments emerge in other interviews with teen gang members, although more commonly the interviewees say that it was mainly others who found pleasure in violence. In a typical comment, one person said of other young gang members, “They like the feeling of firing randomly at people who have nothing to do with the gang. It becomes a high.” 45

Gratuitous harm can also be invoked in cases of youth violence to suggest that people get pleasure from it. Thus, for example, the desire for cash might be enough to explain why a young man would break into people’s homes and steal their valuable possessions, and so burglary alone would certainly not be proof of sadistic pleasure. But some burglars like to inflict gratuitous damage on the houses they invade. Thus, some of them urinate or defecate in the home, or they break items that they cannot steal. 46 Such practices suggest that people enjoy inflicting the damage, because there is no other benefit to them other than the intrinsic pleasure that they get from the act.

Gratuitous harm is not confined to furniture and appliances, either. The following story was quoted in Leon Bing’s book on teen gangs, Do or Die. 47 A young man was talking to a girl when the girl’s brother, nicknamed Sidewinder, came by. Sidewinder asked the young man where he was from, and when he heard the answer he realized that the young man was part of a rival gang. There existed the usual set of vendetta grievances—in the future, after telling this story, Sidewinder added that one of that gang had killed a member of his own gang, and he suspected that this young man “was probably there when that happened” 48—but he had nothing personal against this individual. Still, he did belong to the enemy, and that was enough.

Sidewinder slipped away and collected three of his friends. They returned, and the young couple were still talking. The four jumped the young couple and began beating up the man. So far, perhaps, one could attribute these actions to the standing enmity between the groups. But then Sidewinder and his friends turned more sadistic. First they put him in the trunk of a car and drove to an empty field. There they took him out and tied him by a rope to the car’s trailer hitch. Then they dragged him around the field behind the car. “He got skinned up all bad, tore his scalp half off. Got all dirt and like gravel and stuff stuck in the blood,” 49 Sidewinder recalled. Next they drove to one of the other fellows’ houses and threw him into the yard where there were two pit bulls, who attacked him viciously. “Man, they chewed him up—big ole chunks of meat comin’ off his arms and legs, blood pourin’ out, and [the victim] just screamin’ and cryin’ for us to take him on outta there.” 50

Sidewinder recalled that the young man had at first tried to act tough and stand up to the torture, but by this point he had broken down. The group rounded out the afternoon with a series of humiliations. They made the victim kneel and recite various demeaning statements, such as saying he wanted to perform fellatio on each of them, or “fuck my dead homeboys” (which was contemporary gang slang to express disgraceful insult to the memory of one’s own fellow gang members who had died, often regarded as the ultimate insult and provocation). By this time the fellow had been “almost killed,” presumably including severe bleeding from various cuts and some broken bones, so they “dropped him in the riverbed” and left him there. The pursuit of pleasure is evident in Sidewinder’s final generalization about such escapades, which seem quite restrained to him because the victims are not killed: “When we tired of lookin’ at ‘em, we let ‘em go.” 51

Still, it is important not to over generalize. Not all youth gang members claim to enjoy fighting, and many say they do not. Most often they merely point to a couple of individuals who seem to get such pleasure. One of the most thorough research projects on teen gangs was conducted by sociologist Jankowski, who lived with various gangs for a decade. He acknowledged that some do enjoy the violence, but they are a minority: “Only a small number of gang members enjoy fighting…. Most do not enjoy fighting at all and try to avoid it.” 52

Works on the Nazi Holocaust often include allusions to a callous, brutal, or laughing attitude while the perpetrators were doing their work, but as we have seen, such responses might be understood as practical strategies and coping methods. Such explanations fail in the rare but clear instances of obviously gratuitous violence, as in the following story. A German police lieutenant, heavily drunk early in the day, was waiting for the assigned Jews to finish digging the mass grave in which the village’s Jews would be buried after execution. He personally selected about two dozen men from the Jews waiting for execution. These men were ordered to strip naked and crawl on the ground. The lieutenant then instructed his noncommissioned officers to get their billy clubs and beat the Jews vigorously as they crawled. 53

Compared to the mass murder that was going on all around, inflicting a few nasty bruises or even broken bones may seem like a relatively trivial matter, but it is psychologically instructive. The victims were going to be shot that afternoon, and their deaths should have satisfied any pragmatic or idealistic purpose. To beat them before shooting them was pointless and gratuitous. The purpose of that gratuitous brutality must therefore have been in the act itself, which suggests that the lieutenant got pleasure out of inflicting harm. Again, this incident is not typical, and one should not conclude from it that sadism was the norm—but it is rather unambiguous in suggesting that sadism was genuine.

One might think that Mafia killers would maintain a more professional attitude and not get carried away with pleasure. But some, apparently, begin to find enjoyment in such work. In Chapter 5, I quoted one example, in which the mob chief is said to have exclaimed “I love this” when bundling up a victim’s body to dispose of it, and he later expressed the wish that he could bring the despised victim back to life so that he could kill him again.

A more thorough and thoughtful set of observations was furnished by Antonino Calderone, the Sicilian Mafia informant interviewed at length by criminologist Pino Arlacchi. Although every member of a Mafia family must be capable of murder and many will do the job eagerly because such acts often lead to career advancement, there is a norm that prizes remaining cool and detached. The Mafia does not respect gratuitous cruelty, and it admires the killer who remains calm and businesslike while taking a life.

That norm does not conceal the fact, however, that some men come to enjoy killing. Calderone observed that some men took to killing better than others, and he said that certain “sick” people found pleasure in it. When they first kill, something “springs loose” inside them, which they cannot understand or explain. “And in time murder begins to be pleasing; it becomes a vice, an illness.” 54 His description resembles the process of becoming addicted to a drug, and we will return to this analogy when we try to explain the enjoyment of killing. For now, the important point is simply that even some professionals find themselves gradually succumbing to enjoyment that emerges, perhaps surprisingly, from killing.

Next, let us consider rape. A small minority of rapes include gratuitous sadism that seems based on getting direct enjoyment from the victim’s suffering. Researcher Nicholas Groth characterized these cases as involving men who plan and calculate how to torment a woman and who become excited through the process of inflicting pain on her. In some cases, the man does not even seek direct sexual gratification for himself; he may use a stick or bottle or some other object to penetrate the woman. In such cases, there is little basis for speaking of rape as a sex crime in the sense of the illicit taking of sexual gratification. His pleasure lies in hurting the woman, not in his own orgasm.

Groth concluded that about 5 percent of rapes fall into this category. The number is close to Toch’s finding that about 6 percent of the violent men in his sample were bullies who engaged in violent acts for the sadistic enjoyment of hurting another person.

Marital rape also can contain signs of sadistic pleasure, although it is likely that some twisted urge for revenge over real, exaggerated, or imagined grievances lies behind many such domestic cruelties. In one well-known study of marital rape, several cases fit a pattern of sadism. One husband was attracted to detective magazines and other accounts in which women were treated brutally, and he would sometimes read these aloud to his wife. He hid in the closet one day and then jumped out to surprise her, forcing her down on the bed and raping her anally. He was angry afterward that she had resisted so hard. (She said she had not known at first that the attacker was her husband.) On another night, she went outside into the yard to see what some noise was, and he grabbed her from behind, tied her arms together, bent her over the stack of firewood, and raped her anally. He began to tie her up and take pictures of her with various objects, such as a banana, inserted into her vagina, and although sometimes she went along with these requests, she was very upset to learn that he showed these pictures to his buddies.

Finally he moved out rather than accede to her demand that they begin marriage counseling. After he left, she was going through her things and made a very distressing discovery. He had kept a card file of the forced-sex episodes between the two of them. Each card contained the date of the incident, a coded description of what he had done to her, and a rating of the episode on a zero-to-ten scale. This discovery made her realize that he was far more systematic and calculating in his marital brutality than she had thought. She had assumed that the attacks were merely spontaneous outbursts, but that assumption did not square with his keeping a file with codes and ratings. 55

A very different form of sexually tinged domination occurs in sadomasochism, and indeed the most precise and specific meaning of the term sadism refers to a sexual activity. Sexual sadism is therefore worth considering briefly as another possible source of insight into whether people get pleasure from inflicting pain. Although sexual sadism is not fully understood, enough is known to confirm the broad outlines of what we have already seen.

Sexual sadism is rare. Only a small proportion of adults engage in sadomasochism at all, and the overwhelming majority of those are primarily or exclusively interested in the submissive side (masochism). It is a common complaint in S&M communities that there are not enough people willing to take the dominant role. Everybody wants to be spanked; no one wants to do the spanking. In S&M clubs, for example, there are typically three or four times as many submissives as dominants. 56

Moreover, most people who do enjoy the dominant or sadistic role seem to have acquired this preference after a long initial phase of being submissive and masochistic. I once met such a man when I was testifying as an expert witness at a pornography trial. He had been locally famous in the San Francisco scene as a submissive, but lately he had taken the dominant role. He spoke of “discovering your dark side” as a very gradual process of learning to embrace the dominant role. He had several women who were his slaves, and he was slowly finding more and more pleasure in spanking them and dominating them in other ways. Thus, the pleasure was real, but it had taken him years to discover it, and he said it was the same for every other sexually dominant person he knew.

A Natural Basis for Sadism Three clear conclusions emerge from our survey of evidence about getting sadistic enjoyment from inflicting harm or pain on others. First, there are too many such incidents, spread across too many different times and places, to ignore, and so one must conclude that sadistic pleasure is genuine. Second, it is nearly always a small minority of perpetrators who derive such pleasure—something perhaps on the order of 5 percent, or one out of twenty people, who are actively involved in inflicting harm. Third, it seems that sadistic enjoyment is something that is gradually discovered over a period of time involving multiple episodes of dominating or hurting others.

In those respects, sadistic cruelty seems to resemble addiction. Few people get much enjoyment out of their first glass of beer, cigarette, cup of coffee, or even their first drug experiences. Moreover, most beer drinkers and drug users are not addicts, and there is even evidence that many tobacco users are not addicted. 57 Addiction thus afflicts only some of the users, just as only some perpetrators are sadists. And addiction, like sadism, is typically a process that develops gradually and escalates over time.

There are some signs that sadistic pleasure may be experienced as an addiction, in the sense that the person comes to crave that pleasure and to want ever stronger doses of it. We already quoted several men who said that killing became a habit, or “a vice,” as one of them put it (thus making the parallel to addictive pleasures like tobacco especially clear). The same goes for rape. One researcher found that some rapists described it as habit-forming, saying “Rape is like smoking. You can’t stop once you start.” 58

Similar remarks are made by torturers. It is fairly clear that in most cases torture is officially supposed to be a routine part of police work, aimed at securing information. Moreover, it appears that most torturers start out that way. Instructors emphasize that the goal is to gain a confession of relevant crimes and to obtain useful military intelligence that might help save the lives of comrades who may be in danger from enemy plots and attacks. As one continues to torture, however, one begins to discover sadistic pleasure in it. As a Uruguayan lieutenant reported in an interview with Amnesty International: “Subsequently the idea [of torture as merely a means to a legitimate end] began to lose its force and changed into the application of torture for its own sake … and also as an act of vengeance against the detainee.” 59 One might have expected the converse, that the young, new torturers would tend to get carried away and go wild, while the older and more experienced ones would keep their cool and be more professional about it. But apparently torturers grow meaner and wilder over time.

Addiction Processes To understand sadism, it may be useful to apply what is known about addictions. One of the most important theories about addiction, called opponent process theory, was proposed in the 1970s by Richard L. Solomon and John D. Corbit. 60 Their theory begins with the body’s natural tendency to maintain a stable, peaceful state of equilibrium (called homeostasis). To maintain this state, the body must have processes to restore homeostasis whenever it is disturbed. Running a race, for example, will get the body excited; by the end of the race, one’s heart will be beating hard and one will be breathing heavily. When the race is over, the heart can’t continue to beat so fast forever, so there must be inner processes to slow it back down. Thus, the body operates on the basis of opponent processes: one process moves away from equilibrium (speeding up) and another has the opposite effect (slowing back down).

A very important point of opponent process theory is that the second, restoring process tends to get stronger over time. It is as if the body learns and becomes more efficient at counteracting the unusual state. Run a mile after not exercising for a year, and you’ll gasp for air a long time afterward; but run a mile every day for a year, and by then you’ll catch your breath very quickly afterward. Moreover, you probably won’t even lose your breath as badly. Just as the second, restoring process grows stronger, the first process gets weaker. Together, these two trends may be nature’s way of keeping us from being repeatedly pulled out of equilibrium. In running, this is called getting in shape: The same run puts less of a strain on your body, and you catch your breath faster afterward, than when you first started running.

Now consider alcohol use. Alcohol produces various pleasant feelings, such as euphoria and relaxation. These take the body away from its normal state. The body then has its own inner mechanisms for sobering itself up. Just as the intoxicated state may be very pleasant and easygoing, the hangover state is unpleasant and irritable. As one continues to drink on many occasions, one develops a tolerance for alcohol, so that the same dose produces less and less of a kick. Meanwhile, the hangovers get longer or more severe.

By the same token, drug addicts often find that the phase of withdrawal and depression becomes longer and more unpleasant as the months go by and they continue taking the drug, even if the amount of drug they take does not change. Addiction is spurred because the person thinks that taking another dose is the only way to feel good again quickly, instead of waiting for the body to regain its original state.

With alcohol and other drugs, the pleasure is all in the initial, departure phase (the A phase), and the restorative process (the B phase) is unpleasant. Being drunk feels good; having a hangover feels bad. But there is no reason to assume that the initial phase is always the pleasant one. Some opponent processes show the opposite pattern: The A phase may be unpleasant and the B phase pleasant.

For example, consider the recent fad of bungee jumping (or hang-gliding, mountain climbing, parachuting, and the like). The fear of falling is deeply rooted in human nature, and almost everybody responds to a free fall with panic. Thus, the initial (A) phase reaction is an extremely unpleasant one: terror. But of course the body is not going to remain in a state of terror indefinitely, especially once the fall is completed and the danger is past. To restore homeostasis, the body goes through some process of making itself feel better, such as releasing some inner chemicals that will calm the panic and compensate by giving pleasure. Sure enough, people find that the terror of falling is immediately replaced by a wave of euphoria and relaxation. On the face of it, it seems absurdly stupid to seek pleasure by jumping off a bungee pole or out of an airplane, because that seems a sure way to produce bad feelings; but the intense feeling of pleasure that follows may be quite desirable. People do seem to like it, after all.

Moreover, the tendency for the B process to grow stronger and the A process to grow weaker means that over repeated trials the person will get more and more of the pleasant part. A first bungee jump or parachute experience may be so frightening that the pleasure afterward may not seem entirely worth it. After a dozen such experiences, however, the fear has diminished and the pleasure is stronger than ever. Anyone who reaches that point is likely to find that the experience is compelling, and he or she may begin to crave to repeat it more often. One may also seek out even stronger or more extreme versions, such as jumping from yet higher places.

Sadism: Pleasure in the Backwash Let us now apply the opponent process theory to sadism. We have seen that the initial reaction to hurting someone is typically very unpleasant. People are shocked, dismayed, disgusted, upset. But they do not remain in that state forever; the body finds a way to return to normal. Because the initial reaction is unpleasant, the offsetting (opponent) reaction must be pleasant and positive. Thus, the first time they hurt or kill someone, they will feel bad, but the body will also create subtle good feelings in order to recover and get back to normal. The first time, probably, the bad feelings will be quite vivid and salient, while the good feelings of the B process will remain muted.

If the person inflicts harm on subsequent occasions, however, the balance between good and bad may shift, according to the pattern of opponent processes. The shock and disgust will grow weaker. The enjoyment will grow stronger and more obvious. (It will also start sooner, in keeping with the gradual rise in efficiency that one sees in opponent processes; like the parachutist or bungee jumper who begins to feel pleasure earlier and earlier in the process, instead of having to wait until the danger is entirely past.) In this way, sadistic acts of cruelty may start to bring pleasure.

In this view, the pleasure that one gets from hurting or killing is all in the B process, not the A process. It is somewhat misleading, therefore, to compare rape to smoking tobacco, as the rapist quoted earlier in this chapter did. The thrill of killing may be closer to the thrill of parachute jumping than to the thrill of taking drugs: The pleasure is in the backwash.

This theory seems to fit with the all the observations about sadistic pleasure we have quoted. The initial reaction to committing a violent act is unpleasant, and it predominates the first time. Over time, one begins to find more pleasure in the aftermath, while the unpleasant part becomes weaker. Gradually, one may start to crave the experience. One may also seek stronger experiences, as the initial reaction becomes muted. Thus, sadists should become crueler over time, in the search for ever stronger highs. 61

Consider the following account provided by psychologist Ervin Staub. 62 An American soldier in Vietnam was on helicopter duty. When he flew over a group of civilians, his commanding officer ordered him to fire his machine gun at them. He did not obey. The helicopter circled the area, and when it passed the civilians again, the same command was given, and again he refused. The officer in charge threatened to court-martial him for disobedience. The third time, he did shoot at the people on the ground. This experience shook him up to the extent that he vomited and felt very upset for a time afterward.

On later missions, however, the soldier complied more readily with such orders, and in a fairly short time he said he began to enjoy shooting civilians. He compared it to shooting at targets in a gallery. (Today’s young people would presumably use the analogy of playing a video game.) Thus, the same act that had initially produced severe distress in him was soon converted into fun. He went from having to vomit to actually liking it.

There is one major problem with this theory: Why doesn’t everyone become a sadist, once exposed to the thrill of inflicting harm? Because opponent processes are natural reactions, they should be roughly similar for everyone. Yet we have seen that typically only a small proportion of perpetrators develop into sadists. What prevents this evolution in everyone else?

A Vaccine against Sadism?

The most likely answer is guilt. Guilt is a learned, acquired reaction that makes people feel bad when they hurt other people. 63 So guilt would tend to stand strongly in the way of the opponent process pattern of becoming addicted to the pleasure of harming people.

Guilt may be unable to prevent the opponent process entirely, however. One can only become a full-blown sadist by recognizing that one likes to hurt others, as demonstrated by the comments from sadists quoted earlier in this chapter. Guilt may prevent this recognition. A well-developed conscience would not allow one to admit (even to oneself) having enjoyed the infliction of harm. Just as in sexual repression, guilt does not actually prevent the body’s positive response—instead, it makes one refuse to acknowledge it. Guilt makes one disown and disavow the pleasure.

Guilt may even retard the initial emergence of sadistic pleasure. After the first killing, the killer may be full of distress and disgust, and even after recovering from that may feel bad because of guilt. Any pleasure that accompanies the body’s recovery (the B process) would be concealed by the guilt. (As a highly socialized, acquired reaction, guilt would not be likely to set off opponent processes of its own.) This would explain why people might learn to enjoy watching violence, as in violent movies, more readily than they would learn to enjoy performing violent acts themselves. The opponent process may begin to grow faster and be accepted more easily when guilt is not present, such as when one is merely watching a film.

If this analysis is correct, then there is a potential sadist inside everyone, but our capacity for guilt—the conscience—keeps it hidden. Once we begin to gain experience with inflicting harm on others, the capacity for sadistic pleasure will emerge, but guilt can thwart it. A person prone to a guilty conscience would be unlikely to allow himself or herself to learn to enjoy hurting others. Without the inner restraint of guilt, however, someone might well discover—gradually—that genuine pleasure could be found by tormenting and killing people.

Having a Little Fun Now let’s look at another very different link between pleasure and harmdoing. Sometimes people take up certain activities because of the fun involved in them. Inflicting harm or damage may be a minor, tangential aspect of what they are doing, at least at first.

The word fun can encompass an impressively broad array of activities. Some of them are probably so thoroughly harmless that there is no way to link them to evil. Others may involve crimes and even violence.

Fun can be defined in terms of two broad properties. First, it is arousing or exciting. The word fun would not usually be used to describe calm, placid, serene activities. Second, it brings pleasure. Pleasure and excitement come in many forms, and they are not necessarily incompatible with causing some harm or damage, unless the harm is severe enough to elicit the distress reactions we just discussed.

It is clear that many people find enjoyment in the simple act of breaking rules. Doing something naughty is almost inevitably exciting, and if one succeeds at it, there is the pleasure of success. Thus, the simple recipe for fun is satisfied.

Shoplifting provides a good example. We saw in Chapter 4 that shoplifting generally brings fairly minimal benefits. Indeed, Jack Katz’s research on shoplifting found that the items people stole were typically stored away, lost, or otherwise forgotten. The corollary is that people shoplift for the fun of it. Katz called these pleasures “sneaky thrills,” 64 because the accounts people gave him of shoplifting focused on the excitement of taking the item and getting out of the store without being caught. “I think the reason I steal is the adventure,” as one teenager put it, after saying that he would shoplift items and then deliberately break them or throw them away. “You know, the fact that when you get out of the store and you’ve gotten away with it, your heart’s pounding, you know; whaaa!” 65 He said the same applied to stealing cars. The appeal was the thrill of driving around in someone else’s car. You didn’t particularly want to keep the thing you stole.

It may seem discordant to speak of fun in connection with the Nazi Holocaust, but if one can get past the initial shock the notion is plausible, especially with regard to the early stages of the movement. The photos in the Holocaust Museum in Washington show activities that might easily seem like fun to young people who did not anticipate that large-scale mass murder was to be the eventual outcome. The beginnings of the public Nazi movement involved torchlight parades, marching in uniforms, chanting, and other group activities that might well bring pleasure. On Kristallnacht and other occasions, there was an accepted license to break windows and smash the furniture in Jewish shops and homes. Such acts of vandalism can certainly be fun, especially when there is official permission to break the normal rules of respect for property. Indeed, people have told me about church groups here in the United States that would include “car smashing” as part of their youth group holiday celebrations. The church would purchase an old used car and put it in the parking lot. The young people were then given a pair of sledgehammers and free rein to demolish it. Even normally quiet, religious, well-mannered boys—somehow, the girls did not seem to see the point of this fun—would become wildly aggressive and clamor for extra turns in reducing the car to an unrecognizable pile of twisted fragments.

Likewise, many young people like bonfires and dislike the school discipline symbolized by books, and so a bonfire of books might fall into the same category of naughty fun. In my own youth, we sometimes would celebrate the end of the school year by burning a couple of our notebooks, in a sort of ritual celebration of summer. Again, if one did not see the horrors that lay ahead, the Nazi book-burnings might have appealed to people on the basis of fun. The legitimacy of the act is difficult to appreciate, but it may help to simply reverse the politics. If a giant trove of neo-Nazi hate propaganda were discovered in your neighborhood and the authorities decided to burn it in a big public bonfire, you probably would walk over to see the event, and by the time you stood around watching the fire and talking with your neighbors it might well end up being fun.

As we will see in the next chapter, the Ku Klux Klan started out specifically as a club devoted to fun, with no political or racial purpose. At first they played jokes on one another and then on members of the public in general, and then gradually they began to aim their pranks at black people. The violence didn’t start until later. Even then, though, one can understand that the organization may have had appeal as a source of fun. Members of the Ku Klux Klan in later decades would often reject the notion that racist politics were central. To them, it was a society devoted to good family fun: picnics, bonfires, parades, fireworks, baby shows, and pie-eating contests, mixed together with the costumes, rituals, and secret words.

The contrast is evident in Kathleen Blee’s book, Women of the Klan. The researcher herself focused on the hate propaganda and racist cruelty that have become associated with the Klan, and as a feminist scholar she wanted to understand how women could come to participate in evil, violent behavior. She thought such behavior would normally be associated with men, and the idea of studying Klan women to gain insight into a feminine version of hatred and oppression was very promising. Unfortunately, the women Blee interviewed were no help. They kept turning the conversation away from racist hatred, which they seemed to regard as a minor and unfortunate aspect of the Klan. Instead they wanted to speak of being with friends, having parties, doing good deeds for the community, sewing quilts together, supporting churches, and so forth.

It is also necessary to consider that the exuberance of defying convention may enable fun-seeking people to do things that cause more severe harm than they might have intended. I recall reading a magazine letter when I was a teenager. The letter writer said he had belonged to a “shit club” in high school. The group would rove up and down the streets looking for parked cars that had been left unlocked. When they found one, they would get in. The two girls would climb in the back seat, lower their trousers, and defecate, and the three boys would urinate all over the front seat. I recall wondering whether that would be fun: defacing the car, breaking the rules, the excitement of not getting caught, plus the somewhat shocking intimacy of boys and girls sharing activities that were normally confined to separate bathrooms. Focusing on these thoughts, I was brought up short when the editors’ response pointed out how this kind of fun would have to ruin someone else’s good times. Like me, the young club members probably focused their attention on the excitement and mere naughtiness of what they were doing, without giving realistic consideration to their victims.

Similar logic applies to more extreme activities. Recent news coverage depicted a dramatic crime in which five young friends knifed a man to death in a robbery that brought them only a single dollar. 66 The news coverage emphasized the single dollar, as if to imply that a human life was worth so little to these young men that they would kill for a dollar. The facts of the case suggested a different picture, however. The young men had intended to beat up a victim at random, as their form of fun. The robbery was not part of their plan, nor was the killing. The victim was on his way to a pay phone to call his girlfriend, because he had no phone in his home. The group accosted him and held a knife on him. One of them stabbed him, and the others took his wallet and ran. They had nothing against him and no reason to want to kill him. It was just supposed to be a random physical assault, for fun.

The one-dollar murder brings us back to the magnitude gap, which is essential to keep in mind when trying to understand sadistic pleasure. It is shocking to think that someone might enjoy hurting or killing someone, because the suffering of the victim is so very terrible. But to understand the perpetrator’s enjoyment, one must appreciate that to the perpetrator the whole episode is a small thing, not a big thing. To judge the perpetrator’s acts by the victim’s loss may make moral and legal sense, but psychologically it is misleading. The five young men who killed someone and stole a dollar were not out to end a human life, with a full sense of the magnitude of such an act. They were only seeking a little excitement. If they had not been caught, they would have begun the next day just about exactly where they had begun the previous one, regardless of whether they had killed someone or not. To the victim’s family and loved ones, life may never be the same, but to the killer it is only a small difference. The enjoyment is small. The whole experience is small.

Thus, the search for fun may bring people to activities that can lead to serious crimes and violence later on. To escape from boredom, people want activities that offer pleasure and excitement. Young people in particular tend to suffer from boredom, and they often find that violating rules creates excitement. Their initial acts may stop far short of violence. But as Chapter 9 will show, once people get started, the steps toward greater violence and evil are deceptively easy to take.

Power The novels written by the Marquis de Sade give literary expression to a remarkable (and remarkably unappealing) assortment of sexual practices, perversions, and deviations. One of de Sade’s goals was to record in literature every known perversion, as well as perhaps inventing a few new ones. His ambitions went beyond producing an encyclopedia of pornography, however; he also aspired to be a philosopher. In his novels, the characters have long philosophical discourses in between the carnal acts. The result was a body of philosophical work that is, if somewhat less systematic and elegant than what Kant or Hegel produced, much livelier than theirs.

Along the way, de Sade’s characters give a wide assortment of philosophical justifications for and reflections on their deviant sexual practices. One memorable point that he proposed on several occasions concerns why it is more satisfying to whip or flagellate a partner than to have simple intercourse with her. 67 With flagellation, one is more certain that her responses are sincere. The most fervent caresses may elicit a moan of pleasure that is faked, but the moans elicited by a fervent whipping are presumably sincere and believable.

This explanation for the supposed superiority of whipping over intercourse is based on an assumption that one’s main goal is to elicit a sincere emotional response. If this is not the goal, then the argument becomes irrelevant. Still, there is something to it, at least to the extent that people do desire genuine emotion from their sexual partners. Indeed, even today, some people who have presumably never read de Sade use a version of the same argument in articulating their preference for certain types of pornography. In spanking films, one can believe that the moans are sincere, whereas the expressions of sexual pleasure in ordinary pornography are often merely acted (and sometimes not very convincingly).

One important pattern of sadistic pleasure, therefore, may be based on the wish to elicit sincere, believable emotional responses from another person. Is there such a wish? It might seem that eliciting emotion would not be much of an end in itself. There is one category of people for whom such responses are extremely important and desirable, however: those with a high need for power.

The need for power is essentially the motivation to have an impact on other people. 68 Power, intimacy, and achievement were the three main motives that garnered the attention of researchers during the glory days of motive psychology. Achievement involves the wish to do better and succeed at tasks. Intimacy involves forming close emotional connections with other people, based on mutual understanding and caring. Power refers to having an impact on other people, for better or worse. Each motive has its own hell. The achievement seeker is miserable when he or she fails at a task. The intimacy seeker is miserable when he or she is unable to form a close, positive connection with one or two other people. The power seeker is miserable when he or she fails to have a strong effect on people. To be ignored, to be treated as irrelevant, to believe that one’s own presence and actions make hardly any difference in what others do—these are the experiences that upset and frustrate people who have a high need for power.

Thus, power is a matter of eliciting responses from others. Of course, power may be sought as a means to an end, such as if someone wants to be elected president to carry out some reform or change. But power is also sought as an end in itself. Powerful people find validation in seeing others change their actions because of them. Power may be used to help or to hurt others, but the goal is to produce an effect. To be powerless is to live among people who go on about their business exactly as they would if you were not there. Rape, sexual harassment, and even children’s teasing can also be understood in terms of power motivation.

Power is thus an interpersonal motive, not a solitary pursuit. As the political scientist Hans Morgenthau argued in a famous essay, power and love may spring from the same root of loneliness. 69 Love seeks to unite people by dissolving the boundary between them, so that they merge into one. Power likewise merges two into one, but it does so by imposing the will of one on the other. The power seeker wants to connect with others, but the connection is sought in order to have an impact on those people so that they change their actions.

Power is not inherently bad. Indeed, someone might find a very satisfying exercise of power in giving money to people, because the money will make a big difference in their lives. The leaders of large philanthropical organizations, for example, probably do not get much satisfaction of either their achievement or their intimacy needs in their work, because giving money to needy people neither creates close and lasting bonds nor produces direct successes. Such individuals probably do get immense satisfaction in power terms, however, because the money they give makes a huge difference in the recipients’ lives. The distribution of charity is a very positive, beneficial, and socially desirable way of exercising power.

Our concern is with the other extreme, in which the lust for power leads to sadism. Here de Sade’s theory becomes central. You can be very certain that you are having an impact on someone if you are hurting or harming that person. The groans and tears you elicit are palpable, unmistakable signs that you are having an impact, that that person’s life at this moment is quite different from what it would be if you were not there. Through the victim’s cries, the power seeker gains validation of his own being, his importance, and his power.

The urge to cause suffering in order to establish one’s power over others may well be one of the factors that affect torturers. Although they may start out performing torture as a job, and they often do seem to have achievement goals typical of work in general, they may come to enjoy the victim’s suffering because it proves that they are succeeding in having an impact on others. Some torturers speak of how they react to the occasional victim who refuses to scream or cry or confess. These “tough ones” represent a challenge to the torturers, who may set aside their goals of getting information to pursue instead the goal of eliciting a reaction. As one French torturer said, “When we’re dealing with those tough ones, the first thing we do is to make them squeal; and sooner or later we manage it.” In a revealing comment, he added, “That’s already a victory.” 70 He said that he and his colleagues gained some satisfaction simply from eliciting a “squeal” of pain from the victim, even if no information was obtained. To them, the victim’s tough resistance is a denial of their power, a way of refusing to acknowledge that they are in full control. Silence is a rebuke, a way of denying that one has been affected. The squeal is the victim’s admission that the torturers have had an impact on him or her. It proves their power and control.

Another torturer told the following story, as a way of complaining about the effect that the job was having on him. 71 One day he went down to the street to buy a newspaper, but there was a line of people at the kiosk. He was in a bad mood and became annoyed at having to wait. He knew the man at the newsstand, so he cut in front of others and took his paper. One of the other patrons made an angry protest, wanting him to wait his turn. The torturer felt an immediate urge to beat him up. He said nothing, but he thought to himself, “If I had you for a few hours, my fine fellow, you wouldn’t look so clever afterwards.” Thus, in this incident, his wish to torture the other man was not a mere part of a plan to get his newspaper faster. Rather, he wanted to change the other’s attitude toward him, to make the other realize that he was no one to be trifled with.

When Empathy Serves Cruelty There is one final twist to our analysis of sadism. As we have seen, there is reason to believe that empathy is generally a deterrent to cruelty. Empathy involves knowing what someone else is feeling. It is easy to see why people might be cruel, even unintentionally, if they did not fully appreciate what the victim must feel like.

Yet the most extreme cruelty makes use of empathy. To be seriously, thoroughly cruel, it is necessary to know what the victim is feeling, in order to maximize the suffering. Such knowledge may not correspond to the standard, somewhat careless way that psychologists use the term empathy, but it is literally correct. Perhaps it is most precise to say that maximum cruelty makes use of empathy without sympathy. To hurt someone, you must know what that person’s sensitivities and vulnerabilities are, without having compassion or pity for the person’s suffering. This is perhaps most obvious in the emotional abuse of intimates or family members. Intimates can say the most hurtful things because they know the other person’s areas of vulnerability. The empathic bond to the other person becomes an instrument to facilitate cruelty.

Return for a moment to the torturer confronted with one of the “tough ones,” a victim who refuses to succumb and submit. No matter how the torturer threatens and beats him, the victim remains silent and refuses to answer any questions. Torturers find such people aggravating. 72 The frustration goes beyond mere personal offense and encompasses the torturer’s professional reputation and ambition. He doesn’t want to fail to get the confession. Indeed, after he’s been beating someone for hours, he may sense that the victim is close to yielding. If the torturer takes a break and lets someone else take over, the new person may get the glory of finally eliciting the confession, even though the way was prepared by the previous torturer’s hours of work. So the torturer becomes desperate to break the victim’s will before he has to stop, before his shift comes to an end.

Under such pressures, the torturer wants to find some extra measure with which to break the victim’s resistance, to make him “squeal” with pain and provide the confession. To be effective, this extra measure must find the prisoner’s most vulnerable area and cause exceptional pain there. And to do that, one needs empathy: One needs to understand the prisoner’s feelings.

And so it seems that the most fiendishly cruel acts that people inflict on one another derive from an empathic understanding of the other. Empathy, especially when unmixed with sympathy, can be a dangerous tool in the hands of someone who wants to hurt. Of course, it is plausible that any very successful form of torture may be adopted by others simply for pragmatic reasons. The original invention, however, is aided by empathy.

One of the saddest and cruelest forms of torture involves making the main prisoner observe his or her family members being tortured. For example, S. V. Kossior was one of the original Bolshevists, having joined up in 1907. He served the Communist party faithfully through the Revolution, and in 1927 he became a member of the Politburo, the top group of powerful men in the Soviet Union. In the 1930s, however, Stalin wanted to eliminate any potential rivals, including completely loyal people who had never differed with him, and he began to have the Old Guard members arrested. They were pressured to confess to nonexistent crimes against the party and country they had served faithfully all their lives. Some complied, yielding to party discipline or won over by the false promises of leniency that the authorities held out in exchange for confessions. Others, however, refused to make false confessions.

Kossior was in the latter group. Torture was applied, in the form of severe beatings with fists and wooden sticks (usually the legs of a chair), as well as wearing down the prisoner’s resistance by preventing sleep and withholding food. Kossior stood up under all of it and refused to sign the false confession. Finally, though, the authorities found a way to break him. They brought in his 16-year-old daughter and beat her up and raped her right in front of him. Kossior broke down and confessed to all sorts of untrue things, such as having been a Polish spy and having taken part in terrorist acts against the Soviet people. 73

Such indirect forms of cruelty are not limited to professional torturers, of course. They surface occasionally even in modern American households. In an important book on domestic violence, Richard Gelles and Murray Straus 74 related an incident in which an abusive father became angry at his young daughter. To punish her, he grabbed the pet rabbit that she loved and got out a big knife. The little girl sat in the kitchen watching silently while her father methodically killed her rabbit and gutted it. Similar incidents involve killing other pets, destroying favorite toys, or attacking special possessions of the child.

Emotional abuse can be exceptionally cruel, and yet victims find it hard to gain sympathy because they do not have scars or bruises. The success of emotional abuse relies on the abuser’s knowing just what to say or do to cause the victim distress. Hence, there may be considerable cruelty in a family without violence, as long as the abuser has enough empathy to know how to hurt the victim. One approach is to know what the victim especially loves or enjoys and then spoil it. Some people wait all week to watch a favorite television program, for example, and may look forward to it with great anticipation. To be mean, all one has to do is wait until the program starts and then insist on watching something else (assuming there is only one television set). Yet even though such an event can produce intense disappointment and unhappiness, especially if it is part of a pattern in which one sees one’s partner systematically trying to ruin all one’s joys, it will seem trivial to outsiders. Claire Renzetti quoted one such case in her study of domestic cruelty in lesbian relationships. The unhappy woman said that if her lover had beaten her up, her friends would have come forward to support her and help her escape. But not for such minor events: “You can’t say, ‘My God, she makes me change the channel.’ They just don’t believe that could be such an awful thing.” 75

Of course, subtlety is not essential to emotional abuse. Such abuse may take the form of a man telling his wife she is stupid, fat, ugly, worthless, or bad. He may criticize her endlessly, saying that she is a poor cook, a lousy lover, a terrible housekeeper, an incompetent mother. He may accuse her of flirting with other men or having affairs, even though at other times he will say she is so unattractive and overweight that she is lucky to have him because no other man would ever want her. Women who abuse their husbands will often demean the man’s earning power and virility. In general, such abusers seem to find the special sensitivities of their victims and then make cruel remarks in that area. 76

Thus, empathy may prevent cruelty in some cases, but it can also serve it. The true sadist is not lacking in empathy—on the contrary, empathy helps the sadist to derive maximum pleasure and inflict the greatest pain.

The discussion of empathy leads back to one of the most basic questions about evil: Are human beings basically good or evil, or some of each, or neither? The phenomenon of sadism points strongly toward the view that some people are basically evil, because they seem to prove that human nature contains the capacity to hurt others for the sheer pleasure of it. Yet, as we have seen, the enjoyment in hurting others is probably not one of the main causes of evil. Rather, sadism seems to enter the picture after evil is already in progress. The fact that empathy can be used to increase cruelty should not diminish the high value of empathy, which after all is responsible for some of humankind’s most socially beneficial sentiments and noblest acts. The study of sadism does not justify the conclusion that human beings are basically or partly evil. It would be more accurate to say that human nature contains some built-in mechanisms that can be (and all too often are) adapted and recruited into the service of evil.





PART

3

How They Do It





