CHAPTER

9

How Evil Grows and Spreads “First we will kill all the subversives; then we will kill their collaborators; then … their sympathizers, then … those who remain indifferent; and finally we will kill the timid.” 1 These words were spoken by one of the governors in Argentina in the mid-1970s. He was referring to the coming phase of government repression and terror. The ruling class in Argentina believed that their way of life and their culture were under attack, and when the military took over they decided to enforce discipline by getting rid of these internal enemies. It is not surprising that the governor was able to foresee that imprisonment, torture, and murder were in store for the suspected enemies of the regime. What is remarkable, though, was that he was able to foresee the gradual escalation of repression. Large-scale evil is probably most often the end of a long road that no one foresaw at the start. People become caught up in the process gradually, and things become more and more extreme. The punishments become more severe and the categories of victims become broader. Only the most far-sighted individual (such as this governor) would be able to predict in advance, however, that what starts out as suppressing people who are actively subversive will end with murdering people whose only crime is that they do not show sufficient enthusiasm in their support for the government.

In the last chapter, we examined what might bring someone to cross over the line and do something immoral or cruel. In most cases, these first acts are small and minor. If such acts stayed at that level, the world would be a much kinder and gentler place. The great crimes and atrocities of history did not generally appear abruptly and full-blown. Rather, they were the result of a period of escalation, often one that occurred very gradually.

Once the line has been crossed, other factors start coming into play to produce gradual increases in the severity of the actions. The violence or brutality of the final result may be far beyond what anyone imagined at first. On the other hand, if these factors don’t fan the flames of evil, then the initial misdeed may remain trivial and harmless. It is these secondary causes that bear central responsibility for the triumphs and excesses of evil in the world.

Escalation: Growing Nastier over Time Because severe violence is typically the product of a process of escalation, it is essential to understand what contributes to such escalation. The fact that many violent patterns grow worse and more extreme over time cannot be disputed. Once evil gains a foothold, it seems very capable of growing and flourishing. For example, marital violence does not start off all at once. Recent studies indicate that the usual sequence is an escalation from verbal to physical aggression. People typically start off insulting each other or saying cruel things, and then perhaps they shout and scream at each other, and from there they proceed to hit each other. 2 They do not start off hitting but arrive at that level of violence only after passing through lesser stages of aggression. Similar patterns are found in disputes among strangers. 3

Moreover, escalation of domestic violence proceeds not just in a single episode but through a series of episodes. The major studies of marital violence by Gelles and Straus concluded that there is a general pattern of domestic violence growing more severe over time (as well as showing escalation within each incident). The first time a couple becomes physically violent, their violence is typically limited to minor acts. He shoves her angrily; she slaps him. After a few such incidents, however, there is a punch thrown, and later there may be more severe beatings.

As I wrote this, the nation was fascinated by the trial of O.J. Simpson, a former football star and celebrity whose wife was murdered along with a male friend. Simpson was eventually acquitted of murder, although the acquittal was based more on uncertainties and weaknesses in the prosecution’s case than on any resounding proof of his innocence, and many observers continued to suspect after the trial that Simpson was guilty. In any case, if Simpson did commit the murders, they came at the end of a long series of increasingly violent episodes. Los Angeles police records showed that his wife had often called to complain about his rages and his attacks on her, and the news media featured one old tape of an incident in which he came to her dwelling while they were separated. He broke down the door and threatened her with severe violence, all while she was on the telephone to the police.

It is rare that a gentle, peaceful person will abruptly kill his or her spouse. Spousal murder typically occurs at the end of a long sequence of increasingly violent disputes and acts.

The interpersonal exchange contributes to escalation. As we saw earlier, much violence is reciprocal, and revenge tends to be poorly calibrated so that the retaliation often exceeds the provocation. A young gang member articulated this pattern succinctly: “It’s like this. If you slap me, I’m gonna hit you with my closed fist. If you stab me, I’m gonna shoot you. An eye for an eye doesn’t exist—it’s one-up. One-up is what it is in gang life.” 4 As each side strikes back harder than it was struck, a vicious circle of escalating violence results.

Even one-sided violence escalates, however. Studies of the Holocaust suggest that large-scale mass murder came only after a long and slow progression of lesser actions against its victims. The German Jews were at first stigmatized, discriminated against, deprived of various legal rights, subjected to special taxes, and in other ways mistreated for years before there was any systematic plan to kill them. 5 Even sending them to concentration camps was not necessarily done with an intention to kill large numbers of them. Hannah Arendt has pointed out that most European countries between the two world wars had concentration camps where they detained people whom they wished to deprive of citizenship and other privileges and, ideally, to deport to other countries. (The United States also interned many U.S. citizens of Japanese descent in similar camps.) Sometimes, the police units in neighboring countries sustained low-level border wars with each other based on their respective efforts to dump these unwanted people across the border. One local police department of a large city would take a couple of truckloads of these people across the border and turn them loose. Returning afterward, they would occasionally have to cover their retreat in an exchange of pistol fire, not very deadly, with police from the other side. Opinions about how early Hitler intended to kill the Jews differ widely, but there is plenty of evidence to suggest that many Germans who participated in the relocation process thought only of deporting people who did not fit in. The final solution of mass killing was implemented after it became apparent that there was no place to which the unwanted Jews could be permanently deported.

Historical examples are often subject to controversy, counterexample, and reinterpretation, and so laboratory studies are useful. Such studies confirm the conclusion that aggression tends to escalate. When subjects are put in the position of delivering electric shocks to another person, and they can freely choose how severe the shocks will be, they escalate the shocks gradually over time. By the end of the experiment, they are choosing to administer much more intense and presumably painful shocks than they chose earlier in the procedure. These patterns are not limited to reciprocal, tit-for-tat exchanges, although such patterns of retaliation do show plenty of escalation. But even when the subject in an experiment thought that he or she was simply performing the role of a teacher and punishing an alleged learner for getting wrong answers, the punishments tended to become more severe over time. 6

Getting Used to It One of the first factors that leads to the escalation of aggression is desensitization. In plain terms, desensitization is essentially a matter of getting accustomed to something and ceasing to react strongly to it. Desensitization is not necessarily bad, and indeed it is often used for constructive or therapeutic ends. In treating phobias, such as a fear of flying, for example, many therapists will carefully expose people briefly to the things that frighten them, and they gradually become less and less frightened, until eventually they can, for example, take long airplane trips without succumbing to a paralyzing panic attack.

As we have already seen, most people become very upset when they kill or hurt another human being. The theory of desensitization holds that if they keep killing people, they will suffer less and less distress each time. Killing, torturing, or raping someone may be a shock the first time. The second time, it is less of a shock. By the fiftieth time, it may be no shock at all. Just as is the case with eating the same foods or seeing the same person naked or jumping over and over into very cold water, the body and the psychological system grow accustomed to events that initially produce a strong reaction. Eventually, the reaction is minimal.

A recent critique by James Tedeschi and Richard Felson 7 concluded that research has failed to prove that desensitization affects violence. In my view, their critique is valid in suggesting that the evidence in support of desensitization has not met the very highest standards of methodological rigor. On the other hand, I think there is so much evidence (however imperfect) in favor of desensitization, from both inside and outside the psychological laboratory, that it is appropriate to assume it is true unless some contrary evidence can be marshaled. There are indeed questions about the extent and scope of desensitization effects; for example, does watching violence on television make people indifferent to the actual harming of others? But the core of the theory appears to be true.

We have previously considered Browning’s account of the German policemen who were assigned duties, including mass killings, in occupied Poland during World War II. The reactions of those men seemed to show strong patterns of desensitization. Their accounts of the first massacre indicated that most of the men were profoundly shocked and upset by what they had done. The evening after those first killings, the men sat quietly, shaken, unable to talk about what had happened or about anything else. They ate little and drank a great deal of alcohol. Some had nightmares.

But as they participated in further massacres, they showed fewer signs of distress. Although killing people may have remained an unpleasant duty, it became far less upsetting. After a day’s work, the men would sit together at meals, talk, laugh, play cards, and do other normal activities. The later killings were apparently not a moral and psychological shock to their systems the way the first ones were. Part of the explanation was that they devised ways of performing those duties that made them easier, but it also appears that they were less shocked and upset by shooting people. The involvement in killings, like the rest of the job, had faded into an ordinary routine.

Vividness of memory is one sign of sensitivity, and vividness fits the pattern of desensitization. Several months after the first massacre, the police battalion was given orders for a similar mission: Round up all the people in a certain Jewish village and shoot them. This time the battalion was badly understaffed, apparently because a large part of the group was on another assignment elsewhere. As a result, many new men were pressed into the murderous duty. Browning says that there was a striking contrast years later in the accounts of this day. The old hands who had participated in multiple killing actions did not have clear or distinct memories of this particular one. In contrast, the men who were killing for the first time had stark and vivid recollections of it, full of details. 8 They remembered it as distinctly as the old hands had remembered their first action. Apparently, then, taking part in a mass killing made a much deeper impression on people who were doing it for the first time than on people who had done it before, consistent with the desensitization view.

Many similar patterns can be found in Nathan McCall’s gripping account of his career as a youthful criminal and gang member in urban Virginia. He provides a very moving report of his first participation in gang rape. He knew that the older boys did such things, but the first time his friends found an opportunity, he was nervous and reluctant. He described the victim, Vanessa, a 13-year-old “black beauty,” as naive and a virgin; he had seen her in school and thought about dating her, although he quickly abandoned those thoughts once the prospect of raping her existed, because he thought that someone who had been subjected to a multiple rape would be permanently beneath his dignity to have as a girlfriend. He said he felt sorry for her as he watched her argue and struggle and slowly resign herself to what seemed inevitable. He described his feelings of embarrassment, worry, and disgust; after he took his brief turn between her legs, he “felt sick and unclean” (p. 46). He said he sensed that some of his fellow rapists felt sorry for her and suffered pangs of guilt, too.

Following this moving description, however, McCall notes that the guilt was short-lived, and indeed after the girl left they had a “victory celebration.” He ended the story by saying that soon after this event he and his friends began conducting similar gang rapes on a fairly regular basis, perfecting the art of luring girls into the trap, sometimes using the guys’ homes while their parents were at work, and so forth. The matter-of-fact summary of these later activities contrasts sharply with the reluctant, vivid, ambivalent account of the first time, again consistent with the desensitization view.

In all the reading I did for this book, the most unforgettable story of desensitization was one that was not even told by a perpetrator. (At most, one could say he was a peripheral and involuntary accomplice.) It was told to journalist Gitta Sereny by a man named Richard, who had been a Czech Jew deported to Treblinka. 9

Treblinka was not a concentration camp; it was simply a death camp. Trains full of people arrived there each day, and almost all of the passengers were immediately killed. The only people who lived there were the handful of SS guards, their Ukrainian helpers, and a small contingent of Jews who performed menial labor. Richard was selected for menial labor. Remarkably, he arrived there early in the killings and remained there almost to the end and still survived.

Richard’s job was to collect and sort the belongings of the victims. Trains from the east brought mostly dirt-poor peasants who had only the clothes on their back, and these were usually full of lice, so they were collected and destroyed. But the trains from western Europe carried reasonably well-to-do Jews (and a few others) who had brought along their most important possessions, including fine clothes, good food, and valuables. In a few hours, these unfortunates were marching naked to the gas chamber, while Richard and his colleagues were frantically gathering up their clothes and going through their suitcases. Many trains arrived every day, and it was a rush to get everything from one group of victims sorted and stored away before the next group arrived.

Although Richard’s group was vulnerable to being shot by the SS or Ukrainian guards almost at whim, it gradually reached a working harmony with these men and the danger of execution subsided (as long as the Jews were careful never to give offense). Their special job also gave them an advantage over most inhabitants of concentration camps, who had to survive on a starvation diet of the lowest quality bread and soup. Richard and his colleagues were allowed to feed and clothe themselves from the victims’ booty. The food was good and plentiful, and they kept their health.

Then, in March 1943, things changed. The trains stopped coming every day. Only a few trains arrived, and those were full of poor gypsies who brought little with them. And then the trains stopped altogether. For six weeks there were none. Of course, Richard and his men had not been given any explanations or indeed any information at all. They knew only that there were no trains.

Richard recalled those six weeks as miserable, for several reasons that are important to appreciate. First, and most obviously, the lack of trains meant that their food (and clothing) supply was cut off. They had to eat the regular camp food, which was unhealthy and inadequate. Like starving people everywhere, they lost weight, felt depressed and lethargic, and began to grow weak and fall ill. Some died.

Second, the lack of trains contained a deeper threat. The Jews knew they had been kept alive simply to handle the possessions of the victims. No trains, no victims—and no possessions. Each day, they wondered whether someone would decide that their work was no longer needed and they would take their own turn in the gas chambers. Richard said that he had always seen the storage bins just bursting with clothes and other possessions, but now these had all been shipped off. He said they felt indescribably depressed and afraid when they looked at those huge bins, now standing empty. When full, those bins had been their reason for being allowed to live.

A third cause of concern was the behavior of the Germans. Richard said that the Germans started to seem as panic-stricken as he and his fellows, and so he was constantly afraid that one of those nervous blond men would just shoot him. In retrospect, the Germans’ fear was probably parallel to Richard’s: If there were no more trains, the camp would be shut down, and instead of working there as guards they would be sent, not to the gas chambers, but to the Russian front, which was not a vastly superior prospect.

Finally, one day when Richard and his friends were sitting together in their barracks, doing nothing, one of the Germans walked in with a big smile and announced, with a flourish, that as of tomorrow the trains would be rolling in again. Richard says that he and all the other Jews immediately stood up and cheered.

Years later, he said it made him sick to recall that moment. He and his friends had essentially celebrated the fact that other innocent Jews were being brought to their deaths. He said in retrospect it seemed impossible, but it was the truth: That was the point they had reached. Moreover, it was not just a single outburst of relief. He said they spent that evening “in an excited, expectant mood.” 10 They talked about where the train might be coming from—they hoped it was a rich country “like Holland,” whose citizens would have good food and fine clothes. For Richard, it meant a new lease on life. “The fact that it was their death, whoever they were, which meant our life, was no longer relevant; we had been through this over and over and over.” 11 That last line expresses the desensitization he and his fellows had been through. They had simply grown accustomed to the deaths of others, even though they had no reason to rationalize or justify it. He and his fellows reacted to the prospect of a resumption of the killings solely in terms of what it meant for their own work and well-being.

I do not wish to overstate the case for desensitization; it does not always happen. There may even be occasional trends in the opposite direction. Sometimes people are bothered by what they are doing and cannot put aside their scruples, which seem to accumulate and eventually interfere with further acts. These individuals seem to become sensitized rather than desensitized. But they appear to be the exceptions. Generally, people react less strongly each time they inflict or witness harm.

How does desensitization contribute to escalation? There are several likely answers. First, one must assume that people’s normal repugnance at inflicting severe harm on others holds them back from being as extreme as they could be. Like the shooters who ended up missing their targets at point-blank range (discussed in Chapter 7), people’s inhibitions sometimes prevent them from carrying out violent intentions. With desensitization, these internal blocks are weakened.

It is important to recognize that the contribution of desensitization will most likely be limited. In a first act of violence, internal emotional objections will tend to ameliorate the violence, but as the person becomes less and less sensitive to the suffering of others, he or she will be less hampered by these emotions. This desensitization will not necessarily produce ever more extreme acts of violence; it merely means that the same level of violence can be carried out more efficiently and with fewer failures, delays, and problems.

Among the sadistic few who enjoy hurting others, however, desensitization will have a quite different effect. As they grow less sensitive, they will find their pleasurable reactions diminishing (as opposed to finding merely their reluctance and repugnance diminishing). One might hope that this tendency would cause them to abandon violence as the yield of pleasure diminishes; but more likely, it will prompt them to become ever more cruel in order to recapture the degree of pleasure they found before they became desensitized. Instead of merely killing their victims, sadists may find that they must first torture and humiliate them to get the same degree of satisfaction.

Getting Away with It For many people, the idea of committing some violent or harmful act is surrounded with strong inhibitions. From early in life, we learn that such actions lead to disastrous consequences, possibly because in a small child’s frame of reference, disastrous consequences can be easily arranged. Participating in torture or murder will seem immensely consequential to an adult, and as a result most people will be effectively inhibited from doing such things.

But what happens if, by some remarkable series of events, someone comes to engage in one of those acts after all? Very likely, the disastrous consequences will not ensue. The world does not end, sirens do not go off, people do not immediately see that you are an entirely different person. Things may go on pretty much as before. Such a discovery may be a profound shock and may cause the person to have doubts about all those scruples, worries, and inhibitions. In plain terms, one is surprised to find how easily one gets away with such an act, and so one concludes that the reluctance was overblown. What was I so afraid of?

It helps to consider some mundane examples. In graduate school, one of my married friends experienced a mutual attraction to a female student, and he agonized over whether to violate his pledge of marital fidelity. Finally, temptation won out over conscience, and with some trepidation and inner struggle he walked across the campus to the young woman’s dormitory room. They soon undressed and got into bed. By coincidence, the moment they began having intercourse, the dormitory fire alarm went off. Actually, the alarm was prone to go off rather frequently, but he did not know this (he lived off campus with his wife), nor did he even know that it was the fire alarm; all he knew was that as soon as he had crossed the line into forbidden pleasures, there was this horribly loud buzzing sound all around him.

Having such a signal from the environment at the moment one begins to do something wrong is a parody of what people imagine will happen. Far more often, of course, nothing out of the ordinary happens, and the person is surprised by the absence of condemnatory reaction. This issue is revived periodically in connection with the national antidrug propaganda campaigns. My generation was brought up hearing alarming stories about the catastrophic dangers of drugs, and many of us simply accepted that if one were ever to use illegal drugs, one’s entire life would instantly be turned upside down, one’s health ruined, and one’s career destroyed. It was a shock to me, and I assume to many others, to arrive at college and meet many young men and women who seemed to use drugs constantly while still coping well with life and even earning top grades. Some of my friends experimented with marijuana themselves and were surprised at how trivial and temporary the effects were; they concluded that all the antidrug warnings were simply lies, and they began experimenting with considerably stronger (and more dangerous) drugs. Thus, when they crossed the line, they were surprised that nothing happened, and that lack of catastrophe encouraged them to go further.

Undoubtedly, similar processes can produce escalation of violence. Ervin Staub has emphasized that the silence of bystanders is often a crucial contribution to evil, even though they may think that being silent is not any form of encouragement or action. Like most scholars, Staub says that the first major modern genocide was the Turkish massacre of the Armenians. The path leading up to this episode is revealing. Late in the nineteenth century, the Turks committed several massacres in suppressing a revolt in Bulgaria. These so-called Bulgarian atrocities were widely reported and protested throughout Europe, although officially the great powers did not censure Turkey or initiate sanctions (mainly because they were caught up in the more pressing concerns of the power politics of the time). Thus, there was bad publicity but nothing more.

The next step involved killing Armenians inside Turkey. A small local uprising of Armenians was ended when the insurgents surrendered after receiving a promise of pardon and safe conduct. The promise was immediately broken, and the rebels were killed. Then, in 1895, more than 200,000 Armenians were killed, but the international protest was minimal. The ruling Turks may well have learned from these incidents that killing European subjects bought only a few protests and killing Turkish Armenians not even that. In 1915, they initiated a more thorough genocide, in which roughly one and a half million Armenians were killed. 12

The Turks were not the only ones to be impressed with how easily they got away with large-scale murder. Indeed, one of Hitler’s most famous lines, spoken just before the invasion of Poland, was “Who, after all, speaks today of the extermination of the Armenians?”

The Armenians were only the first victims of our genocidal century. In the subsequent mass killings around the world, similar patterns of gradual escalation can be seen. One perennial reason (although not the only one) for these gradual steps is that the perpetrators wait to see whether there will be some outcry, some protest, some international intervention. When the rest of the world does nothing, they go further. It is not even necessary to assume that they start out with the intention of going all the way to genocide if no one stops them. The first measures often simply restrict the civil rights and benefits of the victim group, perhaps as a way of punishing or getting revenge against them. However, when the perpetrators are surprised at how little protest there is, they may grow willing to inflict more severe sanctions the next time they feel they have a cause.

The pattern of growing more violent when one’s first acts elicit no retaliation or sanctions can be found among individuals just as well as among repressive governments. Experts on domestic abuse believe that one reason for escalation in family violence is that abusers learn how easy it is to get away with hitting. 13 To strike one’s husband or wife in the face would go against a great deal of conditioning for most people, and they would worry about severe consequences—loss of love, dissolution of marriage, even arrest and imprisonment. Instead, however, one typically finds that the person one has struck is willing to continue the marriage, accepts one’s apology and pledges love in return, and in many cases will even actively conceal one’s misdeed (such as when a woman wears sunglasses to hide a black eye). You crossed the line, you actually struck your wife (or husband or parent) and, surprisingly, there was no penalty. Hence, it is easier to do it again next time, because there is less reason to worry or hold back. Indeed, if one is really angry next time, one may easily go further, because what one did last time turned out to be so trivial.

Discovering the Pleasure The last two sections have covered the two main factors that produce escalation, namely, desensitization and the discovery that one can get away with it. There are additional factors, however, including some that have been anticipated in previous chapters. One of them is the discovery that hurting people can be a direct source of pleasure. People may learn to enjoy committing harm.

The issue of sadism has already been covered, and there is no need to recross that ground here. Nevertheless, one aspect that was fairly peripheral to our discussion in Chapter 7 is important now, which is that the pleasure in hurting is typically something that people discover gradually. Sadism is rarely the original or driving force that initiates violence; it is not one of the major or common roots of evil. Instead, violence usually begins for some other reason, and sadism may emerge as a factor over time, if the person continues to commit violent acts. This implies that sadism can become a factor that contributes to escalation.

Sadism is especially important as a late-emerging factor because it provides a new, additional reason to inflict harm. Thus, people may first get involved in hurting others because it is their job, or because they believe they are furthering their idealistic cause, or for instrumental reasons—but then they discover that it becomes gratifying to inflict harm. They discover that they enjoy it. Henceforth, their violent acts spring from both the original cause and the additional motive of enjoyment.

Tit for Tat and Vicious Circles The chapter on revenge (Chapter 5) showed yet another process that can lead to escalation, and indeed in history, many group conflicts or vendettas have escalated in violence over long periods of time. Most people believe they are justified in striking back at someone who has attacked them. As we saw, there is a tendency for these reciprocal and retaliatory acts of aggression to grow more severe, and so the initial antagonism may spiral into worse violence.

A major reason for this escalation is the magnitude gap between perpetrators and victims. The magnitude gap makes it very difficult to settle a vendetta or other grievance in a way that both sides will see as fair. Perpetrators see what they do as smaller in scope, importance, and severity than victims see it, and so the victim’s notion of a fair retaliation will be more drastic and extreme than what the original perpetrator thinks is fair. Just when one side thinks things are even, the other side thinks it has been the victim of an outrage that cries out for retaliation. This leads to a continuing escalation of the violence.

The Ambiguous, Expanding Mandate We have seen that ambiguity sometimes contributes to stepping across the line into wrongful or hurtful actions. Ambiguity plays at least as large a role in escalation. Ambiguity permits a steady expansion of the categories of victims and in the scope of actions that can be taken against them.

Part of the effect of ambiguity has to do with the fact that evil is in the eye of the beholder. I have pointed out throughout this book that perpetrators often do not regard their actions as evil, and so evil flourishes in the gap between the perspectives of actor and observer (or between those of perpetrator and victim). When the rules and meanings are all precisely clear, there is less chance for such divergent interpretations, and hence less room for one person to do something he thinks is right but that someone else will judge as radically wrong.

The connotation of the word ambiguity is somewhat misleading here, because many people think of ambiguity as involving a lack of meaning, such as when it is unclear how something should be understood or interpreted. It is better, however, to understand ambiguity as involving multiple possible meanings, so that the person is uncertain about which of these meanings is the correct one. Ambiguity is a surplus of meaning, not a shortage. Some foreign languages make this clearer than English. In German, for example, the word for ambiguous is zweideutig, which is made from the words for “two” and “meaningful”; thus, something is ambiguous insofar as it has at least two meanings.

Ambiguity breeds evil because many actions can be viewed in widely different ways from different perspectives. An act may seem cruel or violent from one perspective but correct and even morally obligatory from another. The other side has done something that may be acceptable—or may be a direct attack on your group or its goals. A certain act of retaliation may be appropriate—or it may be excessive. There may be a rule against a certain kind of violent reprisal—or the current case may be an exception to such general rules, for some general rules don’t apply during times of emergency.

When the perpetrator is a group rather than a single person, the opportunities for dangerous ambiguities to arise increase dramatically. We have already seen that sometimes the members of a violent group privately think one thing but say something quite different aloud to one another, and so the group communication is distorted. In particular, these distortions tend to breed greater violence, because the group members’ open comments tend to insist on strict adherence to the party line even if they privately have qualms and moral doubts about the whole enterprise. The gap between private meanings and public meanings—between what is thought and what is said—tends to foster greater violence.

The great Russian writer Alexander Solzhenitsyn once remarked on how Americans could not really understand what it must have been like to fall into the clutches of the Soviet penal system, because in America we take our Constitution and laws for granted. He said we cannot imagine how terrible it is when judges must operate without clear or explicit laws. In the United States, when the laws do not explicitly condemn some act, then it is permitted. In the Soviet Union, he said, there was no clear set of written rules that the judges could consult, and it was considered important to punish people who acted wrongly, despite the absence of a constitution. Indeed, some of the most important offenses were quite imprecisely defined, such as counterrevolutionary comments or actions. There is a substantial capacity for such a system to produce repressive, evil patterns of judgments. How can you prove you are not an enemy of the people? And if you are therefore judged guilty, how could a judge dare be lenient in punishing an enemy of the people? Giving a lenient sentence might even be grounds for someone else in the future to prove that the judge was himself an enemy of the people. One never knew. It happened.

One of the saddest predicaments described by Robert Conquest in his history of the Soviet purges was the one faced by women who were arrested for being “wives of enemies of the people.” 14 At some level, to the perpetrators’ way of thinking, the crackdown seemed plausible. After all, if someone marries a major traitor to your country and continues to love and support him while he is betraying it, then probably she is herself dangerous or at least inimical to the decent people of the land. Something should be done with her, lest she carry on her husband’s treasonous activities while he is in prison.

In practice, however, many wholly innocent women found themselves accused of something vaguely terrible but nonspecific and hence impossible to defend against. After all, if your husband has been convicted for whatever vague reasons of being an enemy of the people, and you are unambiguously his wife, then you must belong to the guilty category of “wives of enemies of the people” and hence are destined for punishment yourself. Most of these women had committed no specific crime or other wrong act, and often they did not know what their husbands were supposed to have done. (Nor had the husbands actually done anything, in most cases.) There is almost no reasonable basis for deciding on an appropriate punishment for such a noncrime; the judges tended to sentence the women to prison labor camps for 25 years, which often meant the rest of their lives.

The sort of instruction that is most likely to produce violent, oppressive, evil measures consists of harsh but vague rules. Injunctions to root out and punish “enemies of the people” are a perfect example; clearly it is important to take severe measures with such enemies, but it is far from clear just who those enemies are, and it is also often unclear just how severe the severe measures should be. Should enemies of the people be fired from their jobs? Fined? Imprisoned for 3 years, or for 25 years? Permanently deprived of all civil rights? Executed? Along with their families? Tortured until they reveal names of accomplices, who are then also imprisoned and perhaps shot?

Harsh but vague laws were a centerpiece of the French Terror, 15 which in many ways was the first modern episode of murderous governmental repression. More recent atrocities have kept the same pattern. Elizabeth Becker’s account of the Khmer Rouge terror emphasized the absence of specific rules. Indeed, she says that there were no formal laws at all after the Khmer Rouge took over. 16 Local authorities answered no questions about who had been arrested or why. The people gradually realized they were utterly at the mercy of the authorities. They lived in fear that they might unknowingly say or do the wrong thing and be executed.

At one point, the Khmer decided to intensify their nationalistic campaign by outlawing any identification with other ethnic groups or nations. The vagueness of this law can be seen in the wide differences in its result. In some parts of the country, ethnic minorities were forbidden to practice their customs and religions, wear their preferred clothes, or speak their own languages, but otherwise they went on as before. In other parts of the country, there were wholesale massacres of such minorities. 17

The power of ambiguity can be seen in lesser crimes by individuals, too. The Soviet practice of sending political dissidents to mental hospitals provided a good example of this. 18 Psychiatric diagnosis is far from an exact science even today in the United States, where all political views are officially tolerated and where psychological research is most advanced. One Soviet psychiatrist who later settled in the United States spoke about this Soviet practice. He asserted that many of the top Soviet psychiatrists actually believed that political dissidents, almost by definition, must be insane. Communists believed in the objective truth of their account of the world, and any fellow citizen who refused to go along with the party line was in an important sense out of touch with reality. Other psychiatrists, however, were presumably more cynical about the accuracy of their diagnoses. They told the state what it wanted to hear in order to get on with their jobs as required and hence perhaps advance their careers. They signed the forms that condemned sane, healthy individuals to long-term incarceration under the guise of psychiatric treatment for their nonexistent illnesses.

Yet it is unlikely that they were so cynical that they honestly recognized these victims as fully sane, for under the expert gaze of a psychiatrist there are precious few people who can get a totally clean bill of mental health. In the United States, a famous experiment was conducted in which a group of normal, healthy individuals went to various mental hospitals and asked for treatment, initially claiming symptoms that were actually bogus and nonexistent. They had been instructed that if they were admitted, they were to drop all pretense of illness and act normally, to see how long it took for a sane person to get out of a mental hospital. Not a single one was ever recognized as healthy. They were diagnosed as having various mental disorders, and eventually they were discharged as being in remission—which meant that they were presumably still insane but temporarily free enough of symptoms to be released from the hospitals. 19

Thus, the criteria for recognizing mental illness tend to be loose and slippery, even today, and they were certainly much more ambiguous during the heyday of Soviet power. There was some basis for thinking that anyone who failed to recognize the officially sanctioned truth of Communist doctrine must be mentally ill, just as the sanity of a modern American who believes that the earth is flat or that the government plants mind-control drugs in the municipal water supply would be suspect. A determined inspection of almost anyone’s life and mind can find evidence of abnormality, neurosis, and other pathology. This ambiguity has made psychological diagnosis a useful tool for the repression of political dissent.

Trust and Responsibility Another important way in which ambiguity contributes to evil among idealistic groups is the shuffling and hence eclipsing of personal responsibility. When people act alone, it is obvious who made the decisions and who is to blame. In large and complex groups, however, responsibility can sometimes be divided up into such small parts and pieces that no one seems to be to blame even if there are utterly horrific results. Several broad principles combine to make groups better able than lone individuals to produce evil.

Diffusion of Responsibility: All in This Together The principle of diffusion of responsibility was introduced in 1968 by John Darley and Bibb Latané to explain why bystanders might fail to help a victim in need. Their work was stimulated by a sensational news event, the murder of Kitty Genovese in New York in 1963 by an assailant who beat and stabbed her for nearly an hour. More than 40 people saw or heard what was going on, but no one came to her aid or even called the police. Commentators said that the alienation, indifference, or moral bankruptcy of urban dwellers was to blame for the fact that people could watch someone be killed without doing anything to help. Darley and Latane proposed, however, that the mere fact that there were so many people made each of them feel that someone else would probably act. In carefully constructed laboratory studies, they showed that lone bystanders will often come forward to help a victim, whereas bystanders who believe they are part of a large group will not. The reason is that the responsibility for taking action is divided up among members of the group. The larger the group, the less responsible any individual person feels. 20

The concept of diffusion of responsibility was used later to explain why people do not work as hard in groups as they do as individuals, a phenomenon called social loafing. 21 The idea can also be applied to group violence. No one person feels the pressure to say that a certain action is wrong. Indeed, the very fact that “everyone else is doing it” (in the standard phrase that people offer in moral defense of their questionable actions) seems to indicate that it is correct, or at least acceptable.

Division of Labor A second principle is the division of labor. Groups can work far more efficiently and effectively than individuals if the task is divided up so that everyone does what he or she does best. The evolution of modern manufacturing shows this process at work. The original factories, or “manufactories,” were simply places where groups of very skilled technicians made things—but each individual worked on his own project. Because these technicians had to have a wide range of skills, their labor was quite expensive. Imagine, for example, how much one would have to know to build an entire car, cabinet, or clock all by oneself. And they had to be paid the cost of their expensive labor even when they were just sweeping the floor after the job was done. It was much more efficient and hence much cheaper to hire such experts only for the most difficult tasks and to have other people with lesser, cheaper skills do the rest of the tasks. Critics of the task division of labor have pointed out that the new arrangement reduced everyone’s feeling of identification with the product. If you made an entire cabinet yourself, you would look upon it with pride as something of yours; if all you did was tighten the screws on the doors of 50 cabinets, you would probably feel much less pride. The division of labor reduces feelings of responsibility, too. 22

When large governments or other organizations embark on a campaign of killing people, a careful division of labor can help conceal any individual’s responsibility for the killings. In particular, many groups have found it effective to separate the people who decide whether to kill and whom to kill from the people who carry out the executions. Each individual may see that there is a huge bureaucratic organization, with thousands of people doing thousands of jobs, and his or her own part is quite small. By refusing, one would accomplish little of value, and in particular no one would be saved. Refusing would alienate all one’s friends and colleagues, for one would be implicitly accusing them of doing something terrible. Well, they are doing something terrible, but people are always reluctant to point that out to their friends, if only because accusing a friend of immorality is a good way to lose that friend. In contrast, to go along and do one’s own little part may seem like a fairly innocent and safe choice.

Trust and Loyalty A key aspect of the nature of groups is trust. This trust is related to what I have already described in terms of separating the decision-makers from those who carry out the cruel decisions. In most groups where there is a hierarchy of authority, there is almost necessarily a liberal dose of moral trust involved. Specifically, the people at the bottom trust the decision-makers at the top to do the right thing.

It is perhaps unusually difficult for modern American citizens to recognize this trust. We live in a society in which the news media have free rein to investigate the morality of the top authorities, including both the morality of their national policy decisions and the morality of their private lives. The tradition of moral trust of top authorities is undoubtedly weaker in the United States than in most other cultures, and recent historical events have provided ample lessons to Americans of the importance of questioning authority.

Yet even in the United States one can see the pervasiveness of moral trust. In large corporations, whistle-blowers are rare and are often condemned. Robert Jackall’s landmark study of corporate ethics 23 found that most managers believe that it is fundamentally wrong to go against your boss unless he or she is undeniably engaged in something atrocious, which normally never happens. Even when some kind of abuse comes to light, one should try to remain loyal. Most of the time, it is considered safe to assume that the boss knows more than you do and that you should do what you are told without question. You certainly do not go about trying to prove that your company’s top bosses are morally bankrupt.

Such patterns are not confined to executives. Investigations of police departments or military units often encounter difficulties when the officers refuse to implicate their colleagues. These officers feel that their first moral obligation is loyalty to their fellows, and so they deny having knowledge about misdeeds. Such problems have come to be expected as almost routine in such investigations. For example, in the 1990s, a widespread corruption scandal led eventually to the firing or disciplining of many of New York City’s Harlem precinct police, but the investigation stalled and dragged for months because nobody would talk. The media labeled the hostile silence “the Blue Wall.”

The issue of moral trust was a central one for physicians during the Nazi era, too, as shown in Robert Jay Lifton’s fascinating account, The Nazi Doctors. 24 Before the killing of the Jews began, even before the war began, Germany had begun a policy by which certain hopeless cases were put to death. The euthanasia program under the Nazis was aimed at people who had profound and incurable handicaps, such as severe mental retardation or illness. The paradox was that doctors who had sworn to protect human life were put in the position of killing people if it was determined that their lives were no longer worth living. In this early killing program, one could already recognize some of the features that were so successful in the later mass murders of Jews and other victims. Decisions were supposedly made by committees and distant authorities and then carried out by others, so no one felt individually responsible. In the case of the euthanasia program, each of the physicians involved was encouraged to believe that someone else made the final decision, thereby diffusing and concealing any responsibility. The oversight committees made recommendations and thought that the administering physicians would have the final say. Meanwhile, the administering physicians thought that the expert committee had made the decision and they were merely carrying out what everyone else had determined was the right and proper thing to do.

As Lifton records, the procedure followed in the euthanasia program was for older, highly respected senior physicians to make policy and render individual decisions, while younger doctors were assigned the actual duty of making the lethal injections. When young, inexperienced doctors were thus put into contact with very senior members of their profession, they felt honored and flattered, and they were quite willing to cooperate in their assigned tasks (including killing), partly because they turned over feelings of responsibility to their senior colleagues. In effect, they had been chosen for a special honor that brought more rapid career advancement than they otherwise would have had, and contact with a famous person in one’s own field is usually a flattering and intimidating experience. It was highly unlikely that a young physician who had a chance to work with such an eminent older physician would throw away this opportunity by telling the older man that his actions were disgracefully immoral.

The system greased the wheels for such cooperation by choosing the younger physicians carefully. They were selected for their idealism, their political enthusiasm, and their lack of experience. They were the ones most likely to go along, and the system was set up to take away any feelings of personal responsibility they had. Indeed, one of them recalled his reaction when he was first told, by a famous older man in his field, that the duties would involve putting certain patients to death. “I told [the senior colleague] I could not take on any responsibility at all because I knew I was not qualified medically,” he said. The older physician replied, “All right, you will not have responsibility.” He emphasized that the decisions would be made by a panel of professors and specialists who would make careful evaluations of each case. The young physician had only to do his duty, which would be a valuable service to the profession and the society at large. It might be disagreeable, but soldiers at the front had to perform disagreeable duties, too. 25

The crucial element of trust was articulated by another physician who had been one of the young doctors in this program. Like many people in Germany, he had reserved the absolute highest level of respect for professors, and it had been a professor who had recruited him into the euthanasia program. “It never would have occurred to me that a professor, in no matter what field, would expect a student or a young colleague to do something that would step over the boundaries of human ethics.” 26 The older man was for him the person he would regard as being the highest moral authority. If this person said it was all right, then it must be all right.

Groups Suppress Private Doubts A final way in which groups contribute to the escalation of violence emerges from the discrepancy between what the members of the group say and what they privately believe. The group seems to operate based on what the members of the group say to one another. It may often happen that the members harbor private doubts about what the group is doing, but they refuse to say them, and the group proceeds on its course of action as if the doubts did not exist.

Social psychologists have known for several decades that a group is more than the sum or average of its members. Influential early research showed that groups sometimes make decisions that are riskier than what the average private opinion of the group members favor. 27 More relevant recent work has shown that groups tend to communicate and make decisions based on what the members have in common, 28 which may differ substantially from what the individual members think. In a remarkable series of studies, psychologists Garold Stasser and William Titus showed that groups sometimes make poor decisions even when they have sufficient information to do better. In one study, each group was supposed to decide which of two job candidates to hire. Each member of the group came to the meeting armed with preliminary information about the candidates. The researchers provided more information favoring one candidate, Anderson, but they scattered it through the group. In contrast, the smaller amount of information favoring the other candidate, Baker, was concentrated so everyone knew it. Had the group really pooled their information, they would have discovered that the totality pointed clearly toward hiring Anderson. But instead of doing this, group after group merely talked about what they all knew in common, which was the information favorable to Baker. As a result, group after group chose Baker. 29

We have already seen how groups involved in evil will suppress doubts and dissent. Chapter 6 quoted some of the people who worked in the Stalinist terror. These individuals said they privately doubted the propriety of what they were doing, but whenever anyone would begin to speak about such doubts, the others would silence him by insisting on the party line.

The Terror following the French Revolution showed how cruelty can escalate as a result of the pattern in which private doubts are kept secret and public statements express zeal and fervor. The Terror was directed mainly at the apparent enemies of the Revolution, and the Revolutionary government was constantly obsessed with internal enemies who presumably sought to betray it. Hence, those at the center of the government were paradoxically its most likely victims. To criticize the Revolution or even to question its repressive measures was to invite suspicion of oneself. Accordingly, the members of the tribunal and others began to try to outdo each other in making strong statements about the need for harsh measures, because only such statements could keep them safe from the potential accusation of lacking the proper attitudes. The discussions and decisions featured mainly the most violent and extreme views, and the degree of brutality escalated steadily. 30 Ironically, the leaders’ fear of one another caused them to become ever more violent, even draconian, with the result that they all really did have more and more to fear. And one by one, most of them were killed by the Revolution over which they were presiding.

Many people will sympathize with victims or question whether their own side’s most violent actions are morally right, but they will also feel ashamed of these doubts. What is said in the group, and what is likely to dictate the group’s actions, will be the most extreme and virulent sentiments. Whatever their private feelings, the members may express only the politically correct views of strong hatred of the enemy. In such an environment, the group’s actions may reflect a hatred that is more intense than any of its members actually feel. The group will be more violent than the individual people in it. Given all the other processes that foster escalation, it may not even be necessary for groups to have this effect forever. Once the members of the group are waist-deep in blood, it is too late for them to question the group’s project as a whole, and so they are all the more likely to wade in even deeper.





