Chapter 1
Neuroeconomics—An Introduction

Martin Reuter and Christian Montag




Abstract The present chapter provides an introduction into the young discipline of
neuroeconomics and into the present Neuroeconomics book. Historical aspects,
core concepts and future research avenues are presented.



1.1    Historical Aspects

Neuroeconomics is a very young scientiﬁc discipline that constitutes an interdis-
ciplinary symbiosis of economics, psychology and the neurosciences. The general
aim of neuroeconomics is to study human decision-making with a focus on the
neural mechanisms thereof. The ofﬁcial establishment of the discipline was marked
by the foundation of The Society for Neuroeconomics in 2005.
   Research in this ﬁeld is proliﬁc and of high quality, however, scepticism
remains, especially among those scientists who retain a purist vision of their
respective disciplines. History has taught us that great achievements are made
possible only by the combined expertise of scientists from different ﬁelds. For
example, only through such successful interdisciplinary research could man have



M. Reuter (&)
Department of Psychology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
e-mail: martin.reuter@uni-bonn-diff.de
M. Reuter
Center for Economics and Neuroscience (CENs), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
C. Montag
Department of Molecular Psychology, Institute of Psychology and Education,
Ulm University, Ulm, Germany
e-mail: christian.montag@uni-ulm.de
C. Montag
Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation, Center for Information in Medicine,
School of Life Science and Technology, University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China, Chengdu, People’s Republic of China

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                          1
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_1
2                                                                M. Reuter and C. Montag

flown to the moon; astronomers working in isolation could never have achieved this
dream, but with input from other disciplines (e.g. informatics, mathematics, phy-
sics, etc.) mankind’s dream of walking on the moon became a reality.
    Cognitive neuroscience, which emerged during the 1970s, is the youngest
member of the neuroeconomic trio, while the disciplines of psychology and eco-
nomics have been around for over one hundred years. For decades the two disci-
plines seemed to live in an uneasy parallel, arguably ignoring each other. This is
surprising, given that the understanding of human behaviour is intrinsic to both
disciplines. Of note, the scientiﬁc worldviews and the methodological approaches
utilized by each discipline differ dramatically. Whereas economists try to establish a
formal theory explaining human behaviour in an axiomatic way, psychologists
build and reﬁne theories through an empirical approach. Roughly speaking,
economists have traditionally favoured a theoretical—and psychologists an
empirical—approach. Since the launch of the journal of Experimental Economics in
1998 (and in view of the chairs for behavioural economics newly created at
Universities throughout the world), it is clear that this strict differentiation between
the theoretical economics and empirical psychology no longer holds. Nevertheless,
such historical traditions are of importance; even today the two disciplines show
marked differences that are far-reaching, which manifest in different theoretical
foundations and methodological and statistical approaches, all of which serve to
undermine successful interdisciplinary research efforts.
    Whereas economics had not made direct acquaintance with the neurosciences
prior to the establishment of the new discipline of neuroeconomics, the idea of
investigating the role of the brain in human behaviour is an old one in psychology.
For decades psychologists have used electroencephalography (EEG; see the method
Chap. 19 by Debener et al. in this book) to investigate cognitive and emotional
processes. Therefore, the invention and scientiﬁc application of magnetic resonance
tomography (MRI; for an introduction see the method chapters on MRI by Markett
(fMRI; Chap. 20), Gaser (MRI; Chap. 21) and Rüber (DTI; Chap. 22) in this book)
in the 1990s proved a logical step for psychologists interested in subcortical pro-
cesses that are not explicitly measurable through EEG. The subdiscipline of
Biological Psychology makes use of all kinds of techniques that characterize the
neurosciences, incorporating, in addition to EEG and MRI, genetics, psychophys-
iology, endocrinology, etc. In order to help bridge the gap between the “subdis-
ciplines” of neuroeconomics, the present book deliberately features a broad
methods section, which gives a scholarly introduction into neuroscience techniques
relevant to this ﬁeld (see PART VII of this book).



1.1.1    Economic Models and Their Parallels in Psychology

As mentioned above, economic models of human behaviour are axiomatic and try
to establish algorithms valid for all participants across different situations. This idea
is mirrored in classical experimental psychology, with the difference that
1 Neuroeconomics—An Introduction                                                      3

experimental psychology uses experimental conditions to analyse behaviour. In
Personality Psychology, however, the central tenet recognizes that large variability
exists across participants, even in strictly controlled experimental settings or natural
environments; a phenomenon referred to as individual differences.
    A prominent economic model in neoclassical economics is utility maximization.
According to utility maximization, people make their best choices according to their
desires, knowledge and resources. The term utility does not refer to a good’s
quantity or monetary value per se in determining the decisions of an agent, but to
the utility they obtain from the item. According to Marshall (1920, p. 78) “utility is
correlative to desire and want”, but desire and want can only be inferred indirectly
by “the price which a person is willing to pay for the fulﬁlment or satisfaction of his
desire”. Although utility maximization makes correct predictions in a wide range of
settings and situations including politics, markets and social life, its validity has
been questioned, e.g. by Prospect Theory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Whereas
the concept of expected utility, which originates from Utility Maximization Theory,
postulates that alternative choices are valued by weighting the hedonic utility of
possible outcomes against the chances of those outcomes actually occurring (e.g. in
gambles), Prospect Theory claims that people do not always show a numerical
evaluation of probabilities, but that outcomes are valued according to two aspects: a
reference point (reference-dependent value) and an absolute utility. The
reference-dependent value is thought to represent the valuation of past experiences
and future aspirations and is therefore related to learning (past) and motivation
(future). Most prominently, Prospect Theory explains why people grant more
weight to losses than to gains, a phenomenon called Loss Aversion. There is
empirical evidence across different cultures and ethnicities that, on average, losses
are valued about twice as large as equal-sized gains. Of note, Prospect Theory has
gained empirical support from the neurosciences. Using an fMRI study, Tom and
colleagues have demonstrated that different brain activity patterns are correlated to
the amount of gains and losses (Tom et al. 2007). Interestingly, they did not identify
different brain circuits coding for gains and losses, but instead identiﬁed a unique
system—the ventral striatum—that has become famous in the neurosciences as the
brain’s reward centre. Gains were expressed by an increase—and losses by a
decrease—of the BOLD (blood oxygen level dependent) response in the ventral
striatum.
    Utility Maximization Theory focuses on economic decisions taken by a single
agent in isolation. In contrast, Game Theory has extended the idea of utility
maximization to social situations, e.g. it makes predictions of how the choices of
other peoples influence the choice of an individual. Behavioural economics (partly
influenced by psychology) has developed a battery of different games (e.g. Trust
Game, Public Goods Game, Prisoner’s Dilemma, etc.; for an introduction to eco-
nomic games see Chap. 2 by Civai and Hawes in this book), which test the
assumptions made by Game Theory. However, the empirical data do not always
yield support for the theory. Naturally, people take into account the choices—or
putative choices—of others when making their decisions, but their behaviour is
often incongruent with the traditional economic view of man as a homo
4                                                              M. Reuter and C. Montag

economicus. It is stated that the homo economicus makes decisions guided by
self-interest (i.e. the maximization of personal beneﬁt), that his decisions are
completely rational and that all information necessary for making a choice is
available. Results from the dictator game where player 1 (the dictator) has to split
an endowment with an anonymous person (player 2) show that people do not
behave in a manner congruent with that expected according to the view of man as a
homo economicus (i.e. to take all the money and to award no money at all to player
2) (Camerer 2003). Instead, cross-cultural studies have shown that the “dictator” is
far more cooperative, with mean allocations to the receiver (player 2) of about 28 %
(Engel 2011). Based on the fact that this game, in its original version, is played as a
‘one shot’ game, i.e. the dictator has no reason to fear punishment from player 2 in a
subsequent interaction; the dictator game is thought to be a measure of pure
altruism.
    In addition to the influence of others on people’s choices (Game Theory), there
are other crucial factors that influence economic behaviour. One of the most
prominent factors studied in neuroeconomics is the relationship of the time lag
between the decision and its consequences, referred to as temporal discounting.
Interestingly, psychologists have investigated this topic for decades as delay of
gratiﬁcation (Mischel et al. 1989). In his seminal ‘Marshmallow Study’ at Stanford
University in 1972, Mischel devised an experiment in which children were afforded
the opportunity to ‘earn’ marshmallows. If the children could resist eating the ﬁrst
marshmallow they were offered, they were promised a second one, i.e. they would
receive two marshmallows instead of one. The duration each child resisted the
temptation to eat the initial marshmallow was analysed, and it was subsequently
investigated whether or not delaying gratiﬁcation correlated with future success.
While the majority of the approximately 600 child participants attempted to resist
the urge to eat the ﬁrst marshmallow, only one-third delayed gratiﬁcation long
enough to get the second marshmallow. Analyses suggested that the age of the
children was a crucial factor in influencing the child’s success on this task. With
increasing age, the ability to defer gratiﬁcation increases. These ﬁndings have since
been extended to adult samples, using various kinds of reinforcement. Intelligence
(positive association) and gender (females were superior in resisting an immediate
small reward in favour of a delayed bigger reward; evolutionary factors are dis-
cussed to account for this gender effect) turned out to be further prominent pre-
dictors of the ability to defer gratiﬁcation. Under the label temporal discounting this
phenomenon was investigated by means of functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI). McClure et al. (2004a) could identify distinct neural systems responding to
immediate and delayed rewards. Whereas the limbic system is activated by
immediate rewards (t = 0) the prefrontal cortex responds to both immediate and
delayed rewards (t > 0), but more so when the delayed option is chosen. These
ﬁndings hold true for monetary reinforcement as well as for primary rewards, e.g.
sex (McClure et al. 2004b). The dissociation between cortical and subcortical brain
regions with respect to immediate rewards supports the role of the limbic system
(comprising the ventral striatum that is also named “the reward centre”) for drives
and instincts and the role of the prefrontal cortex for impulse control and cognitive
1 Neuroeconomics—An Introduction                                                    5

processes. The latter are essential for evaluating offers and for deferring rewards
until a future time point. There is plenty of evidence that the more a person dis-
counts a delayed reward, the more likely that person is to exhibit a range of
behavioural problems, including clinical disorders (e.g. drug addiction, impulse
control disorders). The ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) has shown to be
involved in impulse control and in individual propensity to engage in risky beha-
viours (Bechara et al. 2000, 2002).



1.2   What We Have Learned from Animal Models

The crucial question when referring to ﬁndings from animal research is whether
results can be extrapolated to humans. Preclinical trials—typically conducted in
rodents—for the development of new drugs targeted at the treatment of human
diseases, clearly answer this question with “yes”. Excellent animal models for a
range of psychological phenomena, e.g. anxiety, are available and do allow for
predictions of the anxiolytic effects of a certain substance in humans. Even for those
more complex behaviours relevant to the ﬁeld of neuroeconomics, animal model
exist. For example, Chen et al. (2006) were able to demonstrate that Capuchin
monkeys are able to use tokens to purchase food from experimenters and that they
prefer to trade with those experimenters who offer the best deals for their “money”.
In other words, even New World monkeys understand the principles of the market.
Nonetheless, it is evident that the transfer from animal model to human is not
always successful or feasible. Ethical concerns are a crucial consideration in this
respect.
   The invention of imaging techniques [e.g. MRI, positron emission tomography
(PET)] has made it possible to study the human brain during task performance.
Although PET imaging requires the administration of a radioactive ligand into the
central blood system, it is a safe technique that can be used for research purposes
with humans. More invasive techniques, such as microdialysis (a sampling tech-
nique for the continuous measurement of free, unbound concentrations of neuro-
transmitters or hormones in the extracellular fluid of brain tissue) or single-cell
recordings (for assessment of the ﬁring rate of neurons) in the living brain are, of
course, not possible in healthy humans for ethical reasons. However, the neuro-
sciences have provided many groundbreaking animal studies with broad relevance
to neuroeconomics. As mentioned above, reinforcement and reward are crucial for
decision-making, although other context variables also have a tremendous influence
on our choices. The biological system most prominently related to reward is the
dopamine (DA) system (Schultz et al. 1997). Its relevance was ﬁrst identiﬁed in the
context of studies on drug addiction. It was suggested that the dopaminergic system
is the ﬁnal common pathway of reward since almost all substances with the
potential of causing addiction act via the DA system, either directly or indirectly
(Spanagel and Weiss 1999). These ﬁndings could be extended to naturally occur-
ring rewards (primary reinforcers like food or sex). The crucial question of how the
6                                                             M. Reuter and C. Montag

DA system could encode signals of reward is best studied in animal studies (for a
review see Schultz 2013).
    In a seminal study by Tobler et al. (2005), the activity of midbrain dopamine
neurons in Macaque monkeys was recorded while cues signalled the probability of
receiving a primary reinforcer (juice) of varying magnitude. This experiment tried
to explain how the brain disentangles the probability and magnitude of reward.
Keeping the probability of reward constant, the ﬁring rate of the DA neurons
increased monotonically with the expected liquid volume. The DA neurons were
also able to encode the expected reward value, i.e. the combination of magnitude
and probability. In a further step the authors conducted an experiment in which the
reward outcomes were explicit rather than probabilistic. They used conditioned
stimuli that explicitly predicted various amounts of liquid (p = 1). For example, a
conditioned stimulus normally indicates the deliverance of 0.15 ml juice. They
subsequently followed the conditioned stimulus with an unpredicted stimulus;
either a smaller (0.05 ml) or larger (0.50 ml) volume of liquid; in response to which
the ﬁring rate of the dopaminergic neurons decreased or increased respectively. In a
ﬁnal experiment, Tobler et al. used one stimulus that predicted the delivery of either
a small or a medium volume of juice with equal probability and a second stimulus
that predicted a medium or a large volume with equal probability. Results indicated
that for both conditioned stimuli, the deliverance of the, respectively, larger stim-
ulus resulted in an increase—and that the deliverance of the, respectively, smaller
stimulus resulted in a decrease—of the neuronal ﬁring rate. Surprisingly, the
identical medium volume delivery had opposite effects on neuronal activity,
depending on the prediction. The prediction is in turn influenced by a framing
effect. A medium amount of juice is attractive when compared to a small volume of
juice, but unattractive in comparison to a large volume. The authors argue that,
given the inﬁnite number of reward values that are possible, this is an adaptive
process. Thus, the ﬁring rates of the dopaminergic neurons adapt to the coding of
reward value in order to have a greater capacity for coding the likelihood of reward
outcomes. Results showed that dopaminergic neurons encode a combination of
magnitude and probability; the so-called expected reward values and that the
response of the dopaminergic neurons depends on framing effects (for a concise
review on the behavioural dynamics and neural basis of the framing effect please
see Chap. 9 by X.T. Wang et al. in this book).
    The effects of expected reward have a discrete neural signature in human
decision-making, as demonstrated in a seminal study by Preuschoff et al. (2006).
Using a simple gambling task in an fMRI setting, the authors varied expected
reward and risk in an uncorrelated manner. Risk is a consideration because many
decisions in daily life have to be made under conditions of uncertainty. Expected
reward and risk were both represented in dopaminergic innervated brain regions,
however, there was a temporal dissociation in their processing. The brain ﬁrst
processes information related to reward expectancy and later risk information.
Besides the aforementioned study by Preuschoff et al., there are numerous examples
in the literature of ﬁndings from animal studies being mirrored in neuroeconomic
studies on humans. For example, Roiser et al. (2009) investigated the influence of
1 Neuroeconomics—An Introduction                                                        7

framing effects on human decision-making and its neural activation patterns. They
found that amygdala activation was stronger in those trials where participants made
choices in congruence with—compared with those made counter to—the frame, but
that this effect was only apparent in subjects carrying the short allele (s-allele) of the
serotonin transporter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR; for more information on genetics
see Chaps. 4 and 23 by Reuter and Montagin this book), a genetic variant related to
neuroticism, depression and anxiety (Roiser et al. 2009).



1.2.1    Validation of Theoretical Models on Human Decision
         Making in Animals

As described above economists have developed theories (e.g. utility maximization;
game theory, etc.) to predict human decision-making. Researchers from cognitive
psychology and mathematics have established such theoretical models, albeit with a
different focus. The best studied of these models try to explain choices via the
simplest form of decision an individual can make—the choice between two alter-
natives. The focus here lies on the interdependency of choice probability and
response time (RT). The most familiar expression of this relationship is the speed–
accuracy trade-off, which characterizes the decision-maker’s dilemma of being
forced to negotiate between the competing demands of response speed and response
accuracy (Bogacz et al. 2010). Many decisions are based on information that
accumulates over time. Although the probability of making a correct or favourable
decision increases with the amount of information we have gathered, sometimes we
are forced to make quick and ill-informed decisions (e.g. to prevent harm). The
development of Sequential Sampling Models has increased the theoretical under-
standing of such decision processes, however, it was the empirical validation in
animal models (i.e. single-cell recordings in monkeys) that initially helped to test
and reﬁne these models. David Sewell and Philip Smith (see Chap. 14) provide a
thrilling and comprehensive introduction to a research area in which theoretical
mathematical frameworks and computational neuroscience meets empirical neu-
rophysiological animal research. Through recent advances in imaging techniques,
these models have now also been successfully tested in humans (Forstmann et al.
2010).



1.3     Ecological Validity

One of the most severe criticisms of neuroeconomic research is the frequent lack of
ecological validity in studies. What can we learn from human decisions that are
registered in fMRI scanners; a loud environment where movement is extremely
restricted and where social interaction partners are presented—if at all—via video
8                                                               M. Reuter and C. Montag

glasses (Mäki 2010). Imaging techniques like MRI, and PET are fantastic tools for
allowing us to register brain activity, even in subcortical brain regions, while stimuli
are processed. However, these techniques are not made for ﬁeld studies, in which
participants are observed in their natural environment. However, history has
demonstrated that experimental approaches applied in the laboratory can indeed
provide valuable insights into human behaviour and have thereby helped to legit-
imize the discipline of experimental economics. The same success is demonstrable
for neuroeconomic studies using imaging techniques. Neuroeconomics permanently
strives to establish ecological validity in any way possible. Implementing monetary
reward in the behavioural games is one of these provisions. Decisions must be
related to real consequences for the decision-maker, in order to be ecologically
valid. It can be assumed that engagement in an economic game, which is played for
monetary stakes, allows even the (fMRI) scanner environment to fade into the
background.
    Imaging studies are still common in neuroeconomics and have greatly boosted
the success of the discipline. However, alternative neuroscientiﬁc techniques that
are not limited to scanner facilities or laboratories are becoming increasingly
prevalent. Molecular genetics is a key example in this instance. Behaviour can be
studied in participants’ natural environment and the participant subsequently pro-
vides a cell sample (e.g. by means of a noninvasive buccal swap) for genetic
analyses. This approach ensures that participants are not influenced by the exper-
imenter while exhibiting their natural behaviour. Most economists embarking upon
neuroeconomic study are initially unaware that molecular genetics can provide
information on the brain. Genes code for neurotransmitters, hormones, receptors
and enzymes relevant for brain metabolism. Static genetic variants, called poly-
morphisms, exert a permanent influence on these gene products, by modulating the
expression or the structure of gene products. In recent years a new ﬁeld has grown
from molecular genetics: epigenetics. Epigenetics dispels the ancient myth that
genes are like an unstoppable computer programme, started at the moment when the
semen and egg of our parents have fused. Prior to the introduction of epigenetics,
genetic research often occasioned strong resentment among the general population,
as it was considered synonymous with fatalism—a thing you cannot change.
Epigenetic research has served to change this view of genes as destiny.
Epigeneticists have demonstrated that the environment can and does influence our
genes; not the static genetic polymorphisms, but rather the expression of our genes,
by changing the methylation patterns of the genes. Thus, the relationship between
genes and behaviour/environment is bidirectional (for a more detailed introduction,
please see the genetics Chap. 23 in the methods section of this book and Chap. 4
“Genes and Human Decision Making”).
    Genetic approaches are not limited to ﬁeld studies, but are also suitable for
laboratory experiments. Neuroeconomics studies have used this method success-
fully and it will certainly become more and more important in the ﬁeld. In a seminal
study, Israel et al. (2009) have reported an association of a single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP; rs1042778) on the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) and
prosocial fund allocations in the dictator game. This ﬁnding was replicated in an
1 Neuroeconomics—An Introduction                                                    9

independent sample and serves to corroborate animal and human studies in
demonstrating the pivotal role of the hormone oxytocin for prosocial behaviour (for
a review see Ebstein et al. 2009).



1.4   Future Perspectives in Neuroeconomics

No matter how strongly neuroeconomists strive to improve prediction models on
human decision-making through use of neuroscientiﬁc methods, criticism will
always be present. It is impossible to convince every sceptic that biological vari-
ables can help us to better understand human behaviour and that neuroscientiﬁc
approaches are helpful in verifying and reﬁning theoretical economic models. On
the whole, however, most criticism pertains to serious concerns, which must be
taken seriously. The exciting possibilities offered by neuroscientiﬁc methods carry
with it the risk of overselling the ﬁndings (Rubinstein 2008). The mass media
contributes to this by exaggerating its reports of solid scientiﬁc work. We take this
opportunity to discuss two such examples. We recently published a neuroeco-
nomics study entitled “Investigating the genetic basis of altruism: The role of the
COMT Val158Met polymorphism” (see a detailed description of this study in
Chap. 4 in this book). The newspapers wrote articles on this study with headlines
like this: “Altruism gene makes people generous”. It is obvious that altruism is not a
monogenetic phenotype, but is subject to influence both from many genes, and from
environmental effects. Therefore, there cannot be “an (a single)” altruism gene. The
second example demonstrates that researchers sometimes tend to oversell their
scientiﬁc ﬁndings. Kuhnen and Chiao (2009) published an article based on a sample
of 65 participants entitled “Genetic determinants of ﬁnancial risk-taking”. The
Scientiﬁc American reported this study with the headline “My genes made me
invest: DNA implicated in ﬁnancial risk-taking”. One can debate the connotations
of the word “determinants”, but it is obviously related to “determinism”, implying
that there are no other sources of variance relevant for risk-taking, besides the
5-HTTLPR polymorphism investigated in this study. For the sake of Scientiﬁc
American, it must be noted that the word “implicated” reflects the scientiﬁc value of
this study very well, much better, in our opinion, than the phrase “genetic deter-
minants”. Thus, a modest interpretation of scientiﬁc results in the ﬁeld of neuroe-
conomics is essential to increase the respectability of the discipline.
   It is obvious that the methodological spectrum of neuroscientiﬁc techniques has
dramatically increased over the last years. Neuroeconomics is no longer limited to
fMRI studies. We see EEG-, genetic-, endocrinological-, and TMS—studies, to
name but a few methods, and the use of such methods will dramatically increase in
future research. The paradigms and games used in neuroeconomic research will also
become more and more elaborate in the endeavour to disentangle the subcompo-
nents involved in economic decision making. Finally, the introduction of ﬁeld
studies will further enrich the spectrum by allowing researchers to test laboratory
hypotheses in “real life”.
10                                                                     M. Reuter and C. Montag


References

Bechara A, Tranel D, Damasio H (2000) Characterization of the decision-making deﬁcit of
    patients with ventromedial prefrontal cortex lesions. Brain 123(Pt 11):2189–2202 (Nov 2000).
    Erratum in: Brain 132(Pt 7):1993 (Jul 2009)
Bechara A, Dolan S, Hindes A (2002) Decision-making and addiction (part II): myopia for the
    future or hypersensitivity to reward? Neuropsychologia 40(10):1690–1705
Bogacz R, Wagenmakers EJ, Forstmann BU, Nieuwenhuis S (2010) The neural basis of the
    speed-accuracy tradeoff. Trends Neurosci 33(1):10–16
Camerer CF (2003) Behavioral game theory: experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton
    University Press, Princeton, NJ
Chen MK, Lakshminaryanan V, Santos LR (2006) The evolution of our preferences: evidence
    from capuchin monkey trading behavior. J Polit Econ 114(3):517–537
Ebstein RP, Israel S, Lerer E, Uzefovsky F, Shalev I, Gritsenko I, Riebold M, Salomon S,
    Yirmiya N (2009) Arginine vasopressin and oxytocin modulate human social behavior.
    Ann NY Acad Sci 1167:87–102
Engel C (2011) Dictator games: a meta-study. Exp Econ 14:583–610
Forstmann BU, Anwander A, Schäfer A, Neumann J, Brown S, Wagenmakers EJ, Bogacz R,
    Turner R (2010) Cortico-striatal connections predict control over speed and accuracy in
    perceptual decision making. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(36):15916–15920
Kahneman D, Tversky A (1979) Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica:
    J Econom Soc 47(2):263–291
Kuhnen CM, Chiao JY (2009) Genetic determinants of ﬁnancial risk taking. PLoS One 4(2):e4362.
    doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0004362
Israel S, Lerer E, Shalev I, Uzefovsky F, Riebold M, Laiba E, Bachner-Melman R, Maril A,
    Bornstein G, Knafo A, Ebstein RP (2009) The oxytocin receptor (OXTR) contributes to
    prosocial fund allocations in the dictator game and the social value orientations task.
    PLoS ONE 4(5):e5535
Mäki U (2010) When economics meets neuroscience: hype and hope. J Econ Methodol 17:107–
    117
Marshall M (1920) Principles of economics: an introductory volume, 8th edn. Macmillan, London
McClure S, Laibson D, Lowenstein G, Cohen J (2004a) Separate neural systems value immediate
    and delayed rewards. Science 306:503–507
McClure SM, Ericson K, Laibson DI, Loewenstein G, Cohen JD (2004b) Time discounting for
    primary rewards. J Neurosci 27(21):5796–5904
Mischel W, Shoda Y, Rodriguez ML (1989) Delay of gratiﬁcation in children. Science 244:933–
    938
Preuschoff K, Bossaerts P, Quartz SR (2006) Neural differentiation of expected reward and risk in
    human subcortical structures. Neuron 51(3):381–390
Roiser JP, de Martino B, Tan GC, Kumaran D, Seymour B, Wood NW, Dolan RJ (2009) A
    genetically mediated bias in decision making driven by failure of amygdala control. J Neurosci
    29(18):5985–5991
Rubinstein A (2008) Comments on neuroeconomics. Econ Philos 24:485–494
Schultz W (2013) Updating dopamine reward signals. Curr Opin Neurobiol 23(2):229–238
Schultz W, Dayan P, Montague PR (1997) A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science
    275(5306):1593–1599
Spanagel R, Weiss F (1999) The dopamine hypothesis of reward: past and current status. Trends
    Neurosci 22(11):521–527
Tobler PN, Fiorillo CD, Schultz W (2005) Adaptive coding of reward value by dopamine neurons.
    Science 307:1642–1645
Tom SM, Fox CR, Trepel C, Poldrack RA (2007) The neural basis of loss aversion in
    decision-making under risk. Sci 315(5811):515–518
                          Part I
Games in Experimental Economics
