Chapter 10
The Influence of Costs, Beneﬁts and Their
Interaction on the Economic Behaviour
of Consumers

Luca Panzone and Deborah Talmi

                               “Tis the sharpness of our mind that gives the edge to our pains
                               and pleasures.”
                                                                      —Michel de Montaigne


Abstract Recent neuroscientiﬁc research on economic behaviour of consumers
explores how individuals translate information into value in their brain, and what
mechanisms underlie this process. The typical aim of this research is to establish
how single attributes are valued and combined into a single utility, neglects ﬁndings
in multi-attribute utility theory on how utility is achieved when both costs and
beneﬁts are involved. This chapter argues that it is important to consider how the
marginal utility of costs and beneﬁts changes in the respective presence of one
another. This point is discussed by reviewing behavioural and brain imaging data
that illuminate this interplay, with a focus on the implications on econometric
models of consumer behaviour.



10.1     Introduction

Any gain in utility comes at the expense of an initial loss, a concept recognised by
the adage ‘No pain, no gain’. For instance, consumers accept the payment of a price
(a cost) because they expect a gain in hedonic satisfaction through product quality
(a consequent beneﬁt). Similarly, current policies targeting behavioural change
impose a trade-off between effort (an immaterial cost) and a reward associated with
that effort, e.g. a health improvement (a private beneﬁt), or an environmental
improvement (a public beneﬁt) (Steg and Vlek 2009). How the brain estimates the
overall utility of a person facing the cost and the reward prospect and converts them

L. Panzone
School of Social Science, Sustainable Consumption Institute, Manchester, UK
e-mail: luca.panzone@manchester.ac.uk
D. Talmi (&)
School of Psychological Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
e-mail: deborah.talmi@manchester.ac.uk

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                                   167
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_10
168                                                            L. Panzone and D. Talmi

into a single value is not yet fully understood (Camerer et al. forthcoming; Levy and
Glimcher 2012; Louie and Glimcher 2012; Vlaev et al. 2011).
    There is a growing literature on the neural representation of value, i.e. how
individual consumers determine the value of choice options. Yet some of the recent
discoveries on brain valuation activity have not been integrated into a coherent
economic theoretical framework. The aim of this chapter is to understand how
individuals convert costs and beneﬁts into utility in their decisions to consume,
particularly focusing on understanding how these combine into a ﬁnal valuation of
utility. Costs and beneﬁts are deﬁned as anticipated consequences of the acceptance
of a choice, whereby they respectively increase (beneﬁts) or decrease (costs) the
subjective value of the choice in the decision-making process. This deﬁnition
hinges on the nature of these phenomena, since beneﬁts (such as rewards) induce
positive feelings of pleasure (Schultz 2000), while costs (such as effort or pain) are
an aversive feature associated with consumption (Kivetz 2003).
    In the most basic model of optimal decision-making, an individual chooses by
introspectively estimating the expected amount of satisfaction (e.g. happiness,
utility) that a good can deliver upon consumption. This process entails the evalu-
ation of the intrinsic quality provided by each of the characteristics within a good
(Lancaster 1966), which are then integrated into a single value for each option in
the choice set. The resulting choice then corresponds to the option delivering the
highest overall value (Vlaev et al. 2011; Kahneman et al. 1997) or the option with
the highest probability of a positive outcome at consumption. Because quality is
estimated before consumption, these stages are limited by cognitive bounds that
reduce consumer efﬁcacy: consumers use heuristics to determine quality, and
contextual stimuli influence their ﬁnal decisions (Vlaev et al. 2011; Kahneman
2003). It is important to keep in mind that heuristics and external stimuli span
across attributes, reinforcing the links between them.
    This simple model of behaviour assumes independence of product attributes.
However, when goods provide ‘mixed prospects’, i.e. those associated both with
costs and with beneﬁts, valuation is more complex than what has been described so
far. For instance, the purchase of an energy-efﬁcient appliance requires the trade-off
between high environmental quality together with prospective savings (two bene-
ﬁts) and a price premium (cost). The extra money consumers are willing to pay for
the ‘green’ (i.e. energy-efﬁcient) choice depends both on the expected beneﬁts from
energy efﬁciency and on the utility of money. Consumers with high utility from
money (e.g. low-income households) would switch to energy-efﬁcient appliances
only when deriving high levels of utility from energy conservation. Instead, envi-
ronmentally motivated consumers are likely to switch even at a very high premium.
Individuals face such dilemmas frequently in non-purchasing decisions as well: for
example, when they decide whether to go to the gym regularly (effort cost) to lose
weight (beneﬁt), or decide to walk to the recycling bin instead of throwing their
paper into the regular bin (effort cost) to improve the quality of the environment
(beneﬁt).
    Neuroscientiﬁc research typically explores the representation of reward and
punishment separately (see e.g. Schultz 2006; Montague and King-Casas 2007;
10   The Influence of Costs, Beneﬁts and Their Interaction …                         169

Seymour et al. 2007), and how they are integrated during goal-directed behaviour is
relatively unexplored (Phillips et al. 2007; Walton et al. 2007). Goal-directed
behaviour engenders conflict when trading the prospect of an appetitive gain against
an equal prospect of an aversive cost. This conflict is represented empirically by the
dynamic interaction of costs and beneﬁts in the brain, a concept that Multi-Attribute
Utility Theory (MAUT) describes through the use of an interaction term. This point
received empirical support in the pattern of activation of the ventral striatum and the
subgenual cingulated gyrus in the brain. Talmi et al. (2009) reported a positive
correlation between BOLD signal and reward when participants are offered money
(a beneﬁt) to accept mild electric stimulations (low-cost condition); the correlation
was attenuated when the electric stimulation was painful (high-cost condition)
(see also Talmi and Pine 2012). This decreasing correlation is indicative of a
nonlinear relation between costs and beneﬁts.
    The remainder of this chapter will proceed as follows. The next section reviews
the representation of costs and beneﬁts in economic modelling, with a focus on
utility theory, and describes how costs and beneﬁts interact in the ﬁnal determi-
nation of utility. The analysis focuses on decisions between outcomes with a limited
number of attributes (one cost and one beneﬁt) in a single context. The reason for
this rather narrow focus is that the integration of many attributes into a single utility
may exceed cognitive bounds: evidence (Vlaev et al. 2011) suggests that in com-
plex multi-attribute choices consumers may not be able to determine the overall
utility, and the simple model described in this section might not hold. The model
presented here will, therefore, be more valid when only two characteristics are used.
Section 10.3 describes the same interaction between costs and beneﬁts in a neu-
roscientiﬁc model of decision-making. The microeconomic implications of the
model described in Sect. 10.3 are discussed in Sect. 10.4 to extend current
microeconometric models of choice, examining its influence on estimable param-
eters of consumer choice through a simple simulation exercise. Finally, Sect. 10.5
concludes by summarising the key issues emerging from the chapter.



10.2     The Economic Perspective of Cost and Beneﬁts

Economic models of choice and one-person decision problems are an important part
of economic theory. According to the Hicksian model of utility maximisation
(Hicks 1939), individual consumers value goods for the utility they derive upon
consumption. For instance, a consumer derives consumption utility from good i of
characteristic Xi in the form Ui ¼ f ðXi Þ. More precisely, the total value of a good
corresponds to the sum (in utility terms) of the values assigned to the quantity of
each attribute the good provides (Lancaster 1966). Speciﬁcally, the consumer
compares two or more options i (where i = 1, 2,…, I) that differ in their cost Ci and
beneﬁts Bi in terms of their consumption utility Ui ¼ f ðCi ; Bi Þ, where the matrix
½Ci ; Bi  corresponds to Xi . Given income y and price p, the consumer then chooses
by solving the utility maximisation problem.
170                                                                 L. Panzone and D. Talmi


                            max Ui ¼ UðCi ; Bi Þ s:t: pi  yj                       ð10:1Þ
                             C;B


    The marginal utility of costs and beneﬁts is expected to be negative and positive,
respectively.
    This general economic model of utility maximisation assumes that consumers
determine the value of a good in three steps. First, they gather information on each
attribute constituting the good with certainty, e.g. what is the environmental impact
of refrigerators rated A+ over those rated A. Second, they ‘convert’ this information
into a measure of utility, e.g. assuming goods do not differ in any other dimension,
they determine the utility derived from the lower carbon footprint associated to
A+ refrigerators and the net present value of prospective savings, and the disutility
of the price premium required by an A+-rated refrigerator. Third, they sum the
utility of each attribute to determine the total value of each option. The choice then
needs to ﬁt within a budget constraint and requires the trade-off between costs and
             . can be observed through the Marginal Rate of Substitution (MRS),
beneﬁts, which
MRS ¼ @U
      @Bi
         i   @Ui
             @Ci ,   a measure of how much utility from one unit of beneﬁt is needed
to compensate the utility of one unit of cost.
    The general utility function of Eq. (10.1) can take different functional forms.
Psychological and neuroeconomic models of internal valuation generally base their
analysis of decision-making on a von Neumann–Morgenstern utility function (von
Neumann and Morgenstern 1947), which models utility under risk. This function,
known as expected utility function, assumes that rational consumers estimate the
utility of costs and beneﬁts perfectly, with certain knowledge of the probability of
occurrence of an outcome. In this model, the subjective value U of an action
corresponds to the sum of the utility (u) of each outcome, evaluated separately,
multiplied by the corresponding probability π. The value of a mixed outcome based
on one beneﬁcial (B) and one costly (C) attribute corresponds to

                        U ¼ UðCi ; Bi Þ ¼ pCi  uðCi Þ þ pBi  uðBi Þ               ð10:2Þ

    A positive U resulting from Eq. (10.2) favours a decision to act, and in a choice
set the alternative with the greatest U is always preferred.
    In Eq. (10.2), when costs and beneﬁts are exclusive of each other pCi þ pBi ¼ 1.
More generally, when costs and beneﬁts are not the only two possible outcomes that
exists but rather two characteristics of only one outcome in the space pCi þ pBi can
differ from 1. For instance, total probability is below 100 % if an A+ refrigerator
costs an extra £100 with pCi = 0.99 and the subjective belief of an environmental
improvement is pBi = 0.001. Likewise, if a consumer believes that the refrigerator
certainly helps the environment (pBi = 1) and is certainly expensive (pCi = 1), total
probability is above 100 %. Similarly, optimistic consumers might overestimate the
probability of a gain much more than they underestimate the complementary
probability, and pessimistic consumers might do the same for losses.
10   The Influence of Costs, Beneﬁts and Their Interaction …                          171

   Expected utility theory (EUT), described by Eq. (10.2), is a restrictive model for
decision-making under uncertainty because it assumes an objective probability π.
Prospect theory (PT) extended this utility function by ﬁtting a subjective probability
function that ﬁts empirical data better than EUT (Kahneman and Tversky 1979;
Tversky and Kahneman 1992). In particular, PT indicates that accessibility (the way
individuals perceive signals), reference-dependence (the reference point used to
evaluate a signal) and framing (the way the signal is presented) are crucial deter-
minant of behaviour (Kahneman 2003). Consumers then make decisions based on
expected subjective probability rather than objective one, as

                          U ¼ xðpCi Þ  uðCi Þ þ xðpBi Þ  uðBi Þ                  ð10:3Þ

where ω are subjective decision weights. Empirically, this utility function is con-
cave in the gain domain and convex in the loss domain with a steeper slope in the
latter (i.e. the disutility of a loss is greater than the utility of a gain), a phenomenon
known as loss aversion (Kahneman and Tversky 1979).
    Equations (10.2) and (10.3) do not deﬁne a functional form for the utility of
costs, uðCi Þ, and beneﬁts, uðBi Þ, but impose a linear integration of these functions
into a single value. This restriction complies with the independence assumption:
the utility derived from the consumption of a good is independent from the utility
derived from other goods. This assumption might hold when the consumption of
two goods is self-exclusive, e.g. the consumer has budget to purchase either a
refrigerator or a washing machine. Its existence is more controversial when con-
sidering product characteristics (e.g. energy-efﬁciency class against a price pre-
mium), or costs and beneﬁts of the same action. In fact, consumers pursue a certain
number of consumption goals that are satisﬁed through product characteristics that
are rarely self-exclusive (see e.g. Khan et al. 2004; Dhar and Simonson 1999). For
instance, the goal of environmental friendliness in a refrigerator requires both a
positive utility for high efﬁciency (a beneﬁt) and positive willingness to pay for it (a
cost), making these two characteristics dependent on each other.
    Importantly, the independence assumption applied to Eq. (10.3) implicitly
assumes that costs reduce (and beneﬁts increase) the subjective value derived from
beneﬁts (costs) by a constant amount, regardless of how valuable those beneﬁts
(costs) are. However, an increase in costs can increase or decrease not only the
utility expected by the consumer, but also the utility derived from a unit increase in
beneﬁts; similarly, an increase in beneﬁts can modulate the utility derived from a
unit increase in costs. For instance, Kivets (Kivetz 2003) observes that the impo-
sition of an effort requirement (the cost) for a loyalty reward scheme influences the
expected utility of the reward (the beneﬁt): small effort leads to expectations of an
immediate, certain, but small reward; considerable effort instead causes expecta-
tions of a large, even if uncertain, reward. While in a linear model an increase in
costs can lead to higher expected beneﬁts, Kivets observes that an increasing effort
requirement influences the disutility derived from effort itself as well as the
expected marginal utility of the reward, a relation suggesting that these two vari-
ables interact in a utility function. This “synergic effect” implies that a change in
172                                                                    L. Panzone and D. Talmi

costs and beneﬁts does not only impact total utility directly (as intercept shifters),
but the ﬁnal joint effect is higher or lower than the sum of both effects, depending
on the existing relation between them.
    Multi-attribute Utility Theory (MAUT, see e.g. Keeney and Raiffa 1993) pro-
vides some theoretical background for the representation of the interaction between
costs and beneﬁts in a utility function. MAUT maintains that individual charac-
teristics might have a synergic influence on utility. As a simple example, a con-
sumer might have a negative utility from the price of a piece of cake, and a low but
positive utility for its size; nonetheless, utility for size can become very high when
the dessert is particularly expensive—an interaction between size and price.
Following MAUT, the utility function in (10.3) can then be then generalised as

         U ¼ xðpCi Þ  uðCi Þ þ xðpBi Þ  uðBi Þ þ xðpiCB Þ  uðCi Þ  uðBi Þ           ð10:4Þ

where xðpiCB Þ is the subjective probability that costs and beneﬁts interact. The
subjective value U as a function of the utility u of costs (the same applies to
beneﬁts) is portrayed in Fig. 10.1, under the assumption of linear functions u:
unlike the additive model, an interactive model allows for a shift in both intercept
and slope of total utility.
   The key difference between Eqs. (10.3) and (10.4) is the ability, unique to
interactive models, to allow the sensitivity of beneﬁts to vary as a function of the
costs associated with the choice, and vice versa (Talmi and Pine 2012). In partic-
ular, the marginal utility of costs and beneﬁts from Eq. (10.4) correspond to1

                   @U              @uðCi Þ                        @uðCi Þ
                       ¼ xðpCi Þ          þ xðpiCB Þ  uðBi Þ                        ð10:5aÞ
                   @Ci              @Ci                            @Ci

and

                   @U              @uðBi Þ                        @uðBi Þ
                       ¼ xðpBi Þ          þ xðpiCB Þ  uðCi Þ                        ð10:5bÞ
                   @Bi              @Bi                            @Bi

   Returning to the choice of an energy-efﬁcient refrigerator, assume two otherwise
identical refrigerators, differing only in their efﬁciency rating (A and A+) and price
(£100 higher for the A+ option). According to additive models (Eq. 10.3), the
higher price reduces the likelihood of purchasing the efﬁcient option regardless of
the value the decision-maker assigns to the environmental characteristic. By con-
trast, the interactive model (Eq. 10.4) accounts for the dependence between the
value consumers may assign to price premium and efﬁciency rating. This



1
 Equations (10.5a) and (10.5b) could be further generalised to account for loss aversion, which
affects the derivative of costs, so that the change in cost influences beneﬁts in a different way
compared to how the change in beneﬁts influences costs. However, this point would complicate
the argument presented in this article, and it is left for future research.
10   The Influence of Costs, Beneﬁts and Their Interaction …                        173


       U

                                                                 Additive model


                                                                Interactive model




                                                                    u(C)
Fig. 10.1 Value according to additive and interactive models


generalisation allows, for instance, for the possibility of a lower disutility from the
cost for those consumers who deem energy conservation to be very valuable.
   An important feature of an interactive model is the possibility to test whether the
assumptions of attribute independence is valid by comparing the additional variance
explained by the interactive model and the additive model. In fact, because the
interaction term is nested within the additive model, its contribution can be tested
using a Student’s t-test or a Fisher’s F test, or comparable statistics for maximum
likelihood and Bayesian models such as likelihood ratio test, or Akaike or Bayesian
Information Criteria. Through a model-comparison exercise, earlier research sug-
gested that two-way interactions (the interaction of pairs of attribute) in linear
regressions account for 5–15 % of the overall variance of the model, while other
interactions (the interaction of three or more attributes) are negligible in their
predictive power (see Louviere et al. 2000). However, to our knowledge there is no
measure of the statistical importance of interaction terms on models of choice,
implying the absence of estimates on the relevance of the interaction between costs
and beneﬁts on utility.
   As described in the next section, recent behavioural and neuroimaging ﬁndings
support the challenge to the independence assumption by corroborating the exis-
tence of an interaction term. In fact, the presence of mixed outcomes is processed in
the brain differently from the simple presence of costs or beneﬁts alone, a point that
calls for a reconsideration of the simple additive model of costs and beneﬁts. The
next section reviews the existing evidence indicating that interaction terms increase
the predictive accuracy of a model and reflect the cognitive process of valuation.
174                                                              L. Panzone and D. Talmi


10.3    A Neuroeconomic Model of Choice
        with Costs and Beneﬁts

There is a general agreement on the potential of neuroscience to explain the
mechanisms that underlie economic phenomena (Fehr and Rangel 2011; Camerer
et al. 2004, 2005). Current economic and econometric models of choice and
behaviour simplify the processes underlying economic valuation tasks.
Neuroscience can utilise this knowledge in experimental design and analysis, as
well as provide converging evidence for these models by rooting behaviour in
biology. Another role for neuroscientiﬁc data could be to challenge and improve
economic models by noting discrepancy between these models and experimental
observations. However, this synergy is generally rare, with the interaction term in
Eq. (10.4) being a case in point. On the other hand, economic models are rarely
challenged on the basis of behavioural or neural evidence, which supports inter-
active over additive models. This section presents a review of some of this evi-
dence, and proposes how this area of research might contribute to economic theory
and extend current models of behaviour. On the other hand, neurobiological
research of cost–beneﬁt analysis often ignores value integration functions available
in utility theory, an issue reviewed by Talmi and Pine (2012).
    Neuroeconomics supports the usual assumption that consumer choice is the
result of a process of valuation in the brain. Therefore, understanding value rep-
resentation can help understand consumer behaviour. This area of research showed
major recent advances (Dayan, Dayan 2012), identifying a key role for the striatum
and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (Levy and Glimcher 2012). Earlier work
explored the process of valuation in animals (e.g. Premack 2007). This research
identiﬁed a network of brain regions involved in the decision to accept a cost,
usually physical effort, in order to attain a beneﬁt, usually food (e.g. Floresco et al.
2008). Animals’ decision in this situation relies on the dopamine system and the
nucleus accumbens (NAc) as well as the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the
amygdala (Phillips et al. 2007; Salamone et al. 2007; Floresco et al. 2008). Animal
models do not provide strong support for the notion of a single representation of
utility in the brain (Roesch and Bryden 2011), and controversy remains on whether
costs and beneﬁts share representations (Fehr and Rangel 2011; Rilling and Sanfey
Rilling and Sanfey 2011).
    Levy and Glimcher (2012) identify one possible mechanism for the
decision-making process in the human brain, portrayed in Fig. 10.2. Their model is
based on the controversial yet common assumption in neuroscience (see e.g. Vlaev
et al. 2011) that the ﬁnal neural representation of value uses a single ‘neural
currency’. According to this model, in a ﬁrst step information from all cortical and
all subcortical structures is processed and aggregated into a single value. This ﬁrst
step identiﬁes the expected utility of external stimuli using incoming sensory
information and internal signals (e.g. satiety). In a second step, this aggregate utility
estimate is combined with the same initial sensory and internal stimuli to make a
ﬁnal choice through a motor control circuitry. This ﬁnal choice reveals the good
10   The Influence of Costs, Beneﬁts and Their Interaction …                      175

Fig. 10.2 Neuroscientiﬁc
model of choice. Source:
Levy and Glimcher (2012).
Note: 1 vmPFC; 2 OFC; 3
DLPFC; 4 insula; 5 primary
motor cortex (M1);
6 posterior parietal cortex; 7
frontal eye ﬁelds; 8 visual
cortex; 9 amygdala; 10
striatum




with the highest expected utility. The second step can be more or less optimal: for
instance, the food chosen could be determined by product attributes and level of
hunger, but the colour of the package and the level of hunger may also have a direct
influence on the ﬁnal choice.
    These models identify a general process of choice and value integration, but do
not illuminate how mixed prospects are evaluated. The ﬁrst published empirical
work in cognitive neuroscience examining the assumption of a simple additive
utility of costs and beneﬁts is Talmi et al. (2009). They tested non-additive valu-
ation by comparing the ﬁt of two models, one additive (as in Eq. 10.3) and one
non-additive (as in Eq. 10.4), to the same set of behavioural and neural data. In the
experiment, participants were offered choices that incorporated simultaneous
rewarding and punishing consequences, namely monetary gain (a beneﬁt) and
physical pain (a cost) (Fig. 10.3). The paradigm required participants to ‘accept’ or
‘reject’ a series of offers comprising of mixtures of costs and beneﬁts; outcomes
were delivered at a speciﬁed percentage of times, and levels of monetary reward
were manipulated parametrically. The experimental design enabled testing whether
pain attenuates the neural representation of reward, providing evidence for a sig-
niﬁcant interaction between costs and beneﬁts. However, the study did not explore
the impact of reward on the neural representation of pain.
    The effect of the interaction term on choice can be observed in the drift function
portrayed in Fig. 10.4 from Talmi et al. (2009). This ﬁgure represents the path
leading to a choice for an individual participant. Circles represent empirical data on
176                                                             L. Panzone and D. Talmi

Fig. 10.3 Experimental task
requiring the trade-off
between pain and money.
Source Talmi et al. (2009)




Fig. 10.4 Empirical and
modelled choice behaviour
for a single participant.
Source Talmi et al. (2009)




choice frequency (a function of money offered and pain), while line graphs rep-
resent modelled choices for pain in the additive (left) and interactive (right) models.
Black refers to trials where the stimulation was painful, and gray refers to trials
where the stimulation was mild. The interactive model allows for a change in the
slope of the sigmoid function caused by pain, while the additive effect of pain is
only a rightward horizontal shift. Figure 10.4 clearly shows that the additive model
was a better predictor of choice for this individual, a result supported by statistical
tests of model ﬁt across the whole sample (see Talmi et al. 2009, for more detail and
interesting individual differences).
10   The Influence of Costs, Beneﬁts and Their Interaction …                       177

   Talmi et al. (2009) supported the interactive model by demonstrating that the
interaction of costs and beneﬁts engaged a brain system implicated in value learning
(dopaminergic target structures), namely the ventral striatum, which is thought to be
involved in reinforcement learning when processing appetitive (O’Doherty et al.
2004; Tobler et al. 2007) as well as aversive (Iordanova et al. 2006; Hoebel et al.
2007) outcomes. It also engaged the subgenual ACC, which processes optimal
decisions as well as appetitive and aversive choice (Walton et al. 2007), and works
with the ventral striatum in the valuation of costs and beneﬁts in rats (e.g. Salamone
and Correa 2002; Walton et al. 2003; Schweimer et al. 2005).
   Some of Talmi et al.’s (2009) results have been independently replicated by Park
et al. (2011). Both studies ﬁnd that the interactive model is superior to an additive
model in modelling observed behaviour. However, while Talmi et al. (2009) only
modelled a linear utility function u, Park et al. (2011) compared linear and non-
linear utility functions, showing that the interaction term contributes signiﬁcantly to
explaining behaviour only when utility is modelled linearly. Nevertheless, their
neurobiological data also ﬁt the interactive model better than the additive model
regardless of the utility function used. Finally, Prevost et al. (2010) also provide
supporting evidence for the behavioural and neural interaction between costs and
beneﬁts in a study where participants were invited to exert physical effort in order to
gain erotic pleasure. The functional form of the interaction term in Prevost et al.
(2010) differed from Talmi et al. (2009) and Park et al. (2011), as did the neural
substrate serving this interaction, a discrepancy that deserves further research.
Strikingly, only a handful of studies on cost–beneﬁt analysis in cognitive neuro-
science engaged in model comparison, but those who tested the interaction of costs
and beneﬁts found clear supporting evidence.
   The paradigms in the three neuroeconomic studies reviewed in this section were
somehow limited: they focused on a single type of cost (pain or effort); and the
model-comparison exercise used a limited number of functional forms for the utility
function u(). Furthermore, results are based on experimental evidence, hence
limited by the absence of real-world equivalents. Nonetheless, these works open
future research on the interaction between costs and beneﬁts. For instance, research
can expose participants to a differentiated series of consequential real-world deci-
sions that include both primary reinforcers (either positive, e.g. food; or negative,
e.g. pain) and secondary reinforcers (e.g. money), which recruit different brain
systems (Dreher 2012), to test for possible differences in their interaction.
Regrettably, neuroeconomic experiments require expensive data collection, inevi-
tably slowing the pace of current research. Furthermore, the typical use of time
delay between the decision and outcome delivery (Kurniawan et al. 2010; Park et al.
2011), employed to separate the neural signal of valuation from the neural
processing of outcomes, alters the value of prospects (Loewenstein 1987), a limit to
the practical implementation of Eq. (10.4) that should be addressed in future
research.
178                                                                          L. Panzone and D. Talmi


10.4     Cost, Beneﬁts, and Their Interaction
         in Microeconomic Models of Consumer Behaviour

The previous section discussed its influence on behavioural and neurobiological
data from a neuroscientiﬁc perspective. This section discusses the microecono-
metric side of mixed prospects and how the interaction between costs and beneﬁts
can best be incorporated in econometric analysis, with a focus on models of utility
such as choice models. In particular, the objective is to understand the implications
of neuroscientiﬁc research for econometric models of consumer behaviour, which
describe how consumers make decisions by trading-off attributes. This extension of
modelling can be of interest to several areas of research concerned on consumption,
such as for instance environmental public policy and sustainable consumption,
which is discussed in a separate box.
    To understand the microeconomic problem, imagine a consumer j of demo-
graphic Dj considering several options where each option i is characterised by
monetary or non-monetary costs Ci and beneﬁts Bi. In a generic utility function as
in Eq. (10.1), the utility derived by consumer j from option i corresponds to a
deterministic (observable) component Vij, and a random (unobservable) component
νij (see e.g. Burton et al. 2001), as

                      Uij ðBi ; Ci ; Dj Þ ¼ Vij ðBi ; Ci Þ þ mij ðBi ; Ci ; Dj Þ             ð10:6Þ

   Consumers trade-off between costs and beneﬁts (given personal preferences) and
choose the option with the highest utility. In a two-option set, the probability of
consumer j choosing option 1 is

                               P½ðVj1 þ mj1 Þ [ P½ðVj2 þ mj2 Þ                            ð10:7aÞ

which implies

                              P½ðVj1  Vj2 Þ [ P½ðmj2  mj1 Þ                             ð10:7bÞ

    Consumers then choose option 1 whenever the difference in deterministic utility
is larger than the difference in random utility. The same result applies for larger
choice sets.
    Assuming random coefﬁcients (consistent with Eq. 10.7b), the utility function of
a consumer can be modelled using a Random Parameter Logit model2 (RPL) (see
Berry 1994). In the case of independence of costs and beneﬁts (as in Eq. 10.4),
utility corresponds to



2
 The RPL is a general choice model used in applied econometrics. The utility function used to
estimate demand parameters can be simpliﬁed on the basis of the assumption made by the
investigator (e.g. nested logit, conditional logit, simple logit). See Berry (1994).
10   The Influence of Costs, Beneﬁts and Their Interaction …                            179


                               Uij ¼ a0;j  Cij þ a1;j  Bij þ eij                  ð10:8Þ

where for each of the k coefﬁcients ak;j ¼ ak þ dk  Dj þ rk  ek;j , and eij and ek;j are
residuals. Equation (10.8) assumes that the utility u() from Eq. (10.4) is linear for
both costs and beneﬁts, but more general options can be also applied. In a binary
decision (buy versus no-buy), utility can be derived as choice probability and
reveals the point with the highest utility as3

                               Uij ¼ 1      if   0\Uij \ þ 1
                                                                                    ð10:9Þ
                               Uij ¼ 0      if   1\Uij  0

so that the probability terms xðÞ in Eq. (10.3) are captured in the coefﬁcients. To
relax the assumption of independence of C and B, Eq. (10.8) can be extended to
include an interaction term as in Eq. (10.4), to obtain the regression

                     Uij ¼ a0;j  Cij þ a1;j  Bij þ a2;j  ðBij  Cij Þ þ eij     ð10:10Þ

where ak;j ¼   ak þ dk  Dj þ rk  ek;j . Noticeably, interaction terms should always
accompany main terms to avoid omitted variable bias, and the possible endogeneity
of C or B is treated using usual econometric methods (see Ozer-Balli and Sorensen
2010).
    Interactions between independent variables are not infrequent in applied econo-
metric models of utility (both choice models and contingent valuations). However,
these models tend to treat costs as a single variable (price), while beneﬁts (quality)
are disaggregated into a variety of beneﬁts. For instance, the quality of a refrigerator
is not included as a single measure, but as a matrix of variables representing its
product characteristics (e.g. energy-efﬁciency class, size, colour, brand). Thus, the
interaction between product characteristics generally corresponds to reward-reward
interactions and captures synergies between beneﬁts (e.g. the size of a refrigerator
and its efﬁciency), and makes no reference to the literature presented in the previous
section. However, more frequently the difﬁculty of implementing full factorial
designs in experimental tasks justiﬁes the exclusion of interaction terms, particularly
in light of their relatively low explanatory role observed in linear models (Dawes and
Corrigan 1974; Louviere et al. 2000). However, it remains unclear what conse-
quence their exclusion has on the explanatory power of models of choice.
    Importantly, the inclusion of an interaction term allows for a changing marginal
utility of costs and beneﬁts. Equation (10.8) assumes consumers have a constant
                                                              @U             @U
marginal utility from costs and beneﬁts equal to @Ciji ¼ a0;j and @Biji ¼ a1;j .
A nonlinear functional form (e.g. logarithmic) for u() in Eq. (10.4) would give a
marginal utility changing in its argument (i.e. a marginal utility of costs depending
on costs), but with no impact on the independence assumption. In the interactive

3
 Contingent valuation methods allow the inclusion of a scale of probability in Eq. (10.9) to
account for hypothetical bias (see Wang 1997).
180                                                               L. Panzone and D. Talmi

model of Eq. (10.10), the marginal utility of costs depends on the beneﬁts and that
                                                           @U
of beneﬁts depends on costs: these equal, respectively, @Ciji ¼ a0;j þ a2;j  Bi and
@Uij
@Bi¼ a1;j þ a2;j  Ci . This difference implies a different MRS: it is constant and
                       a
equal to MRSB;C ¼ a1;j   0;j
                             in an additive model; while in an interactive model it cor-
                             a þ a C
responds to MRSB;C ¼ a1;j0;j þ a2;j2;j Bii . Importantly, while economic theory expects
a0 \0 and a1 [ 0, the sign of the marginal utility and MRS in an interactive model
depends also on a2 and on the level of costs and beneﬁts observed. Note that for
purely monetary costs, the absolute value of the MRS measures the marginal
willingness to pay for B.
   Figure 10.5 explores the economic meaning of an interaction term. In the ﬁgure,
δ refers to the marginal utility of the combination of costs and beneﬁts, and the sum
of the δs in a diagonal equals the coefﬁcient a2 of Eq. (10.10). In particular, a
negative interaction term indicates a movement along the δB–δC axis and a negative
synergy between costs and beneﬁts: the marginal utility of a beneﬁt declines with
increasing costs and vice versa. On the contrary, a positive interaction term cor-
responds to a movement along the δA–δD axis and a positive synergy of costs and
beneﬁts: the marginal utility of beneﬁts increases or decreases together with costs.
Each individual component δ can be identiﬁed by an appropriate experimental
design that separately assesses consumer response in each of the four conditions in
Fig. 10.5 through, for instance, a choice experiment.
   To understand the practical implications of these considerations, take a consumer
who is contemplating the trade-off between energy-efﬁciency (beneﬁt) and the price
premium (cost) associated with the label in the market for efﬁcient refrigerators.
Coefﬁcients of costs and beneﬁts in both the additive and the interactive models
(10.8) and (10.10) indicate a negative contribution of the price premium alone
(a0;j \0) and a positive contribution of the energy-efﬁciency label alone (a1;j [ 0)
(see Ward et al. 2011). The interaction term would indicate the relation between
these attributes, which is possibly negative: individuals with high utility for energy
efﬁciency would probably show a low sensitivity to the market premium required
(δC); similarly, consumers with high utility from money (low-income households)
would give low value to technology (δB).
   Figures 10.6 and 10.7 show the difference in results using the parameters esti-
mated for energy-efﬁcient refrigerators in Ward et al. (2011), i.e. α0 = −0.008


Fig. 10.5 Possible
combinations of an interaction
                                                                   Benefits
between costs and beneﬁts
                                                                      High      Low

                                                           High        δA         δB
                                                   Costs




                                                           Low         δC         δD
10              The Influence of Costs, Beneﬁts and Their Interaction …                                 181


     (a)

                -0.0074
                -0.0076
                -0.0078
                 -0.008
   MU(Costs)




                -0.0082
                -0.0084
                -0.0086
                -0.0088
                 -0.009
                -0.0092
                          0      0.1     0.2     0.3     0.4     0.5    0.6     0.7     0.8     0.9      1
                                                               Benefits

                                          MU(C) (Add)                 MU(C) (Int)

     (b)

                2.5

                 2
 MU(Benefits)




                1.5

                 1

                0.5

                 0
                      0    100     200     300     400     500 600            700     800     900     1000
                                                           Costs

                                          MU(B) (Add)               MU(B) (int)

Fig. 10.6 Comparison of marginal utility (MU) using additive and interactive models. a Costs.
b Beneﬁts. Note Estimates based on α0 = −0.008, α1 = 2.146, and α2 = −0.001. Add additive
model; Int interactive model
182                                                                    L. Panzone and D. Talmi

 (a)



           0.00

         -50.00
   MRS




         -100.00

         -150.00

         -200.00                                                                        0




                                                                                             Benefits
                                                                                       0.2
         -250.00                                                                     0.4
         -300.00                                                                   0.6
                       0    100 200                                            0.8
                                    300 400
                                            500 600                       1
                                                    700 800
                                            Costs                 900 1000



(b)




            0

           -50
   MRS




          -100

          -150

          -200                                                                       0
                                                                                             Benefits



                                                                                    0.2
           -250                                                                   0.4
           -300                                                                 0.6
                   0       100 200                                           0.8
                                   300 400
                                           500 600                       1
                                                   700 800
                                            Costs                900 1000

Fig. 10.7 Comparison of MRS for different values of costs and beneﬁts in additive and interactive
models. a Additive model. b Interactive model. Note Estimates based on α0 = −0.008, α1 = 2.146,
and α2 = −0.001


(for price) and α1 = 2.146 (for the efﬁciency label). Ward et al. (2011) report no
interaction term, so the simulation uses an arbitrary value α2 = −0.001. Intervals
chosen for the axis account for the nature of the experimental task in Ward et al.
(2011): they use a dummy variable for the label, going from zero to one; and they
use a price going just above $1000. Figures 10.6a and 10.6b show that the additive
10    The Influence of Costs, Beneﬁts and Their Interaction …                        183

model imposes a constant marginal utility, while in an interactive model the mar-
ginal utility declines as costs and beneﬁts increase. Similarly, Fig. 10.7 shows on a
tri-dimensional space how the MRS changes for varying levels of price and label.
Again, while this value is constant for an additive model (a flat surface), it varies for
the interactive model. A change in the coefﬁcient α2 could give substantially dif-
ferent ﬁgures from those presented here, but would not modify the essence of the
argument.
    Using an interaction term for costs and beneﬁts comes with two main difﬁculties
in the empirical application. First, consumer models treat C as a single variable
(price) and B as a matrix of product characteristics (a proxy for quality). An
important reason for this practice is the need to observe the economic trade-off
between goods and money, particularly with the objective of measuring willingness
to pay through the MRS. However, consumers face a series of non-monetary losses
alongside price, such as for example effort, which needs to be included in a matrix
of costs C. This point applies for instance to the decision to purchase readily
prepared vegetables against the natural product, which require different levels of
effort and preparation time once price is considered. The vector C in this case
includes as costly characteristics price as well as the effort required (e.g. in time
terms) to prepare the vegetables for consumption. This distinction between costs
and beneﬁts should be clearly outlined in modelling exercises, to provide a fruitful
understanding of results from a behavioural perspective besides the pure econo-
metric viewpoint.
    A second limitation is the difﬁculty in the ex-ante classiﬁcation of product char-
acteristics as costs or beneﬁts, which is not always straightforward in an empirical
analysis of market behaviour. For instance, organic can be viewed as a beneﬁt for its
impact on food quality and as a cost because of its possible implications on global
food security. Similarly, energy-efﬁciency can be seen as a beneﬁt in terms of energy
conservation, but can be seen as a cost whenever the change in standard requires an
effortful change in behaviour (e.g. an energy-efﬁcient machine requiring
low-temperature wash) or adaptation (e.g. the longer warm-up time of energy-
efﬁcient lightbulbs). These differences can be rarely separated into two different
coefﬁcients, causing difﬁculties in the identiﬁcation of the impact on consumers. This
complication implies the deﬁnition of a correct interaction between costs and beneﬁts
might not always be straightforward to deﬁne, and in some instances might require
preliminary exploratory research, for instance through a qualitative analysis, to fully
understand consumer perception of a speciﬁc characteristic.


     The Interaction Term and Environmental Public Policy
     As described in the main text of this chapter, the inclusion of a term to
     account for the interaction for costs and beneﬁts can provide a more complete
     representation of consumer behaviour. Research in behavioural science to
     date has typically explored the trade-off between private goods, for instance
     pain or effort versus money or pleasure (Park et al. 2011; Prevost et al. 2010;
     Talmi et al. 2009). A rather unexplored area of research regards choices
184                                                              L. Panzone and D. Talmi


  requiring a trade-off between public and private goods, a concern to envi-
  ronmental economists and policymakers. For instance, a consumer deciding
  whether to recycle trades the environmental improvement (a public good)
  against a loss of time (a private good). Public goods are an important feature
  of consumption because the individual making a choice or behaviour does not
  fully pay for, or beneﬁt from, the consequences of his negligence or
  thoughtfulness, sharing them instead with the society. As an example, a ﬁrm
  discharging toxic waste (a private good) in a river (a public good) causes an
  environmental damage that primarily affects other individuals using the river
  (e.g. ﬁshermen, swimmers, kayakers, etc.). Noticeably, shared recipients or
  victims could be very distant in both space and time.
      Environmental public policy aims to preserve the environment as a public
  good. In particular, to change behaviour in a desirable direction, policies need
  to increase individuals’ intrinsic motivation for the preservation of the public
  good, changing their implicit attitudes (Beattie and Sale 2011) and intrinsic
  values (Blankenship et al. 2012). To achieve its objective, public policy uses
  speciﬁc instruments (e.g. a subsidy, a tax, a ban or a penalty) in order to increase
  the individual beneﬁts from socially desirable actions, or increase the costs of
  socially undesirable actions of ﬁrms and consumers (Gneezy et al. 2011).
  However, these instruments are often designed without clear consideration of
  the behavioural implications (Gneezy et al. 2011). For instance, earlier research
  established that extrinsic rewards such as prizes decrease long-term intrinsic
  motivation and effort; while intrinsic rewards such as personal satisfaction
  increase long-term intrinsic motivation (Gneezy et al. 2011; Kaplan and
  Oudeyer 2007). Similarly, there is generally no attention to the interaction
  between costs and beneﬁts in the empirical evaluation of a policy instrument.
      An understanding of the role of costs and beneﬁts in consumer utility is
  crucial for a correct use of economic policy instruments to address environ-
  mental consumption. In fact, cost–beneﬁt decisions lead to an internal conflict
  because a person’s goal to achieve the beneﬁt may clash with the goal of
  avoiding the cost (Locke et al. 1994), leading to high physiological arousal
  (Talmi et al. 2009). Because policy instruments directly influence costs and
  beneﬁts, the way consumers integrate them into a value will have conse-
  quences to the consequent effectiveness of the policy. As an example, a carbon
  tax on meat decreases the utility from its consumption by increasing the price
  of purchase against a positive utility for the environmental beneﬁt. However,
  the marginal utility of the effort in consumers with high preferences for the
  environmental sustainability beneﬁt would be expected to increase with the
  price. In other words, an environmentally sensitive consumer may react pos-
  itively to the tax when this is targeting a good like meat with a high carbon
  footprint, showing a positive interaction that is only captured through the term
  a2;i in Eq. (10.10). The extent to which recent ﬁndings in neuroscience on
  private goods can apply to environmental policy requires further research.
10   The Influence of Costs, Beneﬁts and Their Interaction …                         185


10.5     Conclusions

A quote attributed to G.E.P. Box states that “All models are wrong, but some are
useful” (a thought brought forward also in Box 1976). In fact, while the large
amount of quantitative data available in the current information age stimulates the
creative development of behavioural model of choice and decision-making, those
do not always incorporate the underlying neurobiological mechanisms. This limi-
tation detracts from the ability of such models to inform policy and research.
Particularly, although neuroscience developed a good understanding of how the
brain represents pleasure and pain separately, there is relatively little knowledge on
how they are integrated into a ﬁnal utility function, and how they lead to decisions
and choices. While the prevalent strategy in the presence of mixed outcomes is to
model the impact of costs and beneﬁts independently, cognitive neuroscience
indicates that costs and beneﬁts interact. This chapter shows that the potential gain
from this area of research to decision-making science is a transformation of the way
cost–beneﬁt analysis research is conducted in humans and animals, particularly
integrating interdisciplinary knowledge from economics and cognitive
neuroscience.
    The valuation of mixed prospects is of great interest to cognitive neuroscientists,
a point made evident in a large body of work on this topic. Despite the potential
synergy of economics and neuroscience in the development of neuroeconomics
(Camerer et al. 2004, 2005), neuroscience has seen the greater influence in the ﬁeld,
while economics has so far struggled to incorporate the recent developments on
how the brain makes decisions into appropriate modelling. Applied economic
research often assumes additive integration of costs and beneﬁts out of conve-
nience, without questioning the validity of this assumption. Instead, economics
could beneﬁt from the integration of experimental psychological ﬁndings into
economic models of human decision-making. The discussion presented in this
chapter provides an overview of the beneﬁts from incorporating interaction terms
through simulated data. Applying this model can be done in a straightforward
manner through the collection of primary data or through the observation of market
behaviour, a task left for future research.
    More generally, future research should aim at better understanding of the
functional form of utility, exploring and improving the validity and robustness of
existing models. In particular, more attention should be given to the potential
interactions between costs and beneﬁts, and to the influence of perceived risk
(outcome probability), as well as to delay (time between decision and outcome) on
costs, beneﬁts and their interaction. Neuroscientiﬁc research should aim at gener-
alising the current Von Neumann–Morgensten type of utility function while sup-
porting functional needs that comply with economic theory, rooting economic
behaviour in biology. We hope that this chapter will prove useful by providing an
understanding the status quo of current research, and outlining areas of research that
require further exploration. In fact, the overall objective of this chapter is to enhance
the understanding of economics, neuroscience, as well as their interaction.
186                                                                       L. Panzone and D. Talmi

Acknowledgments We are grateful to Matthieu Arnoult, Ariane Kehlbacher, Katarzyna Werner
for their useful comments on earlier version of this text.




References

Beattie G, Sale L (2011) Shopping to save the planet? Implicit rather than explicit attitudes predict
    low carbon footprint consumer choice. Int J Environ Cult Econ Soc Sustain 7(4):211–232
Berry ST (1994) Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. Rand J Econ 25
    (2):242–262
Blankenship KL, Wegener DT, Murray RA (2012) Circumventing resistance: using values to
    indirectly change attitudes. J Pers Soc Psychol 103(4):606–621
Box GEP (1976) Science and statistics. J Am Stat Assoc 71(356):791–799
Burton M, Rigby D, Young T, James S (2001) Consumer attitudes to genetically modiﬁed
    organisms in food in the UK. Eur Rev Agric Econ 28(4):479–498
Camerer CF, Loewenstein G, Prelec D (2004) Neuroeconomics: why economics needs brains.
    Scand J Econ 106(3):555–579
Camerer C, Loewenstein G, Prelec Drazen (2005) Neuroeconomics: how neuroscience can inform
    economics. J Econ Lit 43(1):9–64
Camerer C, Cohen J, Fehr E, Glimcher P, Laibson D (forthcoming). Neuroeconomics. In: Kagel J,
    Roth A (eds) Handbook of experimental economics. Princeton University Press, USA
Dawes RM, Corrigan B (1974) Linear models in decision making. Psychol Bull 81(2):95–106
Dayan P (2012) How to set the switches on this thing. Curr Opin Neurobiol
Dhar R, Simonson I (1999) Making complementary choices in consumption episodes: highlighting
    versus balancing. J Mark Res 36(1):29–44
Dreher JC (2012) Neural coding of computational factors affecting decision making. Prog Brain
    Res 202:289–320
Fehr E, Rangel A (2011) Neuroeconomic foundations of economic choice—recent advances.
    J Econ Perspect 25(4):3–30
Floresco SB, Onge JRS, Ghods-Shariﬁ S, Winstanley CA (2008) Cortico-limbic-striatal circuits
    subserving different forms of cost-beneﬁt decision making. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci
    8:375–389
Gneezy U, Meier S, Rey-Biel P (2011) When and why incentives (don’t) work to modify behavior.
    J Econ Perspect 25(4):191–210
Hicks JR (1939) The foundations of welfare economics. Econ J 49(196):696–712
Hoebel BG, Avena NM, Rada P (2007) Accumbens dopamine-acetylcholine balance in approach
    and avoidance. Curr Opin Pharmacol 7:617–627
Iordanova MD, Westbrook RF, Killcross AS (2006) Dopamine activity in the nucleus accumbens
    modulates blocking in fear conditioning. Eur J Neurosci 24:3265–3270
Kahneman D (2003) Maps of bounded rationality: psychology for behavioral economics. Am
    Econ Rev 93(5):1449–1475
Kahneman D, Tversky A (1979) Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica
    47(2):263–292
Kahneman D, Wakker PP, Sarin R (1997) Back to Bentham?—explorations of experienced utility.
    Quart J Econ 112:375–405
Kaplan F, Oudeyer P-Y (2007) In search of the neural circuits of intrinsic motivation. Front
    Neurosci 1(1):225–236
Keeney RL, Raiffa H (1993). Decisions with multiple objectives: preferences and value tradeoffs.
    Cambridge University Press
Khan U, Dhar R, Wertenbroch K (2004) A behavioral decision theory perspective on hedonic and
    utilitarian choice. In: Ratneshwar S, Mick DG (eds) Inside consumption: consumer motives,
    goals, and desires. Routledge, Abingdon
10   The Influence of Costs, Beneﬁts and Their Interaction …                                    187

Kivetz R (2003) The effects of effort and intrinsic motivation on risky choice. Mark Sci 22:
    477–502
Kurniawan IT, Seymour B, Vlaev I, Trommershäuser J, Dolan RJ, Chater Nick (2010) Pain
    relativity in motor control. Psychol Sci 21(6):840–847
Lancaster KJ (1966) A new approach to consumer theory. J Polit Econ 74(2):132–157
Levy DJ, Glimcher PW (2012) The root of all value: a neural common currency for choice. Curr
    Opin Neurobiol 22:1–12
Locke EA, Smith KG, Erez M, Chah D-O, Schaffer A (1994) The effects of intraindividual goal
    conflict on performance. J Manag 20(1):67–91
Loewenstein G (1987) Anticipation and the valuation of delayed consumption. Econ J 97
    (387):666–684
Louie K, Glimcher PW (2012) Efﬁcient coding and the neural representation of value. Ann NY
    Acad Sci 1251(1):13–32
Louviere JJ, Hensher DA, Swait JD (2000) Stated choice methods: analysis and application.
    Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Montague PR, King-Casas B (2007) Efﬁcient statistics, common currencies and the problem of
    reward-harvesting. Trends Cogn Sci 11(12):514–519
O’Doherty J, Dayan P, Schultz J, Deichmann R, Friston K, Dolan RJ (2004) Dissociable roles of
    ventral and dorsal striatum in instrumental conditioning. Science 304:452–454
Ozer-Balli H, Sorensen BE (2010) Interaction effects in econometrics. CEPR discussion paper no.
    DP7929, available online at SSRN http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=
    1641004
Park SQ, Kahnt T, Rieskamp J, Heekeren HR (2011) Neurobiology of value integration: when
    value impacts valuation. J Neurosci 31:9307–9314
Phillips PE, Walton ME, Jhou TC (2007) Calculating utility: preclinical evidence for cost-beneﬁt
    analysis by mesolimbic dopamine. Psychopharmacology 191:483–495
Premack D (2007) Human and animal cognition: continuity and discontinuity. PNAS 104
    (35):13861–13867
Prevost C, Pessiglione M, Metereau E, Clery-Melin ML, Dreher JC (2010) Separate valuation
    subsystems for delay and effort decision costs. J Neurosci 30:14080–14090
Rilling JK, Sanfey AG (2011) The neuroscience of social decision-making. Annu Rev Psychol
    62:23–48
Roesch MR, Bryden DW (2011) Impact of size and delay on neural activity in the rat limbic
    corticostriatal system. Front Neurosci 5(130):1–13
Salamone JD, Correa M (2002) Motivational views of reinforcement: implications for
    understanding the behavioral functions of nucleus accumbens dopamine. Behav Brain Res
    137(1):3–25
Salamone JD, Correa M, Farrar A, Mingote SM (2007) Effort-related functions of nucleus
    accumbens dopamine and associated forebrain circuits. Psychopharmacology 191(3):461–482
Schultz W (2000) Multiple reward signals in the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 1(3):199–208
Schultz W (2006) Behavioral theories and the neurophysiology of reward. Annu Rev Psychol
    57:87–115
Schweimer J, Saft S, Hauber W (2005) Involvement of catecholamine neurotransmission in the rat
    anterior cingulate in effort-related decision making. Behav Neurosci 119(6):1687–1692
Seymour B, Daw N, Dayan P, Singer T, Dolan R (2007) Differential encoding of losses and gains
    in the human striatum. J Neurosci 27(18):4826–4831
Steg L, Vlek C (2009) Encouraging pro-environmental behaviour: an integrative review and
    research agenda. J Environ Psychol 29(3):309–317
Talmi D, Pine A (2012) How costs influence decision values for mixed outcomes. Front Neurosci
    6(146):1–21. doi:10.3389/fnins.2012.00146, http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnins.
    2012.00146
Talmi D, Dayan P, Kiebel SJ, Frith CD, Dolan RJ (2009) How humans integrate the prospects of
    pain and reward during choice. J Neurosci 29(46):14617–14626
188                                                                     L. Panzone and D. Talmi

Tobler PN, O’Doherty JP, Dolan RJ, Schultz W (2007) Reward value coding distinct from risk
   attitude-related uncertainty coding in human reward systems. J Neurophysiol 97:1621–1632
Tversky A, Kahneman D (1992) Advances in prospect theory: cumulative representation of
   uncertainty. J Risk Uncertainty 5:297–323
Vlaev I, Chater N, Stewart N, Brown GD (2011) Does the brain calculate value? Trends Cogn Sci
   15(11):546–554
Von Neumann J, Morgenstern O (1947) Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton
   University Press, Princeton
Walton ME, Bannerman DM, Alterescu K, Rushworth MFS (2003) Functional specialization
   within medial frontal cortex of the anterior cingulate for evaluating effort-related decisions.
   J Neurosci 23:6475–6479
Walton ME, Rudebeck PH, Bannerman DM, Rushworth MFS (2007) Calculating the cost of
   acting in frontal cortex. Ann NY Acad Sci 1104(1):340–356
Wang H (1997) Treatment of ‘don’t-know’ responses in contingent valuation surveys: a random
   valuation model. J Environ Econ Manag 32(2):219–232
Ward DO, Clark CD, Jensen KL, Yen ST, Russell CS (2011) Factors influencing
   willingness-to-pay for the ENERGY STAR® label. Energy Policy 39(3):1450–1458
                           Part IV
Decision Making in Social Contexts
