Chapter 12
Altruistic Punishment

Alexander Strobel




Abstract Altruism can be regarded as one crucial challenge in the neuroeconomic
study of human behavior. This challenge is at least threefold: First, altruism needs
to be deﬁned properly; second, its diverse behavioral expressions require elucida-
tion; and third, its underlying mechanisms need to be delineated in order to
understand why individuals behave altruistically. The present chapter therefore
aims at providing a working deﬁnition of altruism and at focusing on one particular
behavioral expression—namely altruistic punishment—and its role in human
cooperation. It proceeds with exemplifying several experimental paradigms in the
study of altruistic punishment and ﬁnally summarizes key ﬁndings on its neuro-
scientiﬁc underpinnings. A special emphasis will be on neuroimaging and psy-
chophysiological studies and on an outlook on potential neuromodulatory
influences. In doing so, this overview can by no means be exhaustive; rather, it is
intended to provide a general impression of the current state of the neuroscientiﬁc
study of the complex trait of altruism.



12.1    Introduction

12.1.1 A Working Deﬁnition of Altruism

Among the diverse deﬁnitions of altruism, the present outline favors the view of De
Quervain and et al. (2004), who—referring to Sober and Wilson (1998)—distinguish
between a biological and a psychological deﬁnition of altruism. The biological
deﬁnition regards altruistic behavior as any costly behavior that confers an economic
beneﬁt to other individuals, regardless of the motives behind such behavior. The
psychological deﬁnition, in contrast, requires that such behavior is driven by a
non-hedonic motive. A bee, which sacriﬁces itself for the sake of the beehive by
stinging an intruder, acts altruistically, but as we cannot know about any motive

A. Strobel (&)
Department of Psychology, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
e-mail: alexander.strobel@tu-dresden.de

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                         211
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_12
212                                                                            A. Strobel

behind this behavior, we have to refer to the biological deﬁnition of altruism. A nun,
who sacriﬁces herself for the sake of the poor, acts altruistically as well, and here, we
could assume some non-hedonic motive behind this behavior, and thus, could refer
to the psychological deﬁnition of altruism. Still, however, the nun might expect
some reward for her behavior—in her community, in the clergy, or in the “kingdom
to come,” and as we cannot know for sure about the motive behind her behavior, we
need to refer to the biological deﬁnition of altruism as well—as costly behavior that
confers an economic beneﬁt to other individuals, regardless of the motives behind
such behavior. While some of the neuroscientiﬁc studies summarized below also set
out to elucidate the motives behind altruistic behavior, relying solely on neurobio-
logical data cannot address the question of the motives of altruistic behavior prop-
erly. Nevertheless, such a neurobiological approach can provide empirical evidence
that can back up discussions on the motives presumably underlying altruistic
behavior.
   Therefore, throughout the present chapter, the term altruism, if not otherwise
speciﬁed, is used synonymously with “altruistic behavior.” Thus, a biological
perspective is taken, thereby abstracting from potential psychological motives
behind altruistic behavior—without assuming there might be none.



12.2    Altruistic Punishment

Altruistic behavior can be observed not only in humans, but in several other species
as well, and can often be explained based on genetic relatedness or beneﬁts arising
in repeated interactions (Bowles and Gintis 2004; Fehr and Gächter 2002). Such
accounts, however, cannot explain why humans show altruistic behavior and
cooperation even in anonymous, unattended, and/or one-shot interactions with
strangers. The strong reciprocity account (Bowles and Gintis 2004) provides an
explanation for these situations: It is based on so-called altruistic punishment, i.e.,
the costly punishment of norm violations without any personal beneﬁt for the
punishing individual, but with potential beneﬁt for other individuals.
    Altruistic punishment can be observed across a wide variety of cultures (Henrich
et al. 2006; Herrmann et al. 2008), rendering it a plausible mechanism underlying
human cooperation throughout different societies. It may have developed by gene-
culture coevolution (Gintis 2003), i.e., a possible genetic propensity to internalize
norms strengthened these norms and evolutionarily favored individuals who
exhibited such a propensity (see also Henrich et al. 2006, p. 1770). Indeed,
experimental and simulation studies have shown that cooperation can be maintained
even in larger groups and in one-shot interactions, if there is the possibility to
punish defectors (e.g., Fehr and Gächter 2002; Boyd et al. 2003; Fehr and
Fischbacher 2003). Before discussing the details of these studies, however, it is
necessary to outline several experimental paradigms that can be used to study
altruistic behavior in general and altruistic punishment in particular.
12   Altruistic Punishment                                                                    213


12.3     Experimental Paradigms for the Study
         of Altruistic Punishment

Figure 12.1 depicts four economic games, i.e., abstract social situations where
interacting individuals exchange some goods, usually money or so-called monetary
units (MU). A rather simple game is the Dictator Game, where one player A, the
“Dictator” receives a certain amount of MU (here: 20) part of which he or she can
share at his or her discretion with another player B, the “Recipient.” Player B has to
accept any assignment made by player A—hence the name of the game. In the
Dictator Game, altruism can be operationalized as the amount of MU which player
A transfers to player B, as he or she is not bound to share, and sharing means
bearing a cost without a beneﬁt—at least in one-shot interactions between two
players that do not know each other. In Fig. 12.1, player A would be considered as




Fig. 12.1 Four paradigmatic economic games for the study of altruistic behavior and altruistic
punishment. Solid lines indicate monetary exchange, (red) dashed lines indicate punitive acts. See
text for details
214                                                                              A. Strobel

less altruistic, as most of the 20 MU is kept, and only 1 MU is shared with player B.
In a modiﬁed version of this game, player B can be given the opportunity to punish
player A, e.g., via assigning MUs from a separate account as punishment points,
thereby reducing the ﬁnancial outcome of player A, but at the same time bearing a
cost, as the separate account will eventually been paid out in cash to player B.
Hence, punishing unfair assignments in the one-shot Dictator Game can be seen as
an operationalization of altruistic punishment, as the punisher bears a cost without a
ﬁnancial beneﬁt—but a potential beneﬁt for other individuals, as player A might
behave differently in future exchange situations to avoid punishment.
    A related, but slightly more complex game is the Ultimatum Game, the name of
which derives from the fact that player A acts as “Proposer” of a split of a sum of
MU, and player B, the “Respondent” decides whether this offer is acceptable. If
player B rejects the offer of player A, both players end up with nothing. Hence, it is
in the self-interest of player A to propose a rather fair or at least not too unfair share.
This disqualiﬁes the amount of MUs offered by player A as operationalization of
altruistic behavior. Rather, the behavior of player B is of interest: in the case of a
19:1 offer, it would be rational to accept, as 1 MU is better than 0 MU. By rejecting
this unfair split, player B bears a cost (an opportunity cost) without a beneﬁt, but
again, with some potential beneﬁt for other individuals interacting with player A in
the future in similar situations. Thus, the rejection rate by player B can be conceived
of as an operationalization of altruistic punishment.
    In a third game, the Trust Game, both players A and B are endowed with a sum
of MUs (20 in the example in Fig. 12.1). Player A, the “Truster” now has to decide
whether or not to transfer part or the entire sum to player B, the “Trustee.” If he or
she trusts player B and transfers MUs (the whole sum in the example), the MUs will
be multiplied (quadrupled in Fig. 12.1) and given to player B. Player B can back
transfer some of his or her MUs (now 100 MU), but needs not to so (as in the
example). Player A’s trust has been betrayed (he or she ends up with 0 MU), and
again, if this is a one-shot interaction and there is an option to punish, the amount of
punishment points invested can be used as an operationalization of altruistic
punishment.
    Finally the fourth game, the Public Goods Game, can be seen as an extension of
the Trust Game. Here, a group of players receives an initial endowment that can be
invested in some public good. The sum invested is multiplied (doubled in the
example), and the resulting sum is evenly paid out to the group. An individual who
invests most or all of the endowment is usually called “Contributor,” an individual
who contributes little or nothing is often called “Freerider”—as he or she does not
contribute as much as the others, but receives the same pay-off and, thus, will
eventually end up with more MUs than the contributors. If the “Freerider’s”
behavior is made transparent to the “Contributors” and if there is an option for
punishment, the amount of punishment points invested by the “Contributors” can
again be viewed as an operationalization of altruistic punishment.
12   Altruistic Punishment                                                         215


12.4     Maintenance of Cooperation
         by Altruistic Punishment

In the already-mentioned experiment by Fehr and Gächter (2002), groups of par-
ticipants played several rounds of a Public Goods game, which was designed in a
way that it was in the material self-interest of the players to act as “Freeriders.”
Varying group compositions ensured the one-shot nature of the interaction. In
sessions where the individual contribution was made transparent to the others and
punishment was possible, cooperation started at a higher level and increased, while
in sessions where no punishment was possible, it started at a rather low level and
even decreased. Thus, even in situations where freeriding is reasonable, altruistic
punishment appears to maintain cooperation. This has also been substantiated by
simulation studies, which have shown that altruistic punishment (and the more so
punishment of non-punishers) maintains cooperation even in large groups (Boyd
et al. 2003; Fehr and Fischbacher 2003). This view has not gone without criticism,
either based on other simulation protocols (Ohtsuki et al. 2009) or on a review of
the literature on experimental versus ﬁeld studies on the factors that maintain
cooperation (Guala 2012). Altruistic punishment therefore should be viewed as one
possible, but by no means the most important or efﬁcient way to ensure cooperation
in human societies. Nevertheless, it has been proven to be a particularly useful
approach for the study of the neurobiological correlates of altruistic behavior, which
will be exempliﬁed in the following.



12.5     The Role of Emotion-Related Brain Areas
         in Altruistic Punishment

One of the ﬁrst studies investigating the neural bases of economic decision-making
was a functional magnetic resonance imaging study by Sanfey et al. (2003) who
scanned their participants while they had to decide whether to accept or to reject fair
or unfair monetary offers in a sequential one-shot Ultimatum Game. As mentioned
above, the rejection of unfair offers bears a cost without a beneﬁt and can thus be
seen as an operationalization of altruistic punishment. The main ﬁnding of this
study was that right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC), and anterior insula exhibited stronger activation during unfair offers.
Moreover, the activity of the anterior insula was positively correlated with rejection
rates for unfair offers. This result was interpreted based on the prominent role of the
DLPFC in cognitive control processes, of the ACC in monitoring of—both cog-
nitive and affective—conflict, and of the insula in subserving emotional processing
via representations of signals of internal states.
    This result highlights the importance of emotions in economic decision-making.
Indeed, recent evidence supports the view that insular representations of emotional
states (Singer et al. 2009) may serve as bias signals in economic decision-making.
216                                                                         A. Strobel

This may drive the motivation to reject unfair offers and thereby to punish norm
violations (see Montague and Lohrenz 2007). The role of emotions in altruistic
punishment is further substantiated by a lesion study by Koenigs and Tranel (2007),
who showed that individuals with lesions in the ventromedial/orbitofrontal cortex
(OFC) were more likely than control subjects to reject unfair offers in the
Ultimatum Game. As OFC damage has been associated with emotional dysregu-
lation and failures in emotion-guided decision-making (e.g., Bechara et al. 2000),
this evidence suggests that OFC lesions might impair downregulation of (negative)
emotional responses when facing unfair offers, which could lead to economically
irrational behavior such as the rejection of unfair, but nonzero offers. Thus, this
interpretation fosters the notion that (negative) emotional processes play a promi-
nent role in altruistic punishment, which in turn also suggests that non-altruistic
motives can drive costly punishment.



12.6    The Role of Cognition-Related Brain Areas
        in Altruistic Punishment

Coming back to the study of Sanfey et al. (2003), one result deserves further
consideration. While in that study, DLPFC activation was observed during the
presentation of unfair offers, it was not directly correlated with rejection rates.
However, another line of evidence nevertheless suggests a causal role for DLPFC in
the rejection of unfair Ultimatum Game offers. In a study by Knoch et al. (2006),
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) was applied over the right and left DLPFC
of respondents in an Ultimatum Game. The authors showed that as compared to a
sham condition, transient disruption of right, but not left DLPFC activity resulted in
reduced rejections of unfair offers, while fairness ratings remained unaffected. Thus,
although participants still viewed offers as unfair, they were more likely to accept
them and, hence, to exhibit reduced altruistic punishment behavior. Comparable
results were obtained by this group in a later study using transcranial direct current
stimulation (tDCS; Knoch et al. 2008); again, transient inhibition of the right
DLPFC resulted in reduced rejection rates while fairness ratings remained unaf-
fected. In another study, they examined electroencephalogram (EEG) alpha activity
at rest, which in the setting of that study was conceived as a trait-like (inverse)
indicator of cortical activation. In line with their earlier observations, they found
higher right frontal resting alpha activity to be associated with reduced rejection
rates during an Ultimatum Game (Knoch et al. 2010). Taken together, these results
argue for a causal role of the integrity of especially the right DLPFC, a region that
has been implicated in exerting cognitive control, particularly the inhibition of
prepotent responses (e.g., Aron et al. 2004).
   Interestingly, if (TMS- or tDCS-induced) disruption of the right DLPFC results
in reduced rejection rates as shown by Knoch et al. (2006, 2008), then the “pre-
potent response” when facing unfair Ultimatum Game offers appears to be to reject
12   Altruistic Punishment                                                           217

them. This could be viewed as an economically irrational, but socially desirable
behavioral act that suggests an important influence of cultural norms on altruistic
behavior, which may be interpreted in terms of the above-mentioned gene-culture
coevolution. Yet, a study by Crockett et al. (2010) suggests other plausible
explanations: In that study, the authors assessed their participants’ impulsive choice
(via a delay discounting task) and altruistic punishment (operationalized as rejection
of unfair Ultimatum Game offers) both during serotonin reduction via tryptophan
depletion as experimental condition and during placebo as a control condition. They
found that across both conditions, the magnitude of impulsive choice correlated
with altruistic punishment, and that increases in impulsive choice after tryptophan
depletion correlated with increases in altruistic punishment after tryptophan
depletion. Given this experimental evidence, cultural norms need either be so
deeply internalized that it requires less self-control to abide by them, or altruistic
punishment may be driven by other motives that are associated with less
self-control. A study by de Quervain et al. (2004) indeed points in the latter
direction, as will be outlined in the following.



12.7     Is Revenge Indeed Sweet? Retribution as a Potential
         Motive for Altruistic Punishment

The studies summarized so far all used the Ultimatum Game, where the cost of
altruistic punishment is to abstain from a gain from so far unavailable monetary
resources. This might involve quite different internal processes than to actually
deploy available monetary resources for the sake of punishment. Hence, a study by
de Quervain et al. (2004) deserves mention, as these authors performed a more
direct investigation of the neural processes underlying altruistic punishment using a
Trust Game. Their participants—all in the role of a betrayed truster—underwent
positron emission tomography while they could use part of their ﬁnancial reim-
bursement to punish betraying trustees. Four conditions were realized: First, the
betrayal of trust was intentional and the punishment was costly (IC), that is, the
betrayed player had to invest own resources to punish the betrayer whose ﬁnancial
outcome was reduced; second, the betrayal of trust was intentional, but the pun-
ishment was free of costs, i.e., no own resources had to be invest to impose
punishment with the effect of reducing the trustees ﬁnancial outcome (IF). Third,
the betrayal of trust was intentional, but the punishment was only symbolic (IS),
that is, it was neither costly for the punisher nor did it reduce the betrayer’s ﬁnancial
outcome; and fourth, there was a condition, where a random device had generated
the decision not to transfer back any money from the trustee to the truster. If the
punishment option was chosen, then both the truster and the trustee—who was not
responsible for the decision—had to bear a cost.
    At the behavioral level, this setting produced high pay-off reductions imposed on
the trustee in the IC condition, even higher reductions in the IF condition, but no or
218                                                                        A. Strobel

only marginal pay-off reductions in the IS and NC conditions. At the neuronal level,
an activity difference was observed in the caudate nucleus, with the IC and IF
conditions being accompanied by higher, and the IS and NC conditions by lower
caudate nucleus activation as compared to mean activation. Moreover, the amount
of MUs invested for punishing in the IC condition correlated with caudate activity
in both the IC and the IF condition. The authors suggested that—as the caudate
nucleus has been implicated in reward processing (e.g., Delgado et al. 2003)—the
motivation to punish defectors could be partly due to feelings of satisfaction when
social norm violations are punished and justice is reestablished. Thus, this result
points to revenge as a potential motive underlying altruistic punishment in direct
one-shot interactions.
   However, two issues in this seminal study require further examination. First, in
the study by de Quervain et al. (2004) as well as in the other studies referred to so
far, participants were directly affected by the unfair behavior of the other players,
the offers of whom they could reject or whom they could punish directly (which
will be referred to here as ﬁrst-party punishment). In such situations, punishment
may be driven by anger and revenge-like motives, thus presumably reflecting
conditions where punishment is subjectively beneﬁcial via satisfaction through
revenge. To test this interpretation, it would be important to contrast such condi-
tions with others where the punisher is not directly affected by unfair behavior, so
that revenge-like motives cannot account for punishment. Several studies have
therefore employed third-party punishment (with the potential punisher being not
directly affected by the unfair behavior of the other player; see, e.g., Fehr and
Fischbacher 2004). Here, the punishment of unfair behavior should not be moti-
vated by the satisfaction of revenge.
   Second, in the de Quervain et al. (2004) study, caudate activation was stronger in
the two conditions where punishment was effective (i.e., IC and IF) and was
reduced in the conditions where punishment was ineffective (IS) or was no pun-
ishment at all, as the trustee was not responsible for the “betrayal” (NC). Yet, only
the IC condition was an operationalization of altruistic–i.e., costly–punishment.
This leaves open the question whether the caudate nucleus activation might have
been associated with effective rather than with altruistic punishment.



12.8    Third-Party Punishment

In an own functional magnetic resonance imaging study (Strobel et al. 2011), we
therefore addressed these two issues in order to provide a more differentiated basis
for a neuroscientiﬁc account of the motives underlying altruistic punishment. To
this end, we used a variant of the Dictator Game, where player B (the “Recipient”)
had to accept even very unfair offers, but could exert punishment from a separate
account of punishment points. Indeed, evidence suggests that individuals tend to
punish norm violations even when they are not affected by the norm violation
themselves, but are watching social exchange situations from a third-party
12   Altruistic Punishment                                                                     219

perspective (Fehr and Fischbacher 2004). Thus, we were interested in whether there
were differences in brain activation during punishment acts where individuals might
pursue some subjective beneﬁt such as satisfaction through revenge (i.e., punish-
ment for norm violations affecting one self, or ﬁrst-person punishment) as com-
pared to punishment acts where individuals seemingly do not pursue any subjective
beneﬁt (i.e., punishment for norm violations affecting other people, or third-party
punishment). Hence, we compared two conditions where players B were either the
recipients themselves or were “watching” interactions between the Dictators and
some players C.
   Our second question was whether caudate nucleus activation during punishment
acts would be associated with effective rather than with altruistic punishment.
Hence, we compared two conditions where the punishment—with equal costs—
was either highly effective (strong punishment, resulting in a substantial reduction
of the Dictator’s payoff) or rather less effective (weak punishment, resulting in
marginal reduction).
   Analyses were performed for predeﬁned regions of interest that were based on
the literature reviewed above (see Fig. 12.2, left panel): Insula, ACC, and DLPFC
as derived from the results by Sanfey et al. (2003) and Knoch et al. (2006); OFC as




Fig. 12.2 Altruistic punishment in the dictator game: functional magnetic resonance imaging
results from Strobel et al. (2011) at MNI coordinates (xyz) 10, 12, 0. The ﬁrst panel from the left
shows the regions of interest (ROIs) deﬁned on the basis of the available literature (see text):
NCd = caudate nucleus; CG = cingulate gyrus (displayed here is the anterior cingulate cortex,
ACC); DLPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; Ins = insula; NAc = nucleus accumbens. The
next panels show the clusters within these ROIs that were signiﬁcant at a false discovery rate
corrected level of signiﬁcance of P < 0.05 for the contrasts “punishment > no punishment” (with
all predeﬁned ROIs being signiﬁcantly more active in the punishment condition), “ﬁrst
person > third party”, (where along with ACC, NAc was signiﬁcantly more active in the
ﬁrst-person condition), and “strong > weak punishment” (with NCd being signiﬁcantly more
active in the strong punishment condition)
220                                                                            A. Strobel

derived from the results of Koenigs and Tranel (2007; not displayed in Fig. 12.2 as
unfortunately, due to technical reasons, OFC signals could not be captured properly
in our study), and caudate nucleus as implicated in altruistic punishment by de
Qvervain et al. (de Quervain et al. 2004). Moreover, as these authors argued for a
role of reward processes in altruistic punishment, we additionally included another
region of interest: the nucleus accumbens, which plays a prominent role in reward
processing (see, e.g., Robbins and Everitt 1996).
    To summarize the results, our behavioral data indicated that altruistic punish-
ment showed medium correlations with self-reported altruistic tendencies as
assessed with the Altruism facet of the revised NEO Personality Inventory
(NEO-PI-R; Costa and McCrae 1992), thereby substantiating the notion that eco-
nomic games such as the one employed here indeed capture individual behavioral
tendencies that protrude over the laboratory. The imaging data revealed that, as
expected, all predeﬁned regions of interest were signiﬁcantly more active in trials
where our participants punished as compared to trials without punishment (see
Fig. 12.2, second panel from the left). This substantiates the role of
cognition-related areas (DLPFC, ACC) and emotion-related regions (Insula) in
altruistic punishment. Furthermore, when comparing the ﬁrst person with the
third-party condition, nucleus accumbens (along with ACC) showed stronger
activation in the ﬁrst-person condition (Fig. 12.2, third panel from the left), and
when comparing strong (i.e., effective) with weak (i.e., less effective) punishment,
we selectively observed caudate nucleus activation (Fig. 12.2, right panel) in almost
the same region as that reported by de Quervain et al. (2004). The latter result
therefore argues for a role of the caudate nucleus in effective rather than in altruistic
punishment per se.
    Summarizing, the pattern of results shows that brain regions involved in
cognitive-affective processing and in altruistic punishment in previous studies were
also more active during altruistic punishment in the present study (DLPFC, ACC,
insula). Moreover, regions implicated in reward processing were more involved
when punishment had a strong effect (caudate nucleus) or when the punisher was
directly affected (nucleus accumbens). Thus, on the basis of these results, revenge
as a motive for punishing social norm violation cannot be ruled out, but might not
be the only determinant.
    Indeed, another factor impacting on the propensity for altruistic punishment
appears to be group membership of the punisher and the defector of a social norm:
Baumgartner et al. (2012) observed that individuals showed less third-party pun-
ishment of defecting members of their ingroup as compared to those of an
outgroup. While punishing outgroup members correlated with the connectivity
within a functional brain network implicated in sanction-related decision-making
(right orbitofrontal an lateral prefrontal regions as well as right caudate nucleus),
punishing ingroup members was correlated with the connectivity within a brain
network involved in mentalizing processes. The authors interpreted the latter
ﬁnding as presumably indicative of their subjects’ efforts to understand the
defective behavior of their ingroup members. Most interestingly, the authors could
demonstrate that the activity in the mentalizing network was negatively correlated
12   Altruistic Punishment                                                         221

with the activity of network nodes of the punishment network, pointing to a sup-
pressive influence of the former on the latter.
    The study by Baumgartner et al. (2012), thus, broadens our perspective on
altruistic punishment by shifting the focus from single brain regions and their
presumed role on the modulation of behavior to brain networks and their correlated
activity during altruistic punishment. This network perspective can be expected to
considerably further our understanding of the processes underlying altruistic pun-
ishment. Yet, even this approach falls short of one crucial further aspect of the
complex phenomenon under investigation: its process nature on a micro-timescale.
Due to the low-temporal resolution of methods such as functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging, fast computational processes underlying altruistic punishment—
e.g., some calculation of a violation of a personal or social norm that needs to be
performed ahead of cognitive-affective processes in order to trigger altruistic
punishment—cannot readily be captured. Hence, methods that allow for a better
temporal resolution are an important means to further our understanding of the
neurocognitive processes during altruistic punishment. EEG is one such method
(see the EEG chapter by Debener et al. in the methods chapter of this book for a
detailed description of this method), as it provides a high-temporal resolution (albeit
at the cost of a lower spatial resolution). Moreover, EEG is less costly, allowing for
larger samples and, thus, for the detection of smaller effects as those typically to be
detected in imaging studies.



12.9     The Feedback-Related Negativity as a Predictor
         of Altruistic Punishment

Besides EEG analyses in the frequency domain (see the above mentioned study by
Knoch et al. 2010, who observed—presumably habitual—right frontal EEG alpha
activity to be associated with the rejection of unfair offers in the Ultimatum Game),
EEG analyses in the time domain are capable of capturing even very fast neural
processes. By means of so-called event-related potentials (ERP), changes in neu-
ronal activity following some critical event can be tracked at the millisecond level.
The ERP approach has already been successfully applied to the study of the pro-
cesses underling the propensity to reject unfair offers in the Ultimatum Game. One
key study will be outlined in the following.
   Hewig et al. (2011) investigated the role of the so-called feedback-related
negativity (FRN) in Ultimatum Game bargaining. The FRN is a negativity in the
ERP that is maximal over frontal recording sites. Based on source localization
studies, it is assumed to be generated by the ACC when feedback in experimental
conditions deviates from an individual’s expectation and, thus, might be an indi-
cator of processes underlying reinforcement learning (Holroyd and Coles 2002). In
the case of the Ultimatum Game, unfair offers can be considered as deviations from
some (individual or social) norm, which may prompt rejection of these offers,
222                                                                           A. Strobel

probably based on prediction error computations that are indexed by the FRN.
Indeed, the authors could show that the rejection of unfair offers could be predicted
by the magnitude of the FRN (to fair offers). Together with self-reported subjective
emotion ratings and objectively measured skin conductance levels, 84 % of the
rejection of unfair offers could be predicted. This supports the view that the
detection of norm violations and the resulting (or at least accompanying) emotional
processes as indexed here in emotional ratings and psychophysiological arousal
measures trigger altruistic punishment.
   So far unpublished own data based on a sample of 44 volunteers substantiate the
results by Knoch et al. (2010) and Hewig et al. (2001): in an Ultimatum Game, the
FRN signiﬁcantly predicted the rejection rate (as in Hewig et al. 2011), but only for
a ﬁrst-person condition; in a third-party condition, it was resting frontal alpha (as in
Knoch et al. 2010, but bilaterally) that predicted rejection rates. If replicable, these
results would suggest that feedback-related and, thus, state-like (bottom–up gen-
erated) event-related perturbations in cortical (ACC) activity are more predictive of
the rejection of unfair offers when the subjects are directly involved, while trait-like
characteristics such as resting frontal EEG alpha activity are more important when
subjects are acting as witnesses of unfair behavior in a perhaps more top–down
controlled way.



12.10     Neuromodulatory Influences on Altruistic Behavior

While, as shown, there is ample evidence on the neural correlates of altruistic
punishment, a so far less extensively investigated topic in this context is the role of
neuromodulators in altruistic punishment. The already mentioned study by Crockett
et al. (2010) is one of few studies that have implicated neuromodulators in altruistic
punishment. Their result that serotonin depletion-induced increases in impulsive
responding correlated with increased altruistic punishment can easily be reconciled
with the reviewed evidence on the role of emotional responses to unfair behavior in
economic games: Perceived norm violations trigger prepotent negative emotional
responses to unfairness that—under conditions of heightened impulsivity and, thus,
reduced inhibition of these prepotent responses via serotonin depletion—can out-
weigh economic considerations (as, e.g., in the context of the Ultimatum Game, it
would economically reasonable to accept even the least nonzero offer).
    However, evolutionarily, an enhanced impulsive responding that favored pre-
potent responses would not enhance cooperation, unless the prepotent response
favored cooperation. Rather, in order to enhance cooperation, a violation of a social
norm that hinders cooperation needs to be detected and correcting behaviors need to
be at hand even at economic costs. Such behavior might be in addition otherwise
rewarding, e.g., because a contingency between such behaviors and personal or
social rewards had been learned. Here, another neuromodulator comes into play that
has been associated with prediction error coding and reinforcement learning. FRN
that was associated with altruistic punishment by Hewig et al. (2011) has been
12   Altruistic Punishment                                                       223

suggested as a reward prediction error signal and has also been associated with
dopamine signaling (Holroyd and Coles 2002). Moreover, activity of brain regions
activated during altruistic punishment, e.g., DLPFC, ACC, insula, and caudate
nucleus—although likely to be serotonergically modulated as well—are prominent
targets of dopaminergic projections from the midbrain that have been implicated in
prediction error signaling (Schultz 1998) and reward processing (Robbins and
Everitt 1996). Therefore, in view of the gene-culture coevolution assumption,
genetic variation in dopamine function could be expected to impact on, ﬁrst, neural
responses to norm violations, and second, the expectation of possible future rewards
derived from the punishment of unfair behavior, be it via the personal reward of
satisfaction derived from revenge or via learned contingencies between punishment
behavior and social rewards or both.
   Therefore, in our study reviewed above (Strobel et al. 2011), we also examined
the possible role of genetic variation of dopamine function in the modulation of
neural responses during altruistic behavior. To this end, we included a widely
studied genetic variation of dopamine function into our analyses: a G to A single
nucleotide polymorphism in the gene encoding the dopamine-degrading enzyme
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) that results in the substitution of the amino
acid valine (Val) by methionine (Met) at amino acid position 158 of the COMT
enzyme. This so-called Val158Met polymorphism impacts on the COMT enzyme’s
thermostability: Met allele homozygotes exhibit only one-fourth of the COMT
activity than Val/Val homozygotes, which likely results in higher levels of synaptic
dopamine (Lachman et al. 1996; Chen et al. 2004). The COMT Val158Met poly-
morphism has been associated with prefrontally modulated cognitive and affective
processing (see Mier et al. 2010, for a review and meta-analysis). Interestingly, it
has also been implicated in reward processing, as in a study by Dreher et al. (2009),
Met allele carriers exhibited higher activation in the ventral striatum and the
DLPFC during reward anticipation.
   While we could not identify a COMT genotype-related difference in DLPFC
activation, we observed a punishment-related genotype effect at the level of nucleus
accumbens activation: Carriers of the Met allele and, thus presumably higher
synaptic dopamine activity, showed higher punishment-related nucleus accumbens
activation. We interpreted this ﬁnding as indicative of a COMT Met allele-related
bias of ventral striatal integration of input signals from DLPFC, ACC, insula, and
other regions that results in higher reward anticipation for the decision to punish
unfair behavior. Such an interpretation, however, would require that individuals
have internalized contingencies between norm-enforcing behavior and social
rewards, with COMT Met allele carriers being more susceptible to social signals of
reward and, thus, more likely to adapt their behavior to attain such rewards (see
Strobel et al. 2011).
   While in our report, we regarded this ﬁnding as a ﬁrst empirical support for the
gene-culture coevolution assumption (which could be viewed as being further
substantiated by the fact that the COMT Met allele appears to be a comparably
recent variant unique to humans; Palmatier et al. 1999), several caveats need to be
considered. First, our sample was comparably small (twenty-four subjects), and
224                                                                           A. Strobel

second, generalization of this effect on other forms of prosocial behavior is not
readily possible given conflicting evidence from a study by Reuter et al. (2011) who
observed COMT Met/Met genotype carriers to be less likely for charitable donation
of money in an experimental setting. While this apparent discrepancy could be
explained by different experimental settings, different internalized social norms for
costly punishment of unfair behavior versus costly giving to a charity, and/or
different expectations of personal or social rewards associated with the respective
behaviors, further work is needed to resolve this discrepancy.
    However, both these studies demonstrate a critical role of genetic variation in
dopamine function in prosocial behavior, a role that is further substantiated by
another study from our group: We observed carriers of a variant of the dopamine
D4 receptor gene exon III polymorphism, which has been associated with
impulsivity-related personality traits and behavioral tendencies (Ebstein et al. 1996;
Kluger et al. 2002; Swanson et al. 2000), to report less altruistic behavior on the
Altruism scale of the NEO-PI-R (Anacker et al. 2012).
    Taken together, evidence on neuromodulatory influences on altruism/altruistic
punishment is scarce and partly inconsistent, but nevertheless suggests that neu-
romodulators such as serotonin and dopamine play a prominent role in altruistic
punishment. Yet, their exact roles in different contexts remain to be elucidated.



12.11     Conclusions and Further Directions

Taken together, the evidence reviewed in this chapter underscores the role of brain
regions implicated in both cognitive processes, most likely such involving the
inhibition of prepotent responses (Knoch et al. 2006, 2008, 2010) and affective
processes in altruistic punishment (Koenigs and Tranel 2007). Negative emotional
states such as anger (Sanfey et al. 2003; see also Seip et al. 2009), the expectation of
satisfaction by revenge (de Quervain et al. 2004; Strobel et al. 2011), and, thus,
spiteful motives (Jensen 2010) may drive altruistic punishment just as may group
membership (Baumgartner et al. 2012). Other factors may influence altruistic pun-
ishment as well such as ‘physical’ factors like the size of societies (Marlowe and
Berberesque 2008) or egalitarian motives even in the absence of cooperation to be
reinforced (Dawes et al. 2007), but so far have not been examined neuroscientiﬁcally.
    The mentioned cognitive-affective processes are likely preceded by a compu-
tation of a violation of a personal or societal norm, which to some extent can be
captured by the magnitude of the FRN as a neural signature of a deviation from
one’s expectations (Hewig et al. 2011). A perceived norm violation then can trigger
prepotent negative emotional responses to unfairness that under conditions of
reduced inhibition of these prepotent responses can outweigh economic consider-
ations. Such reduced inhibition may stem from increased impulsive responding,
which may be due to altered serotonin activity as shown by Crockett et al. (2010),
but could also be assumed to be linked to stress, as it was recently shown that acute
psychosocial stress increased various prosocial behaviors (von Dawans et al. 2012),
12   Altruistic Punishment                                                                  225

or to stable personality characteristics. They, in turn, might be partly genetically
modulated, as might be the sensitivity to social signals of reward as speculated in
the context of the study by Strobel et al. (2011) who observed an association of the
COMT Val158Met polymorphism with nucleus accumbens activity during altruistic
punishment. Thus, genetic variation in the function of neurotransmitters and neu-
romodulators might have a twofold impact on altruistic punishment: ﬁrst, with
regard to the acquisition and internalization of norms and the formation of prepotent
responses when norms are violated, and second, with regard to the trait- or state-like
propensity to inhibit or disinhibit such prepotent responses. Especially the latter
issues are expected to attract attention in future studies.
   Discerning readers will have noticed that in the present summary, terms like
“may” or “might” are used quite often, as are phrases like “this points to” or “this
suggests”—and, indeed, they were chosen intently: Neuroimaging and other neu-
roscientiﬁc techniques provide a valuable means for the study of the brain processes
and neural mechanisms underlying altruistic behavior—but, itself, they cannot
inform about the motives driving such behavior. The activity of some brain region
or even a brain network during altruistic punishment can only suggest or point to
such motives: If activity in a brain region X previously activated during reward
expectation is also observed during altruistic punishment, one cannot readily
deduce that altruistic punishment has to do with reward expectation (unless reward
expectation is the only process that has been associated with the activity in X—
which for a “multi-purpose device” such as our brain and for a complex
cognitive-affective process such as reward processing is quite unlikely). One can
only state that, because region X has also been implicated in reward processing, it
cannot be ruled out that the activity in X during altruistic punishment might be
suggestive of a role of reward expectation during altruistic punishment.
   Researchers using neuroimaging and other neuroscientiﬁc approaches always
need to be aware of the danger of such so-called “reverse inferences” (Poldrack
2006)—i.e., to infer a cognitive process underlying a given task from the activation
of some brain region during that task, unless it is highly speciﬁc—but also of its
potential use: to generate new hypotheses; and to adequately test these hypotheses,
one cannot rely on elaborate neuroscientiﬁc tools alone, but need to employ carefully
designed experimental paradigms, which rule out alternative explanations. Thus, the
studies reviewed in this chapter have only begun to scratch at the surface of the
complex phenomenon of altruistic punishment—yet, while its driving forces still
remain to be elucidated, they have provided important clues and directions for future
research.


References

Anacker K, Enge S, Reif A, Lesch K-P, Strobel A (2012) Dopamine D4 receptor gene variation
   impacts self-reported altruism. Mol Psychiatry (Epub ahead of print, 08.05.2012)
Aron AR, Robbins TW, Poldrack RA (2004) Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex. Trends
   Cogn Sci 8:170–177
226                                                                                   A. Strobel

Baumgartner T, Götte L, Gügler R, Fehr E (2012) The mentalizing network orchestrates the impact
   of parochial altruism on social norm enforcement. Hum Brain Mapp 33:1452–1469
Bechara A, Damasio H, Damasio AR (2000) Emotion, decision making, and the orbitofrontal
   cortex. Cereb Cortex 10:295–307
Bowles S, Gintis H (2004) The evolution of strong reciprocity: cooperation in heterogeneous
   populations. Theor Popul Biol 65:17–28
Boyd R, Gintis H, Bowles S, Richerson PJ (2003) The evolution of altruistic punishment. Proc
   Natl Acad Sci USA 100:3531–3535
Chen J, Lipska BK, Halim N, Ma QD, Matsumoto M, Melhem S, Kolachana BS, Hyde TM,
   Herman MM, Apud J, Egan MF, Kleinman JE, Weinberger DR (2004) Functional analysis of
   genetic variation in COMT: effects on mRNA, protein, and enzyme activity in postmortem
   human brain. Am J Hum Genet 75:807–821
Costa PT, McCrae RR (1992) Revised NEO personality inventory (NEO PI-R) and NEO ﬁve
   factor inventory. Psychol Assess Resour, Odessa
Crockett MJ, Clark L, Lieberman MD, Tabibnia G, Robbins TW (2010) Impulsive choice and
   altruistic punishment are correlated and increase in tandem with serotonin depletion. Emotion
   10:855–862
Dawes CT, Fowler JH, Johnson T, McElreath R, Smirnov O (2007) Egalitarian motives in
   humans. Nature 446:794–796
de Quervain DJ, Fischbacher U, Treyer V, Schellhammer M, Schnyder U, Buck A, Fehr E (2004)
   The neural basis of altruistic punishment. Science 305:1254–1258
Delgado MR, Locke HM, Stenger VA, Fiez JA (2003) Dorsal striatum responses to reward and
   punishment: effects of valence and magnitude manipulations. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 3:
   27–38
Dreher J-C, Kohn P, Kolachana B, Weinberger DR, Berman KF (2009) Variation in dopamine
   genes influences responsivity of the human reward system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:
   617–622
Ebstein RP, Novick O, Umansky R, Priel B, Osher Y, Blaine D, Bennett ER, Nemanov L, Katz M,
   Belmaker RH (1996) Dopamin D4 receptor (D4DR) exon III polymorphism associated with
   the personality trait of Novelty Seeking. Nat Genet 12:78–80
Fehr E, Fischbacher U (2003) The nature of human altruism. Nature 425:785–791
Fehr E, Fischbacher U (2004) Third-party punishment and social norms. Evol Hum Behav 25:
   63–87
Fehr E, Gächter S (2002) Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature 415:137–140
Gintis H (2003) The hitchhiker’s guide to altruism: gene-culture coevolution, and the
   internalization of norms. J Theor Biol 220:407–418
Guala F (2012) Reciprocity: weak or strong? What punishment experiments do (and do not)
   demonstrate. Behav Brain Sci 35:1–15
Henrich J, McElreath R, Barr A, Ensminger J, Barrett C, Bolyanatz A, Cardenas JC, Gurven M,
   Gwako E, Henrich N, Lesorogol C, Marlowe F, Tracer D, Ziker J (2006) Costly punishment
   across human societies. Science 312:1767–1770
Herrmann B, Thöni C, Gächter S (2008) Antisocial punishment across societies. Science
   319:1362–1367
Hewig J, Kretschmer N, Trippe RH, Hecht H, Coles MG, Holroyd CB, Miltner WH (2011) Why
   humans deviate from rational choice. Psychophysiology 48:507–514
Holroyd CB, Coles MGH (2002) The neural basis of human error processing: reinforcement
   learning, dopamine, and the error-related negativity. Psychol Rev 109:679–709
Jensen K (2010) Punishment and spite, the dark side of cooperation. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci
   365:2635–2650
Kluger AN, Siegfried Z, Ebstein RP (2002) A meta-analysis of the association between DRD4
   polymorphism and novelty seeking. Mol Psychiatry 7:712–717
Knoch D, Pascual-Leone A, Meyer K, Treyer V, Fehr E (2006) Diminishing reciprocal fairness by
   disrupting the right prefrontal cortex. Science 314:829–832
12   Altruistic Punishment                                                                     227

Knoch D, Nitsche MA, Fischbacher U, Eisenegger C, Pascual-Leone A, Fehr E (2008) Studying
    the neurobiology of social interaction with transcranial direct current stimulation–the example
    of punishing unfairness. Cereb Cortex 18:1987–1990
Knoch D, Gianotti LR, Baumgartner T, Fehr E (2010) A neural marker of costly punishment
    behavior. Psychol Sci 21:337–342
Koenigs M, Tranel D (2007) Irrational economic decision-making after ventromedial prefrontal
    damage: evidence from the Ultimatum Game. J Neurosci 27:951–956
Lachman HM, Papolos DF, Saito T, Yu YM, Szumlanski CL, Weinshilboum RM (1996) Human
    catechol-O-methyltransferase pharmacogenetics: description of a functional polymorphism and
    its potential application to neuropsychiatric disorders. Pharmacogenetics 6:243–250
Marlowe FW, Berbesque JC (2008) More ‘altruistic’ punishment in larger societies. Proc R Soc B
    Biol Sci 275:587–590
Mier D, Kirsch P, Meyer-Lindenberg A (2010) Neural substrates of pleiotropic action of genetic
    variation in COMT: a meta-analysis. Mol Psychiatry 15:918–927
Montague PR, Lohrenz T (2007) To detect and correct: norm violations and their enforcement.
    Neuron 56:14–18
Ohtsuki H, Iwasa Y, Nowak MA (2009) Indirect reciprocity provides a narrow margin of
    efﬁciency for costly punishment. Nature 457:79–82
Palmatier MA, Kang AM, Kidd KK (1999) Global variation in the frequencies of functionally
    different catechol-O-methyltransferase alleles. Biol Psychiatry 46:557–567
Poldrack RA (2006) Can cognitive processes be inferred from neuroimaging data? Trends Cogn
    Sci 10:59–63
Reuter M, Frenzel C, Walter NT, Markett S, Montag C (2011) Investigating the genetic basis of
    altruism: the role of the COMT Val158Met polymorphism. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 6:
    662–668
Robbins TW, Everitt BJ (1996) Neurobehavioural mechanisms of reward and motivation. Curr
    Opin Neurobiol 6:228–236
Sanfey AG, Rilling JK, Aronson JA, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD (2003) The neural basis of economic
    decision-making in the ultimatum game. Science 300:1755–1758
Schultz W (1998) Predictive reward signal of dopamine neurons. J Neurophysiol 80:1–27
Seip EC, van Dijk WW, Rotteveel M (2009) On hotheads and dirty harries: the primacy of anger in
    altruistic punishment. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1167:190–196
Singer T, Critchley HD, Preuschoff K (2009) A common role of insula in feelings, empathy and
    uncertainty. Trends Cogn Sci 13:334–340
Sober E, Wilson DS (1998) Unto others: the evolution and psychology of unselﬁsh behavior.
    Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Strobel A, Zimmermann J, Schmitz A, Reuter M, Lis S, Windmann S, Kirsch P (2011) Beyond
    revenge: neural and genetic bases of altruistic punishment. NeuroImage 54:671–680
Swanson JM, Flodman P, Kennedy J, Spence MA, Moyzis R, Schuck S, Murias M, Moriarity J,
    Barr C, Smith M, Posner M (2000) Dopamine genes and ADHD. Neurosci Biobehav Rev
    24:21–25
von Dawans B, Fischbacher U, Kirschbaum C, Fehr E, Heinrichs M (2012) The social dimension
    of stress reactivity: acute stress increases prosocial behavior in humans. Psychol Sci 23:
    651–660
                         Part V
Translational and Developmental
 Approaches to Neuroeconomics
