Chapter 13
Brain SEEKING Circuitry
in Neuroeconomics: A Unifying Hypothesis
for the Role of Dopamine-Energized
Arousal of the Medial Forebrain Bundle
in Enthusiasm-Guiding Decision-Making

Jaak Panksepp and Cristina G. Wilson


Abstract Affective shifts are critical factors in our decision-making with respect to
all our survival concerns, including high cognitive ones such as those related to our
economic investments and divestments. A critical emotional system, not commonly
considered in neuroeconomics, is our primary process subcortical SEEKING sys-
tem that regulates our exploratory-investigatory urges, including the eager antici-
pations of our higher mental processes. In economic decision-making, our
SEEKING urge motivates us to consider the diverse opportunities and risks that are
inherent in life-supportive decision-making. This state of mind, at normal levels of
activity, energizes focus on cognitive details that can promote opportunities for
success as well as avoid costly mistakes. However, excessive activity in this system
may also promote faulty (addictive?) decision-making that is common in gambling,
when hopes outweigh consideration of risks (as might be mediated by the cognitive
representatives of FEAR and PANIC system). It is well known that all drug
addictions are mediated by the feelings of euphoria that the SEEKING system can
promote. Clearly, the ancient emotional systems of the brain need to be considered
as motivators of neuroeconomic decisions, but they also need to be understood as
primal motivations which need to be disciplined by higher decision-making
capacities that emerge developmentally as a function of the losses and gains that
have resulted from the vicissitudes of living in at times predictable but also
unpredictable social (and physical) worlds. Without developmentally emergent
cognitive discipline, the SEEKING system can promote delusional thinking.




J. Panksepp (&)
Department of Integrative Physiology and Neuroscience, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Washington State University, PO Box 647620, Pullman, WA 99164-762, USA
e-mail: jpanksepp@vetmed.wsu.edu
C.G. Wilson
Department of Psychology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-7300, USA

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                                 231
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_13
232                                                       J. Panksepp and C.G. Wilson

As the Victorian Scottish philosopher and satirical writer Thomas Carlyle viewed it,
economics was the “dismal science”—largely amounting to the flow of goods and
money in highly competitive marketplaces, bringing both misery and riches, to
those whose insights were deﬁcient or insightful, respectively. During the past
dozen years, the dismal social science of ‘supply and demand’ has been brightened
considerably in the light of human, as well as cross-species neuroscience: we can
now envision how economic decisions are crafted by both affective hopes and
cognitive calculations of the brain’s mind. However, there are many societal pat-
terns that are still better fathomed by the flow of money as assessed by statistical
(non-experienced) electronic computations rather than the software of the experi-
enced mind, whether affective or cognitive. In the current chapter we argue that the
perennial critical affective states of mind remain the intermediary brain
decision-making processes, many shared by all mammals that we discuss here. We
will largely focus on what has traditionally been called “the brain reward system,”
even though anyone paying attention should know that this system does not
mediate sensory pleasures, but rather, the appetitive foraging, arising from a very
precious brain system—the Medial Forebrain Bundle (that we call the SEEKING
System) that allow us to pursue pleasures and satisfactions (including avoidance of
negative events/states) with a joyful attitude that is full of enthusiasm.
    Thereby, we will also focus heavily on the affective state-control contributions
in decision-making, for that is where even the cross-species animal work provides
considerable illumination. We will not consider the many cognitive “computa-
tions” that go into the making of life-supportive choices, but simply make the
case that without the affective underpinnings, arising from lower (primary pro-
cesses) of the brain, the cognitive ‘‘computations’’ would have no values to guide
them. Our position will be evolutionary—namely, that individual economic
decision-making could not operate without the enthusiasms, hopes, and wishes of
the various evolutionary ‘‘layers’’ of the brain (Figs. 13.1, 13.2 and 13.3). We
will designate the most fundamental substrates as being “primary” since they are
constituted of various evolved emotional systems within our brains, that not only
engender various affective states, but concurrently generate various states of
action readiness. Thus, the mentally experienced aspects of primary process
emotions mediate not only various affective states, but they are action oriented:
Both features code for basic survival issues: all ‘‘good’’ feelings (“desirable”
states-of-being at higher mental levels) predict that individuals are on survival
trajectories, while all ‘‘bad’’ feelings (to be avoided) predict that one may be on
the down-hill course of destruction (Panksepp 1982, 1998). Of course these
simple minded, but all-important, feeling states need to guide learning and
memory—namely, the deeply unconscious secondary processes (Solms and
Panksepp 2012) that distribute feelings not only in external space and time (based
on past experiences in the world), but also provide the raw materials for thinking.
The tertiary processes of the brain, concentrated in thought-promoting neocortical
reaches of the mind, is where higher, cognitive decision-making is ﬁnalized, after
weighting the pros and cons for one’s own interests and thriving.
13   Brain SEEKING Circuitry in Neuroeconomics …                                           233




Fig. 13.1 A drawing of the Medial Forebrain Bundle (MFB), illustrating the main trajectory of
the SEEKING system (classically referred to as “the brain reward system”). It runs up from the
midbrain, through the lateral hypothalamus (LH), into more rostral neural regions. Other neural
regions pictured: optic chiasm (Ch), olfactory bulbs (O.B.), olfactory peduncle (O.P.),
paraolfactory area (P.A.), olfactory tract (O.T.), diagonal band of Broca (D.B.), anterior
commissure (A), pituitary gland/the hypophysis (Hyp.), and mammillary bodies (M). (Figure from
LeGros Clark et al. 1938)


    While it is obvious that most human economic decision-making is heavily a
neocortical thinking-related affair, we would be sorely mistaken to neglect the
primary process affective (valuative) foundations upon which our higher
decision-making processes were constructed in brain-evolution and individual
development. Indeed, there are several conceptual kinds of intrinsic value systems.
Some are homeostatically based, such as the basic consummatory mechanisms of
HUNGER and THIRST, not to mention the many other intrinsic bodily needs such
as thermoregulatory values (Cabanac 1992) and various other bodily survival states.
Other affective value systems are sensorially based, such as the wonderful smells
and tastes of the culinary world that still guide our post-modern “foraging” patterns
in diverse food establishments, whether cafes, markets, or fancy restaurants. Yet,
the category of affects that has the widest purview in everyday economic
decision-making is the emotional values—the evolutionarily constructed, intrinsic
needs of the brain itself that we will primarily focus on here.
    If one had to select a single emotional system from the seven outlined by
cross-species affective neuroscience research (Panksepp 1998)—namely
SEEKING, RAGE, FEAR, LUST, CARE, PANIC and PLAY—that is more
important for human decision-making than any other, it would surely be SEEKING.
(Please note, capitalizations are used as a formal nomenclature convention for
labeling “primary-process” psychobehavioral emotional/motivational systems of
the brain). The SEEKING network is a general-purpose appetitive system that many
of the other emotions and affects utilize, and it is the only one, if damaged severely,
that compromises life itself for it depletes foraging/enthusiasm resources. This
system courses through the Medial Forebrain Bundle (MFB, see Fig. 13.1 for
original depiction) which was only recently visualized in humans with modern
diffusion tensor imaging (Coenen, et al. 2012)—for overall summary of major
connectivities see Fig. 13.2. When the MFB is damaged bilaterally it leads to an
234                                                                J. Panksepp and C.G. Wilson




Fig. 13.2 Diagrams showing different aspects of the SEEKING system in the rat brain. a Shows
ascending projections from the midbrain Ventral Tegmental Area (VTA) a10 dopamine neurons
that innervate the nucleus accumebs (NAS) and prefrontal cortex (PFC) among other regions.
b Efferents (descending) of the nucleus accumbens, mostly GABAergic. c The major afferent
projections to the NAS. d Afferent projections to the VTA. Other abbreviations: Amygdala
(AMY), bed nucleus of stria terminalis (BST), caudate-putamen (C), corpus callosum (CC),
diagonal band of Broca (DB), dentate nucleus (DN), dorsal raphe (DR), entopeduncular nucleus
(ET), frontal cortex (FC), hippocampus (HC), inferior colliculus (IC), lateral hypothalamus (LH),
lateral preoptic area (LPO), mesopontine reticular nuclei (MPR), olfactory bulb (OB), periaque-
ductal gray (PAG), prefrontal cortex (PFC), parabrachial nucleus (PN), superior colliculus (SC),
substantia innominate (SI), substantia nigra (SN), thalamus (TH), ventral pallidum (VP).
(Figure from Ikemoto and Panksepp 1999)


amotivational organism that is no longer capable of fending for itself, and will die
without nursing (Teitelbaum and Epstein 1962). It is small wonder that this system
has been implicated in the burgeoning ﬁeld of neuroeconomics (e.g., Knutson and
Greer 2008; Glimcher 2011a, b), but not enough effort has been devoted to make
clear that this general purpose emotional-motivational system, which encourages
animals to explore and forage in their environments for all things needed for
survival, has a much broader scope than neuroeconomics, and it certainly is poorly
conceptualized as “the brain reward system” (the traditional historical label, that
still lingers, despite its narrow-mindedness). In fact there are many rewarding
systems in the brain, and the general-purpose SEEKING urge (for an extensive
historical discussion, see Panksepp 1981) does not mediate sensory pleasure, but
more likely feelings of “enthusiasm”—an essential psychological ingredient in
getting what you want (which of course already reflects the transition from a
primary aspect of mind to related higher mental processes).
    Beside recognizing the above conceptual naming error, carried forward to this
day (e.g., Haber and Knutson 2009), we must initially consider, in any disciplined
discourse, that the brain (and the mind) is an evolutionarily layered organ, with at
13   Brain SEEKING Circuitry in Neuroeconomics …                                             235




Fig. 13.3 Nested hierarchies of psychobehavioral control within the brain—a synopsis of the
hierarchical bottom–up (right) and top–down (left) circular control that reflect evolutionary and
developmental control in all primal brain emotional system. In order for higher Mind-Brain
functions (such as neuroeconomic decision-making) to mature they initially have to be integrated
with the lower affective Brain-Mind functions. Primary processes are depicted as squares
(SEEKING level), secondary-process learning as circles (Berridge’s “wanting” level of analysis),
and tertiary processes (Schultz’s “reward prediction level of analysis,”) by rectangles. This
schematic summarizes how bottom–up evolution of nested-hierarchies can integrate lower brain
functions with higher brain functions, so as to eventually exert top–down regulatory control.
Bottom–up controls prevail in early-infancy and early childhood development. Top–down control
emerges as individuals approach adulthood


least three global progressions which, if not kept semantically clear, will lead to
abundant communicative confusions. Indeed, as soon as one understands the
conceptual problems with the classic hand-me-down concept of “the brain reward
system” one is hard put not to consider alternative terminologies that can be
deployed without psychological confusion, which respect not only behavioral brain
functions but tightly related psychological phenomenologies as well. Although our
goal is to discuss how this MFB-based brain network participates in human
decision-making, especially in the economic realm, we must ﬁrst deal with per-
sistent conceptual issues that need to be addressed when we study of evolutionarily
layered brain-mind processes.
    For didactic convenience, we divide the brain and mind into three evolutionary
layers of organization, as has been common in the history of neuroscience; for
example Paul MacLean’s (1990) “Triune Brain” view, commonly detested by
behavioristic reductionists, but defended by those interested in the mind (Panksepp
236                                                        J. Panksepp and C.G. Wilson

1998, 2002, 2011a, b), who believe that a nuanced neuromechanistic understanding
of brain emotional functions is essential for clarity at the neuropsychological level.
Continuing in this vein, the “solution” advanced here is to ﬁrst consider the primary
process function of the MFB-based “behavioral-foraging to cognitive-expectancy
system” (Fig. 13.1, recently envisioned in humans Coenen et al. 2011, 2012),
which is here labeled formally, and we believe conceptually correctly, as the
SEEKING system. The SEEKING system operates at an unconditional instinctual
level to promote survival in the sense of providing a general-purpose urge to
explore, investigate, and pursue all types of pleasurable rewards and avoid various
negative affects that index fundamental survival issues. Another more recently
suggested view is Berridge’s (1996) ‘wanting’ system, which is very synergistic
with the above concept, but perhaps not an appropriate label for the unconditional
emotional-psychobehavioral, primary-process level of analysis, since it implies a
learned appetitive-directedness toward speciﬁc items in the world. ‘Wanting’ is an
excellent secondary- or even tertiary-process concept, reflecting psychological
process aroused once animals have learned what objects in the world satisfy their
needs, where the forward-directed enthusiasm was initially and unconditionally
aroused by the SEEKING system. For a conceptual diagram explaining these levels
of control, see Fig. 13.3.
    Of course in neuroeconomics, where most consider human higher
decision-making processes, investigators typically concern themselves with
tertiary-process functions of the brain, a topic that has been superbly taken up by
Rolls (2014) in his recent monograph on “Emotions and Decision-Making.” The
great interest in cognitive neuroscience, is to focus on such higher brain functions
through human brain imaging, and clearly such higher order tertiary processes,
cannot be easily studied in animals. Still, excellent neurophysiologists such as
Wolfram Schulz, who pursued single-unit studies of ventral tegmental dopamine
neurons—one of the headwaters of the SEEKING system (without acknowledging
such a system)—found how robustly DA neurons responded to the anticipation of
cue-predicted rewards, and how they diminished in activity when rewards were
withheld, namely, what would traditionally be called a ‘‘frustration response.’’ After
being educated in psychologically relevant brain functions by an esteemed
learning-oriented experimental psychologist, Tony Dickinson of Cambridge
University, Schulz conceptualized this frustration-disappointment response of the
ascending DA-pathways in computation terms, namely as a “reward prediction error”
signal. That concept rapidly became a meme among computationally oriented
scholars interested in higher order decision-making processes, who chose not to
consider affective shifts in decision-making. In any event, those higher processes,
highly dependent on what should be considered secondary processes (i.e., learning
and memory) arise from diverse prior life experiences, which are constituted of
various unconditional ‘‘rewarding’’ and ‘‘punishing’’ states of the nervous system
(i.e., confrontation with various world events that generated primal internal ‘‘val-
ues’’, or affective states). The memory of those experiences, and related world out-
comes prompt the SEEKING system to continue to pursue speciﬁc paths, because
there are memories of past pleasurable or satisfying experiences that have already
13   Brain SEEKING Circuitry in Neuroeconomics …                                  237

guided the appetitive learning of behavior patterns. Tangentially, from a practical
human sociological point of view, this way of thinking supports our recommendation
that teachers need to keep linking new learning to prior knowledge in ways that
sustain enthusiasm, the key affect of the SEEKING system. Not only does the
emerging cognitive sophistication reflect mental maturation, but it highlights how the
brain comes to be an enthusiastic decision-making machine in the marketplace (aka,
neuroeconomics). Thus, let us briefly consider the mechanisms of decision-making.



13.1     Economic and Other Decision-Making

Decision-making, though complex and varied, maintains a general input
choice-feedback structure (Ernst and Paulus 2005). Input refers to the gathering and
assessment of relevant decision information that assists in the formation of pref-
erences. Choice refers to the behavior carried out and the anticipation of conse-
quences; and feedback is the experience and appraisal of the consequences of the
behavior. Cold (reflective) and hot (intuitive) processes differentially contribute to
choice during each decision phase. Cold processes are typically slow, conscious,
and rule governed, while hot processes are fast, automatic and associative.
A distinction between hot and cold processes in judgment and decision making has
been made by many scholars (e.g., Kahneman 2002; Slovic et al. 2005; Stanovich
and West 2000), and there are different hypotheses as to how hot and cold influ-
ences interact (for a review see Evans and Stanovich 2013). For the purposes of
this chapter we will simply assume that both hot and cold processes play important
and neccessary roles in decision making, and avoid speciﬁc claims about how
processes interact. During the input stage, emotionally salient information forms
unreflective, but affectively driven choice preferences (hot), which with the emer-
gence of higher cognitive episodic and prospective memories, can promote choice
options that are consciously reasoned through (cold). Thus, during the choice stage
there are bound to also be phenomenally conscious feelings of
anticipation/motivation (hot), which can lead to cognitively driven choices (i.e.,
cold decisions). During the feedback stage, hot and cold processing are both used to
integrate new information into existing knowledge/expectation structures.
Historically, hot processes have been characterized as an impediment to rational
choice behavior. The literature on judgement and decision making has primarily
focused on hot processing as the source of decision bias (e.g., Kahneman and
Frederick 2007), and there is substantial evidence that reliance on hot, intuitive
influences can lead to sub-optimal choice. The view that emotion is an impediment
to decision-making has also been perpetuated in popular culture: in Star Trek, for
example, the Vulcan species is portrayed as logically superior to humans because of
their ability to control and minimize emotional influences. However, modern
neuroimaging studies provide strong evidence that affective processing in emo-
tional integration (orbitofrontal cortex, amygdala), bodily arousal (anterior cingu-
late cortex), and anticipation/motivation substrates (ventral striatum—nucleus
238                                                      J. Panksepp and C.G. Wilson

accumbens) can lead to more efﬁcient and effective navigation of the decision
environment (Levine 2009; Minati et al. 2012; Platt and Huettel 2008). Despite this
evidence, few neural models of decision-making exist that incorporate affective
substrates (Levine 2009), and little effort has been made to integrate them with
existing animal models of basic emotional systems.
   Our goal here is to frame our existing neuroscientiﬁc knowledge of
decision-making within primary process emotion research, speciﬁcally the
SEEKING system (Panksepp 1998; Panksepp and Biven 2012). To do so, we will
ﬁrst provide some more detailed background on the SEEKING system, focusing on
the role of the nucleus accumbens since this substrate is important in the
decision-making process. Then, building on this information, we will discuss the
converging lines of evidence that support the role of the SEEKING system in each
stage (input, choice, feedback) of decision-making: namely, enhanced activation of
the nucleus accumbens to salient stimuli during input, delineation in activation
between motivation and consumption during choice, and activation resulting in
incentive learning during feedback. Finally, we will discuss the interaction of
SEEKING and decision-making in the pathology of addiction.



13.2    The SEEKING System

The SEEKING system, also known as the brain reward system, was originally
discovered by Olds and Milner (1954). In their seminal study, Olds and Milner
(1954) found that rats would continuously press a lever that applied electrical
stimulation to the septal area of the brain and the nearby nucleus accumbens. Since
the stimulation was all that was needed to reinforce behavior, and reinforcement
was equivalent to when natural rewards (e.g., food) were used, they concluded that
these brain areas must process reward. An explosion of follow-up research has
supported the role of these brain areas, especially the nucleus accumbens, in
reward-related functions and dopamine appears to be the primary mediator of a
distinct “rewarding” state in the brain. Speciﬁcally, researchers have found that
animals will repeatedly self-administer dopamine agonists into the nucleus
accumbens (Carlezon et al. 1995; Hoebel et al. 1983; Ikemoto et al. 1997; Phillips
et al. 1994) and exhibit place preferences for environments where dopamine has
been administered into the nucleus accumbens (Carr and White 1983, 1986; White
et al. 1991). However, more recent research indicates that the dopamine-mediated
activation of the nucleus accumbens is only instrumental in the
anticipation/approach phase of reward; that is, it is necessary for the seeking of
reward, but not the consumption (Ikemoto and Panksepp 1996, 1999). This con-
clusion is supported by lesion studies which have been unable to produce consistent
deﬁcits in reward consumption via nucleus accumbens damage (Liu et al. 1998;
Sokolowski and Salamone 1998), and by participation of dopamine release within
the nucleus accumbens during aversive (nonrewarding or punishing) experiences
(Salamone 1994; Salamone et al. 1997). If the nucleus accumbens was involved in
13   Brain SEEKING Circuitry in Neuroeconomics …                                 239

reward consumption we would expect consistent, large deﬁcits in reward con-
sumption with lesioning, and zero activation during punishment. Thus, the label
“brain reward system” seems to be an inaccurate descriptor of the emotional process
mediated by nucleus accumbens dopamine (Salamone et al. 2005).
    Because of such problems and to better reflect the anticipatory nature of this
process, Panksepp (1982, 1998) relabeled this foraging substrate the SEEKING
system. Simply put, the SEEKING system motivates us to interact with our envi-
ronment and to harvest the resources needed for survival (Panksepp and Biven
2012). Since the system is purely emotional/motivational, it does not change as a
function of the behavioral goal; that is, activation of the system motivates organ-
isms to engage with their surroundings, while not being tied to a speciﬁc
reward/punishment or sensory modality, at least not until patterns of learning have
emerged. In other words, the unconditional neural activation of this system has an
enormous number of possible goal-directed manifestations after learning, including
diverse economic decision-making processes in humans (Knutson and Greer 2008).
    Anatomically, the hub of the SEEKING system is in the ventral tegmental area,
and from there it projects to three major areas: the MFB and lateral hypothalamus,
the nucleus accumbens, and the medial prefrontal cortex (Panksepp and Biven
2012). Within the nucleus accumbens, there are at least three distinct SEEKING
manifestations: (i) flexible foraging responses which, with learning, lead to
(ii) various unconscious habit responses which help program (iii) higher frontal
cortical declarative-perceptual decision-making abilities. The declarative-perception
system detects salient stimuli and can consciously contrast them with previously
experienced stimulus-event relationships via projections from the nucleus accum-
bens to frontal cortical areas. The flexible SEEKING response systems (along with
secondary and tertiary elaborations) is involved in unconditioned as well as
eventually anticipatory/investigatory behaviors, which can be used as information
for declarative-perceptual system, providing overall coherence for incentive
learning. Thus, stimuli associated with previously life-sustaining or life-impairing
events will result in higher nucleus accumbens activation leading to more energized
approach or avoidance responses that are included in routine individual economic
decision-making, but also establishing societal infectiousness within available
marketplaces, including runs on stocks. Finally, the habit response system allows
for the development and maintenance of procedural performance (i.e.,
stimulus-response learning); however, once habits/conditioning have been devel-
oped, nucleus accumbens activation may be no longer necessary for behavior
expression, with evidence from animals indicating that behavioral control often
shifts to dorsal-striatal (caudate-putamen) habitual responding. So, anticipation
brought about by SEEKING guides our immediate approach/avoidance behaviors
(flexible foraging responses), and creates/updates stimulus-event associations
(declarative-perception) to facilitate learning until behavior often become
automatic-procedural (habit response).
240                                                      J. Panksepp and C.G. Wilson


13.3    The Role of the SEEKING System in Economic
        and Related Decision-Making

Before detailing the evidence supporting the role of SEEKING in higher
decision-making, it may be useful to briefly reiterate the difference between pri-
mary, secondary, and tertiary processes: Basic emotional systems, like SEEKING,
are known as primary processes because they are evolutionarily older (subcortical)
unconditional (i.e., “instinctual”) structures that are homologous in animals
(Panksepp 2010). Primary processes are expressed as pure feelings (entailing no
necessary higher order analysis, but gradually, with learning, promoting that). For
example, SEEKING activation in non-human animals is typiﬁed by apparently
“purposeful” (i.e., coherent, intrinsically well organized) movements characterized
by intense exploration of the environment, while deep-brain stimulation activation
in humans can lead to feelings of eager, initially goalless enthusiasms and antici-
pation (Panksepp and Biven 2012) that can be sufﬁciently robust to lead to an
antidepressive tonic elevation of mood, which is accompanied by hopes for the
future (Panksepp et al. 2014; Schlaepfer et al. 2013; Wright and Panksepp 2012).
Secondary processes are those that arise from simple (conditioned) learning and
memory processes, which may be largely unconscious (Solms and Panksepp 2012).
While some stimuli are inherently rewarding or punishing to animals, most
stimulus-response relationships are learned via subcortical structures (Panksepp
2010). Finally, tertiary processes, like decision-making, are unique to animals
possessing developed cortical structures (Panksepp and Biven 2012; Rolls 2014).
   Of course, these levels of control are not independent, but highly interactive
(Fig. 13.2). Primary processes can have a role within tertiary processes; for
example, SEEKING system dopamine pathways only ascend to frontal cortical
regions in “lower” mammals, but in “higher” mammals the pathways also ascend to
sensory-perceptual cortices (Panksepp and Biven 2012). Thus, SEEKING has a role
in higher order (tertiary) processes not so explicitly evident in “lower” mammals.
Likewise, secondary processes usually have a role within tertiary processes since
learning and memory are essential for most higher order cognitive functions. In
decision-making (tertiary), learning (secondary) and SEEKING (primary) are
necessary process components at each stage of the development of complex psy-
chobehavioral processes.
   Input stage. Compared to the other stages of decision-making, the role of
SEEKING in the input stage of economic decision-making may seem to be rela-
tively minor in mature organisms; the declarative-perception subsystem detects
salient stimuli which shape cognitive preferences. Abundant evidence for such top–
down processing comes from fMRI studies in humans (Hamman et al. 2004;
Knutson et al. 2001a, b; Knutson et al. 2005; Zink et al. 2004). However, bottom–
up regulation is still present, especially in the presence of unconditionally com-
pelling stimuli. For instance, Hamman et al. (2004) found that nucleus accumbens
activation was maximized in men and women when anticipating viewing sexual
(salient) versus nonsexual interactions. Zink et al. (2004) extended this ﬁnding to
13   Brain SEEKING Circuitry in Neuroeconomics …                                   241

monetary rewards showing that anticipation of salient (response-dependent) options
elicited higher nucleus accumbens activation than anticipation of minimally salient
(response-independent) options. The salience manipulation was conﬁrmed via
self-report and skin conductance response measurement: response-dependent
options were reported to be more arousing and pleasurable, and elicited higher
skin conductance responses than response-independent options. Similarly, Knutson
et al. (2001a, b, 2005) found that activation of the nucleus accumbens during a
monetary incentive delay task increased as a function of anticipation of reward
magnitude. Activation was highest when anticipating large-magnitude gains and
losses and was independent of option probability (Knutson et al. 2005). The
declarative-perception SEEKING subsystem connects salient stimuli with previous
experiences via neural projections to frontal cortices; thus, we would expect
accompanying activation of these structures during stimuli detection. Of the
aforementioned studies, only Zink et al. (2004) and Knutson et al. (2005) reported
on the activation of cortical structures. Both found signiﬁcant complementary
activation of the orbitofrontal, dorsolateral prefrontal, and anterior cingulate cor-
tices during detection of salient stimuli. These areas will be important to our later
discussion of incentive learning during the feedback stage of decision-making.
    Choice stage. What human brain imaging suggests is that the SEEKING system
continues to play a substantial role even during the cognitively mediated choice
stage of decision-making. Since the flexible SEEKING response subsystem initiates
primary-process appetitive motivation/anticipation, it sustains its role even as
higher order cognitive systems come into play. A large body of research supports
differential neural activation of anticipation, and consumption during
decision-making; with anticipation being primarily mediated by nucleus accumbens
activity (Bjork et al. 2004; Knutson et al. 2001a, b; Schultz et al. 1993). In a series
of human fMRI studies, Knutson et al. (2001a, b) demonstrated dissociations in
neural activation during anticipation and consumption using a monetary incentive
delay task; anticipation was correlated with nucleus accumbens activity while
“consumption” was correlated with ventromedial frontal cortex activity. Using a
similar procedure on both adolescents and adults, Bjork et al. (2004) also found
activation of the nucleus accumbens during anticipation of monetary choice,
regardless of age; although consumption was associated with medial prefrontal
cortex activation. These results are consistent with electrophysiological ﬁndings in
primates. Using monkeys trained on a delayed stimulus-response task, Schultz et al.
(1993) found that dopamine projections from the ventral tegmental area to the
nucleus accumbens were selectively activated during stimulus (juice) anticipation.
Note that this is the exact anatomical projection of the SEEKING system described
earlier, providing strong evidence for its role in decision-making.
    Further evidence is provided by research detailing SEEKING during choice
across different reward modalities. Since the SEEKING system is not modality
speciﬁc, nucleus accumbens activation should be present in all reward types.
Research using monetary rewards (Bjork et al. 2004; Knutson et al. 2001a, b) has
already been discussed in detail, but utilization of other abstract rewards has pro-
duced analogous activation (Aharon et al. 2001; Azim et al. 2005). Nucleus
242                                                        J. Panksepp and C.G. Wilson

accumbens activation was produced by Aharon et al. (2001) in anticipation of
attractive faces, and by Azim et al. (2005) in anticipation of humorous stimuli.
Studies using primary rewards in decision-making (as in Schultz et al. 1993) have
also reported anticipatory nucleus accumbens activation (Berns et al. 2001;
Gottfried et al. 2003; McClure et al. 2003; O’Doherty et al. 2002, 2004). Nucleus
accumbens activation in humans was produced by Gottfried et al. (2003) in
anticipation of pleasant olfaction, and by Berns et al. (2001), McCluree et al.
(2003), and O’Doherty et al. (2002, 2004) in anticipation of juice. O’Doherty et al.
(2004) also found that activation was produced regardless of task difﬁculty; that is,
activation was the same during anticipation of passive and active choice. This result
contrasts research by Salamone et al. (2005) and Salamone et al. (2007) which
provided evidence for dopamine-mediated nucleus accumbens activation in rats
during effortful (active) choice, but not passive choice. Conflict between these
results may be a product of anatomical SEEKING differences between “lower” and
“higher” mammals, as previously discussed; however, more research is needed to
conﬁrm the role of active versus passive choice on SEEKING anticipation.
    There is also conflicting evidence for valence dissociation in anticipation of
choice (Knutson and Cooper 2005). Since the SEEKING system is goalless,
nucleus accumbens activation should be present in reward approach and punish-
ment avoidance. Yet, while some research indicates no difference in neural acti-
vation between anticipation of reward and punishment (Rogers et al. 2004), other
research suggests that the nucleus accumbens is only activated in anticipation of
reward (Knutson et al. 2001a). Seymour et al. (2007) proposed a unifying inter-
pretation of these conflicting results; namely, trial-by-trial fMRI analysis is not
sophisticated enough to detect nucleus accumbens activation during anticipation of
punishment. Using a temporal difference learning model, Seymour et al. (2007)
found that anticipation of both reward and punishment are processed in the ventral
striatum (housing the nucleus accumbens), but reward is processed in the anterior
portion and punishment in the posterior portion. This anterior–posterior gradient
interpretation supports recent ﬁndings in rat research. A series of studies by
Reynolds and Berridge (2001, 2002, 2003) demonstrate that artiﬁcial excitation of
anterior and posterior portions of the ventral striatum produces appetitive (i.e.,
feeding) and aversive (i.e., paw treading, burying) anticipatory behaviors, respec-
tively. Presumably such differences should be evident also in human economic
choices, reflecting wins and losses in the marketplace.
    Finally, with regard to anticipatory choice, there is some debate over whether
nucleus accumbens activation can be alternatively explained by motor demands. As
previously mentioned, Zink et al. (2004) found greater activation of the nucleus
accumbens during motor response-dependent (salient) input versus motor
response-independent (passive) input; a ﬁnding that could be interpreted as the
result of motor demands during anticipation of response-dependent choices
(Knutson and Cooper 2005). However, other research shows that nucleus accum-
bens activation is still maintained in anticipatory choice during low-demand motor
tasks (Ernst et al. 2004; Ramnani et al. 2004). Using a passive monetary task,
Ramnari et al. (2004) found that anticipation of reward resulted in nucleus
13   Brain SEEKING Circuitry in Neuroeconomics …                                   243

accumbens activation while passive experience of reward activated the medial
prefrontal cortex. Ernst et al. (2004) found similar results using a risky choice wheel
of fortune game; choice (initial wheel spin) activated the anterior cingulate cortex,
parietal cortex, and supplementary motor area, and anticipation of reward (wheel
spinning) activated the nucleus accumbens. Thus, there is fairly strong evidence
that activation of the nucleus accumbens during the choice stage is due to
SEEKING anticipation and not task-related motor demands.
   Feedback stage. Information received during the feedback stage of
decision-making activates the SEEKING system to modulate incentive learning. The
flexible-response system is active in early learning, with salient feedback stimuli
leading to more energized subsequent approach/avoidance responses; then, later in
learning, once behavior becomes procedural, the habit response system is activated.
This process is hypothesized to occur through a difference in dopamine neuron value
coding between expected versus experienced outcomes; in other words, deviations
from expectation act as learning signals, with greater deviations promoting greater
learning (Montague et al. 1996). This hypothesis is supported by electrophysiological
research in primates (Schultz et al. 1993), as well as neuroimaging studies in humans
(Berns et al. 2001; McClure et al. 2003; Zink et al. 2004). Schultz et al. (1993) found
that ﬁring rates of dopamine neurons within the nucleus accumbens increase in
response to unpredicted reward, are maintained in response to predicted reward, and
decrease in response to expected reward that does not occur. Similarly, fMRI research
shows greater activation of the nucleus accumbens during unpredicted outcome
versus predicted outcome (Berns et al. 2001; McClure et al. 2003), with compli-
mentary activation of frontal cortical structures (Zink et al. 2004).
   Frontal cortical activation is both expected and necessary during this decision
stage as information received via feedback is contrasted with experiences in
memory, and learning schemas are updated. In particular, the orbitofrontal and
dorsolateral prefrontal cortices appear to be important substrates in incentive
learning (O’Doherty et al. 2003; Singer et al. 2004). Using a Prisoner’s Dilemma
game, Singer et al. (2004) found complimentary activation of the nucleus accum-
bens and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex when subject’s viewed faces of persons
who had previously cooperated; activation further increased if cooperation was
intentional versus nonintentional, but disappeared when viewing control faces.
Alternatively, using a risky choice task, O’Doherty et al. (2003) found activation of
the nucleus accumbens and the orbitofrontal cortex during feedback about monetary
rewards; activation in the orbitofrontal cortex was magniﬁed with reward salience.
These results provide support for the role of the flexible-response SEEKING
subsystem in incentive learning; and, in addition, they align with research indi-
cating that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex also operates in moral decisions
(Greene et al. 2001), and the orbitofrontal cortex integrates reward information with
future expectation (Siddiqui et al. 2008), both types of mentation being of obvious
importance in economically signiﬁcant decisions.
   Since there is a tradeoff between the flexible and habit response SEEKING
subsystems once learning becomes procedural, nucleus accumbens activation
should be present early in learning, but decrease or disappear as experience grows.
244                                                        J. Panksepp and C.G. Wilson

Preliminary research in rats indicates this pattern (Cardinal et al. 2001; Schoenbaum
and Setlow 2003). Speciﬁcally, Cardinal et al. (2001) found that lesions in the
nucleus accumbens resulted in a preference for small immediate rewards over large
future rewards, the potential result of impaired learning; and Schoenbaum and
Setlow (2003) found that nucleus accumbens lesions impaired improvement of
response latency in a learned discrimination task. At least one study has been
conducted exploring this issue in humans: Using a monetary choice task, Tanaka
et al. (2004) found that short-term reward prediction (early learning) was correlated
with nucleus accumbens activation, while long-term reward prediction (procedural
learning) was not. Thus, the proposed switch between flexible and habit response
SEEKING subsystems is supported by the limited existing research.
    In summary, the SEEKING system is integral in each stage of decision-making.
During input, information relevant to choice is gathered, with salient stimuli leading
to stronger SEEKING activation and formations of preference. In choice, motivation
to engage with the decision environment and the anticipation of consequences,
regardless of reward modality or valence, is driven by SEEKING. During feedback,
consequences are assessed, with salient (unexpected) outcomes leading to greater
SEEKING activation and incentive learning. Thus, SEEKING is part of normative,
day-to-day choice experience; it operates continuously whether making ﬁnancial,
consumer, or health decisions. Yet, SEEKING also has signiﬁcant clinical relevance;
in particular, it appears to play an important role in the pathology of addiction.


13.4    Addiction, SEEKING, and Decision-Making

In a sense, individual economic decisions have relationship to addictive behaviors,
which may help explain why cattle-type crowd behaviors may influence large scale
boom and bust economic patterns. Addiction, either behavioral (e.g., gambling) or
substance-linked (e.g., alcohol), is the process in which behavior becomes com-
pulsive and takes precedence over other activities, leading to maladaptive
decision-making (Robinson and Berridge 2000). Traditionally, addiction has been
explained in terms of a positive/negative reinforcement model analogous to the
brain reward hypothesis (Olds and Milner 1954), where the motivation to take
drugs (craving) is brought about by either, (1) the positive rewarding effects of the
drug experience, or (2) the desire to avoid negative effects of withdrawal (Robinson
and Berridge 2000). Yet, as previously discussed, this hypothesis has limited
explanatory value, and, with regards to addiction, cannot explain why addicts seek
drugs when the amount will not be sufﬁcient for pleasure, crave drugs before and
after withdrawal, and continue to use drugs that do not produce strong, aversive
withdrawal symptoms (e.g., psychostimulants). Conversely, some researchers posit
that addiction occurs because the addictive stimuli are, in and of themselves,
positive reinforcers (i.e., stimuli that increase the behaviors they immediately fol-
low) (Jaffe 1992). However, this is hardly an explanation of addiction, just circular
reasoning (e.g., addicts take drugs because drugs promote drug-taking).
13   Brain SEEKING Circuitry in Neuroeconomics …                                   245

    Although these popular and established explanations of addiction are problem-
atic, the mediating neural mechanism behind the addictive process is quite clear;
namely, an increase in dopamine in the nucleus accumbens (Di Chiara 1999; Everitt
and Robbins 2005). Given the role of the nucleus accumbens in SEEKING, and the
compulsive “wanting” experienced by addicts (“a hallmark principle of addiction”;
Everitt and Robbins 2005), it is reasonable to hypothesize that addiction is mediated
by SEEKING. If this is the case, there should be dissociation between motivation to
engage in the addictive behavior and consumption of the addictive stimuli, with the
former being accompanied by nucleus accumbens activity. Evidence for such dis-
sociation, speciﬁc to addiction, is provided by non-human animal research (Di
Ciano and Everitt 2004; Hutcheson et al. 2001; Ito et al. 2004; Park et al. 2002).
Hutcheson et al. (2001) found that lesioning the nucleus accumbens in rat’s con-
ditioned to self-administer heroin, impaired their heroin-SEEKING behavior. Ito
et al. (2004) replicated these results using cocaine. Also using cocaine, Di Ciano
and Everitt (2004) and Park et al. (2002) found that SEEKING was impaired by
blocking dopamine receptors in the nucleus accumbens of rats conditioned to
self-administer the drug. Collectively, these results indicate a role for nucleus
accumbens-mediated SEEKING in the motivational aspects of addiction, and have
implications for its treatment. If wanting of the addictive stimuli can be reduced via
nucleus accumbens antagonism, then the cycle of addiction is broken. However,
selectively impairing SEEKING for stimuli, and not creating a global deﬁcit, may
prove difﬁcult and remains a challenge to be addressed.
    The SEEKING system also appears to be directly involved in the pathology of
addiction. Research has revealed that addiction produces reliable neuroadaptations to
SEEKING structures such as the nucleus accumbens (Letchworth et al. 2001; Nader
et al. 2002). Examining dopamine binding in monkeys conditioned to self-administer
cocaine, Letchworth et al. (2001) found that extended exposure to cocaine produced
increased binding in the nucleus accumbens. Using a similar procedure, Nader et al.
(2002) found that dopamine 1 receptors increased in the nucleus accumbens after
prolonged cocaine exposure, but decreased dopamine 2 receptor density. Thus, there
appears to be a neural sensitization of the nucleus accumbens, mediated by dopamine
1 receptors, during addiction. In their incentive-sensitization theory of addiction,
Berridge and Robinson (1998) propose that this sensitization is responsible for the
compulsive wanting behavior in addiction. Sensitization pushes SEEKING into
over-drive which is behaviorally displayed in addiction as focusing on the addictive
stimulus-response relationship. For example, crack cocaine addicts who have run out
of drugs exhibit a behavioral phenomenon known as “chasing ghosts” in which they
compulsively search for and closely examine anything resembling a particle of the
drug, despite reporting that they know it is a useless behavior (Berridge and Robinson
1998). This process is presumably reliant on continuing arousals from the SEEKING
system, as it pulls information from previous associations from addictive behavior
patterns to inform continued attempts at consumption. This can result in phenomena
like place preference, where cravings for the addictive stimuli increase in relation to
their previous contextual, spatial, or temporal associations (Robinson and Berridge
2000). In sum, the pathology of addiction may be dependent on the sensitization of the
246                                                        J. Panksepp and C.G. Wilson

SEEKING system, which produces compulsive wanting behavior and contributes to
the disease’s continuing vicious cycle.
    The adaptation of the nucleus accumbens—a substrate essential to
decision-making—during addiction results in some decision-making deﬁcits in
addicts. Most research on this topic has focused around performance on the Iowa
Gambling Task (IGT), developed by Bechara et al. (1994). In this task, participants
make choices between four decks over multiple trials; two decks are “good” leading
to better outcomes over time, and two decks are “bad.” The goal of the task is to
learn deck properties via experience and maximize hypothetical winnings. Bechara
and colleagues (2001, 2002a,b) found that addict’s IGT performance was similar to
patients with ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) damage, both demonstrate
“myopia” for the future by choosing mostly from the bad decks which yield high
immediate gains but higher future losses. Interestingly, decision making impair-
ments were not present in all addicts, between 32–37% had performance consistent
with controls and this grouping was not predicted by differences in stimulus
addiction (Bechara at al. 2001, 2002a). A follow-up study found that, of the addicts
with poor IGT performance, a small sub-group (about 36% of sample) demon-
strated insensitivity to future consequences consistent with VMPFC damage, but a
much larger sub-group (about 64%) demonstrated a hypersensivity to reward
(Bechara et al. 2002b).These results were interpreted in-line with classic explana-
tions of addiction, where “myopia” for the future can arise from either primary or
secondary processes. Primary processes generate a strong response to the delivery
of the reward, which reinforces the selection of choices with high short term gains,
but higher long term losses. Secondary processes produce the same pattern of
choice by generating thoughts about gaining rewards. We propose that addiction-
related decision making differences in the IGT may instead be the result of sensi-
tisization of the SEEKING system. Compulsive wanting behavior produced by
SEEKING could drive the selection of high short term reward choices, and since
SEEKING is independent of the actual consumption of choice outcomes, addicts
would continue to select high short term reward choices despite higher long term
losses. However, more research on the impact of addiction on decision making is
needed (with additional paradigms) to verify the role of SEEKING.



13.5    Conclusion

Our SEEKING system keeps us in a general state of engagement with the world;
feelings of anticipation, regardless of the intended goal, drive us toward action. In
decision-making, SEEKING motivates us to explore choice options and assists in
learning, so choices can improve over time. Thus, without this SEEKING urge, we
as decision-makers would be doomed to repeat our same mistakes over and over
again. Addiction, which is characterized by a similar repetition of mistakes, may be
the product of neural sensitization of the SEEKING system, leading to compulsive
13   Brain SEEKING Circuitry in Neuroeconomics …                                    247

wanting behavior; however, more research on the exact interaction between the
SEEKING urge and economic decision-making is needed.
    From this perspective, it is important to remember that the modern era of neu-
roeconomics was strongly grounded in the study of animal emotional circuits.
Perhaps the very ﬁrst modern neuroeconomics study was done by Brian Knutson,
soon after he departed from a year of postdoctoral work in the primary author’s lab
back in 1994, to work at a lab doing the ﬁrst human-brain imaging at the American
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland. At our lab, he had learned
much about the SEEKING system and its role in appetitive eagerness (Knutson
et al. 1998, 1999, 2002), which provided lasting insight into the animal foundations
of human nature. With remarkable enthusiasm, Brian translated those insights into
the ﬁrst brain imaging studies of neuroeconomic decision-making in humans
(Knutson et al. 2000, 2001a, b), which has become a booming ﬁeld of research, that
has wisely sustained its linkages to the fundamental issues that have been best
illuminated through animal research… albeit the market-share of discussions in the
ﬁeld still utilize the original hand-me-down and somewhat off-the-mark concept of
“The Brain Reward System.” All who have been paying attention realize that the
brain has many rewarding systems, so neuroeconomics needs a more sophisticated
discussion of what is actually happening psychologically in the brain (for abundant
perspectives, see Glimcher 2011a, b; Glimcher and Fehr 2013), and the utility of
“reward prediction error signals” although still the rage (e.g., Hart et al. 2014), does
not well describe what the Mesolimbic Dopamine system is actually doing, psy-
chologically, within the brain. It is essential to return to the actual affective pro-
cesses that these subcortical neural systems actually engender within the brain and
mind (e.g., Hayes et al. 2014; Panksepp 1998; Panksepp and Biven 2012).
    So, returning to fundamentals, it is important to realize that the SEEKING system
which lies at the very heart of organismic coherence (Teitelbaum and Epstein 1962),
and which generates feelings of enthusiasm in both mice and men, guides all survival
aspirations, including feelings that are often depleted in clinical depression (Panksepp
et al. 2014, Panksepp 2015, 2016), as well as within in the larger societal purview of
economic depressions. This does not mean that the boom and bust fluctuations of
economic cycles have a critical subcortical basis, but simply that down deep within
brain emotional systems, the economics of survival are still coded as affects. Those
facets of mind are critical for individual feelings of well-being, and they do influence
the flow of trafﬁc in the diverse economic marketplaces invented by humans.
    To the best of our knowledge there is nothing in the brain that evolved under the
influence of economic pressures that emerged with the utilization of money as a
shared standard of economic value. This is important to remember, for that means
that the “dismal sciences” of neither macroeconomics nor microeconomics have
strict rules within evolved regions of human brains. Thus, it may be worthwhile to
return to a satirical remark from Thomas Carlyle: “There are good and bad times,
but our mood changes more often than our fortune.”
    http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/authors/t/thomas_carlyle.html#VXVSS6cL
fzoe1oxl.99
248                                                               J. Panksepp and C.G. Wilson


References

Aharon I, Etcoff N, Ariely D et al (2001) Beautiful faces have variable reward value: fMRI and
   behavioral evidence. Neuron 32:537–551
Azim E, Mobbs D, Jo B et al (2005) Sex differences in brain activation elicited by humor. Proc
   Natl Acad Sci USA 102:16496–16501
Bechara A, Damásio H (2002a) Decision-making and addiction (Part I): Impaired activation of
   somatic states in substance-dependent individuals when pondering decision with negative
   future consequences. Neuropsychologia 40:1675–1689
Bechara A, Damásio AR, Damásio H et al (1994) Insensitivity to future consequences following
   damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition 50:7–15
Bechara A, Dolan S, Denburg N, Hindes A, Anderson SW, Nathan PE (2001) Decision-making
   deﬁcits, linked to a dysfunctional ventromedial prefrontal cortex, revealed in alcohol and
   stimulant abusers. Neuropsychologia 39(4):376–389
Bechara A, Dolan S, Hindes, A (2002b) Decision-making and addiction (part II): myopia for the
   future or hypersensitivity to reward? Neuropsychologia 40:1690–1705
Berns GS, McClure SM, Pagnoni G et al (2001) Predictability modulates human brain response to
   reward. J Neurosci 21(8):2793–2798
Berridge KC (1996) Food reward: Brain substrates of wanting and liking. Neurosci Biobehav Rev
   20:1–26
Berridge KC, Robinson TE (1998) What is the role of dopamine in reward: Hedonic impact,
   reward learning, or incentive salience? Brain Res Rev 28:309–369
Bjork JM, Knutson B, Fong GW et al (2004) Incentive-elicited brain activation in adolescents:
   Similarities and differences from young adults. J Neurosci 24(8):1793–1802
Cabanac M (1992) Pleasure: The common currency. J Theor Biol 155:173–200
Cardinal RN, Pennicott DR, Sugathapala CL et al (2001) Impulsive choice induced in rats by
   lesions of the nucleus accumbens core. Science 292:2499–2501
Carlezon WA, Devine DP, Wise RA (1995) Habit-forming actions of nomifensine in nucleus
   accumbens. Psychopharmacology 122(2):194–197
Carr GD, White NM (1983) Conditioned place preference from intra-accumbens but not
   intra-caudate amphetamine injections. Life Sci 33:2551–2557
Carr GD, White NM (1986) Anatomical disassociation of amphetamines rewarding and aversive
   effects: an intracranial micro-injection study. Psychopharmacology 89(3):340–346
Coenen VA, Schlaepfer TE, Maedler B et al (2011) Cross-species affective functions of the medial
   forebrain bundle-Implications for the treatment of affective pain and depression in humans.
   Neurosci Biobehav Rev 35(9):1971–1981
Coenen VA, Panksepp J, Hurwitz TA et al (2012) Human medial forebrain bundle (MFB) and
   anterior thalamic radiation (ATR): diffusion tensor imaging of two major subcortical pathways
   that may promote a dynamic balance of opposite affects relevant for understanding depression.
   J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 24:223–236
Di Chiara G (1999) Drug addiction as dopamine-dependent associative learning disorder. Eur J
   Pharmacol 375:13–30
Di Ciano P, Everitt BJ (2004) Direct interactions between the basolateral amygdala and nucleus
   accumbens core underlie cocaine-seeking behavior by rats. J Neurosci 24:7167–7173
Ernst M, Paulus MP (2005) Neurobiology of decision-making: a selective review from a
   neurocognitive and clinical perspective. Biol Psychiatry 58(8):597–604
Ernst M, Nelson EE, McClure EB et al (2004) Choice selection and reward anticipation: an fMRI
   study. Neuropsychologia 42:1585–1597
Evans JBT, Stanovich KE (2013) Dual-process theories of higher cognition: advancing the debate.
   APS 8(3):223–241
Everitt BJ, Robbins TW (2005) Neural systems of reinforcement for drug addiction: from actions
   to habits to compulsion. Nat Neurosci 8(11):1481–1489
13   Brain SEEKING Circuitry in Neuroeconomics …                                              249

Glimcher PW (2011a) Understanding dopamine and reinforcement learning: the dopamine reward
    prediction error hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:15647–15654
Glimcher PW (2011b) Foundations of neuroeconomic analysis. Oxford University Press, New
    York
Glimcher PW, Fehr E (eds) (2013) Neuroeconomics: decision making and the brain. Academic
    Press, London
Gottfried JA, O’Doherty J, Dolan RJ (2003) Appetitive and aversive olfactory learning in humans
    studied using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurosci 22(24):10829–
    10837
Grant S, Contoreggi C, London ED (1999) Drug abusers show impaired performance in a
    laboratory test of decision-making. Neuropsychologia 38:1180–1187
Greene JD, Sommerville RB, Nystrom LE et al (2001) An fMRI investigation of emotional
    engagement in moral judgment. Science 293(5537):2105–2108
Haber SN, Knutson B (2009) The reward circuit: linking primate anatomy and human imaging.
    Neuropsychopharmacology 35:4–26
Hamman SB, Herman RA, Nolan CL et al (2004) Men and women differ in amygdala response to
    visual sexual stimuli. Nat Neurosci 7(4):411–416
Hart AS, Rutledge RB, Glimcher PW et al (2014) Phasic dopamine release in the rat nucleus
    accumbens symmetrically encodes a reward prediction error term. J Neurosci 2014
    34(3):698–704
Hayes DJ, Duncan NW, Xu J et al (2014) A comparison of neural responses to appetitive and
    aversive stimuli in humans and other mammals. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 45:350–368
Hoebel BG, Monaco AP, Hernandez EF et al (1983) Self-infusion of amphetamine directly into the
    brain. Psychopharmacology 81:158–163
Hutcheson DM, Parkinson JA, Robbins TW et al (2001) The effects of nucleus accumbens core
    and shell lesions on inravenous heroin self-administration and the acquisition of drug-seeking
    behavior under a second-order schedule of heroin reinforcement. Psychopharmacology
    153:464–472
Ikemoto S, Panksepp J (1996) Dissociations between appetitive and consummatory responses by
    pharmacological manipulations of reward-relevant brain regions. Behav Neurosci 110:331–345
Ikemoto S, Panksepp J (1999) The role of nucleus accumbens dopamine in motivated behavior: a
    unifying interpretation with special reference to reward-seeking. Brain Res Brain Res Rev
    31:6–41
Ikemoto S, Glazier BS, Murphy JM et al (1997) Role of D1 and D2 receptors in the nucleus
    accumbens in mediating reward. J Neurosci 17:8580–8587
Ito R, Robbins TW, Everitt BJ (2004) Differential control over cocaine-seeking behavior by
    nucleus accumbens core and shell. Nat Neurosci 7:389–397
Jaffe JH (1992) Current concepts of addiction. In: O’Brien CP, Jaffe JH (eds) Addictive states.
    Raven Press, New York
Kahneman D (2002) Maps of bounded rationality: a perspective on intuitive judgement and choice
    [Prize Lecture]. Retrieved from: http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/
    laureates/2002/kahnemann-lecture.pdf
Kahneman D, Frederick S (2007) Frames and brains: elicitation and control of response
    tendencies. Trends Cogn Sci 11(2):45–46
Knutson B, Cooper JC (2005) Functional magnetic resonance imaging of reward prediction. Curr
    Opin Neurol 18:1–7
Knutson B, Greer SM (2008) Anticipatory affect: neural correlates and con- sequences for choice.
    Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363:3771–3786
Knutson B, Burgdorf J, Panksepp J (1998) Anticipation of play elicits vocalizations in juvenile
    rats. J Comp Psychol 112:65–73
Knutson B, Burgdorf J, Panksepp J (1999) High-frequency ultrasonic vocalizations index
    conditioned pharmacological reward in rats. Physiol Behav 66:639–643
Knutson B, Westdorp A, Kaiser E et al (2000) FMRI visualization of brain activity during a
    monetary incentive delay task. Neuroimage 12:20–27
250                                                                  J. Panksepp and C.G. Wilson

Knutson B, Adams CM, Fong GW et al (2001a) Anticipation of increasing monetary reward
   selectively recruits nucleus accumbens. J Neurosci 21:159–164
Knutson B, Fong GW, Adams CM et al (2001b) Dissociation of reward anticipation and outcome
   with event-related fMRI. NeuroReport 12(17):3681–3687
Knutson B, Burgdorf J, Panksepp J (2002) Ultrasonic vocalizations as indices of affective states in
   rat. Psychol Bull 128:961–977
Knutson B, Taylor J, Kauman M et al (2005) Distributed neural representation of expected value.
   J Neurosci 25:4806–4812
LeGros Clark WE, Beattie J, Riddoch G et al (1938) The hypothalamus, morphological,
   functional, clinical and surgical aspects. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd
Letchworth SR, Nader MA, Smith HR et al (2001) Progression of changes in dopamine transporter
   binding site density as a result of cocaine self-administration in rhesus monkeys. J Neurosci
   21:2799–2807
Levine DS (2009) Brain pathways for cognitive-emotional decision-making in the human animal.
   Neural Netw 22:286–293
Liu X, Strecker RE, Brener J (1998) Dopamine depletion in nucleus accumbens influences
   locomotion but not force and timing of operant responding. Pharmacol Biochem Behav
   59:737–745
McClure SM, Berns GS, Montague PR (2003) Temporal prediction errors in a passive learning
   task activate human striatum. Neuron 38:339–346
Minati L, Grisoli M, Seth AK et al (2012) Decision-making under risk: a graph-based network
   analysis using functional MRI. NeuroImage 60:2191–2205
Montague PR, Dayan P, Sejnowski TJ (1996) A framework for mesencephalic dopamine systems
   based on predictive Hebbian learning. J Neurosci 16:1936–1947
Nader MA, Daunais JB, Moore T et al (2002) Effects of cocaine self-administration on striatal
   dopamine       systems     in    rhesus     monkeys:    Initial    and     chronic     exposure.
   Neuropsychopharmacology 27:35–46
O’Doherty JP, Deichmann R, Critchley HD et al (2002) Neural responses during anticipation of a
   primary taste reward. Neuron 33:815–826
O’Doherty J, Critchley H, Deichmann R, Dolan RJ (2003) Dissociating valence of outcome
   from behavioral control in human orbital and ventral prefrontal cortices. J Neurosci,
   23(21):7931–7939
O’Doherty J, Dayan P, Schultz J et al (2004) Dissociable roles of the ventral and dorsal striatum in
   instrumental conditioning. Science 304:452–454
Olds J, Milner P (1954) Positive reinforcement produced by electrical stimulation of septal area
   and other regions of rat brain. J Comp Physiol Psychol 47(6):419–427
Panksepp J (1981) Hypothalamic integration of behavior: rewards, punishments, and related
   psychobiological process. In: Morgane PJ, Panksepp J (Eds.) Handbook of the hypothalamus,
   vol 3, Part A. Behavioral studies of the hypothalamus. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp 289–487
Panksepp J (1982) Toward a general psychobiological theory of emotions. Behav Brain Sci
   5:407–467
Panksepp J (1998) Affective neuroscience: the foundation of human and animal emotions. Oxford
   University Press, New York
Panksepp J (2002) The MacLean legacy and some modern trends in emotion research. In:
   Cory GA, Gardner R Jr. (eds) The evolutionary neuroethology of Paul MacLean. Praeger,
   Westport, CT, pp ix–xxvii
Panksepp J (2010) Affective neuroscience of the emotional BrainMind: evolutionary perspectives
   and implications for understanding depression. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 12(4):533–545
Panksepp J (2011a) Cross-species affective neuroscience decoding of the primal affective
   experiences of humans and related animals. PLoS ONE 6(9):e21236
Panksepp J (2011b) The basic emotional circuits of mammalian brains: do animals have affective
   lives? Neurosci Biobehav Rev 35:1791–1804
13   Brain SEEKING Circuitry in Neuroeconomics …                                                251

Panksepp J (2015) Affective preclinical modeling of psychiatric disorders: taking imbalanced
    primal emotional feelings of animals seriously in our search for novel antidepressants.
    Dialogues in Clin Neurosci 17:363–379
Panksepp J (2016) The cross-mammalian neurophenomenology of primal emotional affects: From
    animal feelings to human therapeutics. J Comp Neurol 524:1624–1635
Panksepp J, Biven L (2012) The archaeology of mind: neuroevolutionary origins of human
    emotions. W. W. Norton & Company, New York
Panksepp J, Wright JS, Döbrössy MD et al (2014) Affective neuroscience strategies for
    understanding and treating depressions: from preclinical models to novel therapeutics.
    J Clinical Psych 2014(2):472–494
Park WK, Bari AA, Jey AR et al (2002) Cocaine administered into the medial prefrontal cortex
    reinstates cocaine-seeking behavior by increasing AMPA receptor-mediated glutamate
    transmission in the nucleus accumbens. J Neurosci 22(7):2916–2925
Phillips GD, Robbins TW, Everitt BJ (1994) Bilateral intra-accumbens self-administration of
    amphetamine:       antagonism     with    intra-accumbens      SCH-23390      and     sulpiride.
    Psychopharmacology 114:477–485
Platt ML, Huettel SA (2008) Risky business: The neuroeconomics of decision-making under
    uncertainty. Nat Neurosci 11:398–403
Ramnani N, Elliot R, Athwal BS et al (2004) Prediction error for free monetary reward in the
    human prefrontal cortex. Neuroimage 23:777–786
Reynolds SM, Berridge KC (2001) Fear and feeding in the nucleus accumbens shell:
    rostrocaudal segregation of GABA-elicited defensive behavior versus eating behavior.
    J Neurosci 21:3261–3270
Reynolds SM, Berridge KC (2002) Positive and negative motivation in nucleus accumbens shell:
    bivalent rostrocaudal gradients for GABA-elicited eating, taste, and “liking”/”disliking”
    reactions, place preference/avoidance and fear. J Neurosci 22:7308–7320
Reynolds SM, Berridge KC (2003) Glutamate motivational ensembles in nucleus accumbens:
    rostrocaudal shell gradients of fear and feeding. Eur J Neurosci 17:2187–2200
Robinson TE, Berridge KC (2000) The psychology and neurobiology of addiction: an
    incentive-sensitization view. Addiction 95(2):91–117
Rogers RD, Ramnani N, MacKay C et al (2004) Distinct portions of anterior cingulate cortex and
    medial prefrontal cortex are activated by reward processing in separable phases of
    decision-making cognition. Biol Psychiatry 55:594–602
Rolls ET (2014) Emotion and decision-making explained. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Salamone JD (1994) The involvement of nucleus accumbens dopamine in appetitive and aversive
    motivation. Behav Brain Res 61:117–133
Salamone JD, Cousins MS, Snyder BJ (1997) Behavioral functions of nucleus accumbens
    dopamine: empirical and conceptual problems with the anhedonia hypothesis. Neurosci
    Biobehav Rev 21:341–359
Salamone JD, Correa M, Mingote SM et al (2005) Beyond the reward hypothesis: alternative
    functions of nucleus accumbens dopamine. Curr Opin Pharmacol 5:34–41
Salamone JD, Correa M, Farrar A et al (2007) Effort-related functions of nucleus accumbens
    dopamine and associated forebrain circuits. Psychopharmacology 191:461–482
Schlaepfer TE, Bewernick B, Kayser S et al (2013) Rapid effects of deep brain stimulation for
    treatment resistant depression. Biol Psychiat 73:1204–1212
Schoenbaum G, Setlow B (2003) Lesions of nucleus accumbens disrupt learning about aversive
    outcomes. J Neurosci 23(30):9833–9841
Schultz W, Apicella P, Ljungbergb T (1993) Responses of monkey dopamine neurons to reward
    and conditioned stimuli during successive steps of learning a delayed response task. J Neurosci
    13(3):900–913
Seymour B, Daw N, Dayan P et al (2007) Differential encoding of losses and gains in the human
    striatum. J Neurosci 27:4826–4831
Siddiqui SV, Chatterjee U, Kumar D (2008) Neuropsychology of prefrontal cortex. Indian J
    Psychiatry 50(3):202–208
252                                                                 J. Panksepp and C.G. Wilson

Singer T, Kiebel SJ, Winston JS et al (2004) Brain responses to the acquired moral status of faces.
   Neuron 41:653–662
Slovic P, Peters E, Finucane ML et al (2005) Affect, risk, and decision-making. Health Psychol 24
   (4):35–40
Sokolowski JD, Salamone JD (1998) The role of accumbens dopamine in lever pressing and
   response allocation: Effects of 6-OHDA injected into core and dorsomedial shell. Pharmacol
   Biochem Behav 59:557–566
Solms M, Panksepp J (2012) The “Id” knows more than the “Ego” admits: Neuropsychoanalytic
   and primal consciousness perspectives on the interface between affective and cognitive
   neuroscience. Brain Sci 2:147–175
Stanovich KE, West RF (2000) Individual differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
   debate. Behav Brain Sci 23:645–726
Tanaka SC, Doya K, Okada G et al (2004) Prediction of immediate and future rewards
   differentially recruits cortico-basal loops. Nat Neurosci 7:887–893
Teitelbaum P, Epstein AN (1962) The lateral hypothalamic syndrome: Recovery of feeding and
   drinking after lateral hypothalamic lesions. Psychol Rev 69:74–90
White NM, Packard MG, Hiroi N (1991) Place conditioning with dopamine D1 and D2 agonists
   injected peripherally or into nucleus accumbens. Psychopharmacology 103:271–276
Wright JS, Panksepp J (2012) An evolutionary framework to understand foraging, wanting, and
   desire: the neuropsychology of the SEEKING System. Neuropsychoanalysis 14:5–39
Zink CF, Pagnoni G, Martin-Skurski ME et al (2004) Human striatal responses to monetary reward
   depend on saliency. Neuron 42:509–517
