14.3    Neurophysiological Correlates of Decision Processes

As noted in the introduction, a large number of studies have identiﬁed a link
between patterns of neural ﬁring rates in oculomotor brain circuits and the
dynamics of evidence accumulation during decision-making. The key ﬁnding
relating neural activity to evidence accumulation is the characteristic ramping of
ﬁring rates to a threshold level prior to initiating a saccade response. Using a variety
of stimuli and tasks, it has been shown that neurons in FEF (Hanes and Schall 1996;
Thompson et al. 1996, 1997), LIP (Shadlen and Newsome 1996, 2001), and SC
(Ratcliff et al. 2003, 2007) all exhibit this ramping behavior. The consistency of the
ﬁring rate data in the face of considerable variation in stimulus and task properties
suggests that this activity reflects the evolution of a visual decision-making process
rather than simple sensory processing. In this section, we ﬁrst discuss some of the
research that has linked neural patterns of activity with cognitive representations of
decision processes. We then focus on several recent studies that show how neural
data can impose strong constraints on sequential sampling models, and can con-
sequently be used to select among models that are very difﬁcult to distinguish by
behavioral data alone.



14.3.1 Identifying Decision-Related Neural Activity: The
       Case of LIP

A common task used to study the neural correlates of visual decision-making is the
motion direction discrimination task developed by Newsome, Shadlen, and col-
leagues (see Fig. 14.1; for recent reviews, see Gold and Shadlen 2007; Huk and
Meister 2012). Monkeys judge the global direction of motion of a random dot
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                       275

stimulus and make a saccade-to-target response to indicate their choice. Task dif-
ﬁculty is manipulated by varying the proportion of dots that move coherently in one
direction. For these stimuli, it is well-established that motion coherence correlates
closely with activity in macaque visual area MT (an extrastriate visual cortical area
also known as V5), and that this activity forms the sensory basis for
decision-making in this task. The response rate of MT increases roughly linearly
with motion coherence, exhibits a time course that is tightly coupled with the onset
of the stimulus, and quickly reaches a constant ﬁring rate during stimulus viewing
(e.g., Britten et al. 1993). However, MT ﬁring rates are tightly linked to the
presence of the stimulus on screen, and only correlate somewhat weakly with
behavioral indices of judged direction of motion (Britten et al. 1996). For example,
microstimulation of direction-selective MT neurons during stimulus viewing speeds
responses favoring the preferred direction, and slows responses for the opposite
direction (Ditterich et al. 2003), but the influence of microstimulation on behavioral
choice becomes progressively weaker as the delay between stimulus offset and
onset of microstimulation increases (Seidemann et al. 1998).
    Perhaps the most striking distinction in activity patterns between MT and LIP
neurons is that only the latter exhibit gradual ramping of ﬁring rates to a threshold
following presentation of a stimulus (e.g., Shadlen and Newsome 1996, 2001),
making LIP activity, but not MT activity, consistent with the kinds of evidence
accumulation processes assumed by sequential sampling models. A simple
hypothesis linking LIP activity with evidence accumulation is that the two are
related linearly (e.g., LIP activity reflects discriminative perceptual evidence,
integrated over time). The implication is that the rate of increase in LIP activity—or
more generally, activity closely related to the decision process—would be reflected
in the rate of evidence accumulation, corresponding to the drift rate in a diffusion
decision model (e.g., Ratcliff 1978; Ratcliff and McKoon 2008), which indexes the
average quality of stimulus information driving the decision process, and sets the
average rate at which the evidence total changes over time. Although drift rate is
commonly estimated as a free parameter from data in human behavioral studies, for
the motion direction discrimination task, it is possible to derive estimates of drift
rate directly from the motion coherence of the stimulus because the neural repre-
sentation in MT is well approximated by a linear transformation of the motion
signal (Britten et al. 1993). Deriving drift rates from the motion signal in this way
has proved successful in modeling data from the motion direction discrimination
task (Ditterich 2006; Mazurek et al. 2003). We now discuss several strands of
research that provide convergent support for directly linking neural ﬁring rates with
the process of evidence accumulation.
    Figure 14.8 shows neural ﬁring rate data averaged across 104 LIP neurons of
macaques performing the random dots task from a study by Shadlen and Newsome
(2001). Monkeys viewed the stimulus for a variable amount of time before it was
extinguished. After a variable retention interval, during which ﬁxation had to be
maintained, the monkeys indicated their response by making a saccadic eye
movement. The data are presented in two ways: In the left panel, ﬁring rate for
different levels of motion coherence is presented relative to the onset of the
276                                                                   D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith




Fig. 14.8 Population response of 104 LIP neurons recorded from macaques performing the
motion discrimination task. Solid lines are for responses to saccade targets within the neuron’s
receptive ﬁeld, dashed lines are for responses to targets outside the receptive ﬁeld. The left panel
shows ﬁring rates for stimuli at different levels of motion coherence, aligned on stimulus onset.
The right panel shows ﬁring rates aligned on the saccade response. Reproduced from Shadlen and
Newsome (2001)


stimulus. In the right panel, the neural response is presented relative to initiation of
the saccade. The key ﬁndings are that (1) increasing the viewing time increases the
level of spiking activity, (2) increases in spike rate occur faster with higher levels of
motion coherence, and (3) prior to initiating a saccade, spike rates reach a common
asymptote regardless of motion coherence. Results such as these led Gold and
Shadlen (2001) to suggest LIP neurons might be performing a ‘read out’ function
from sensory neurons in MT, integrating relative levels of evidence for different
response alternatives. Although these results are intriguing, a limitation of the
original version of the random dots task was that monkeys made their decisions
after an experimenter-enforced delay, which meant the task did not yield the kind of
RT data that have been used to test sequential sampling models in psychology.
   Roitman and Shadlen (2002) subsequently investigated an RT version of the
motion direction discrimination task that allowed the monkey to respond imme-
diately upon making a decision. The ﬁndings from the RT task replicated the main
ﬁndings from the original task: LIP ﬁring rates increased as a function of stimulus
viewing time at a rate determined by motion coherence, reaching a common
threshold ﬁring rate prior to making a saccade. Because monkeys initiated a saccade
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                     277

Fig. 14.9 Population
response of LIP neurons
recorded from macaques
performing the response time
version of the motion
discrimination task.
Responses are grouped
according to behavioral
response time, and are aligned
on initiation of a saccade
response. Note that the rate at
which activity approaches the
threshold ﬁring rate varies
according to response time.
Reproduced from Roitman
and Shadlen (2002)




upon making a decision, additional RT-related aspects of the data could be
examined. Consistent with the notion of LIP activity reflecting evidence accumu-
lation to a criterion, both behavioral RTs and LIP ramping activity were system-
atically dependent on motion coherence. At higher levels of coherence, LIP ﬁring
rates more rapidly approached asymptote, and behavioral RTs were shorter. The
relationship between behavioral RT and ramping of LIP activity is shown in
Fig. 14.9, which plots response-aligned LIP activity associated with different RT
bands. Whereas the slowest RTs exhibit gradual ramping of LIP activity approxi-
mately 700–800 ms prior to a saccade, the fastest RTs are associated with LIP
ramping commencing only 300–400 ms prior to a response.
    The issue of whether LIP represents the time integral of perceptual evidence was
tested experimentally by Huk and Shadlen (2005). They presented monkeys with a
random motion texture overlaid with the familiar random dots stimulus. During
stimulus viewing, motion coherence was briefly perturbed by adding a 100 ms
pulse of coherent motion to the texture. The direction of the motion pulse either
matched or opposed that of the random dot stimulus. Consistent with the time
278                                                           D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

integration hypothesis, the motion pulse not only biased decision outcomes, but
also exerted a sustained influence on LIP activity for up to 800 ms. This result was
extended by Kiani et al. (2008), who showed that the timing of the motion pulse
delivered during stimulus viewing was critical. When the motion pulse was added
around the onset of the stimulus, the direction of motion affected both behavioral
choice and LIP activity. However, when the pulse was delivered toward the end of
stimulus presentation, choice probability and LIP ﬁring rates were unaffected. Kiani
et al. interpreted their results as showing that evidence accumulation does not occur
indeﬁnitely for ﬁxed duration stimuli, but that integration only occurs until a
response criterion is reached. When the motion pulse was presented late in the trial,
the monkey had most likely already made a decision, and apparently discounted
subsequently presented stimulus information.
    Microstimulation studies provide further insight into the relationship between
LIP activity and decision-making that go beyond the correlational results discussed
so far. Whereas the studies reviewed so far have observed a correlation between LIP
activity and decision processes, microstimulation allows for more direct causal
influences, as LIP activity is manipulated directly. Ditterich et al. (2003) established
the causal connection between MT neurons and direction of motion decisions by
showing that microstimulation of MT neurons induced a bias in choice behavior
and RT favoring the preferred direction of the stimulated neuron. Hanks et al.
(2006) adopted a similar approach for neurons in LIP. By applying microstimula-
tion to neurons with receptive ﬁelds overlapping the response target, Hanks et al.
showed that decision-making could be biased in a way similar to that demonstrated
by Ditterich et al. Crucially, however, microstimulation to LIP produced smaller
effects on choice and RT than MT stimulation. This is consistent with the idea that
MT codes for the sensory data that provides the input to the decision process,
whereas LIP codes for the value of the decision variable itself (i.e., the current level
of accumulated evidence). In diffusion model terms, MT stimulation affects the drift
rate of the diffusion process, which characterizes the quality of the perceptual
evidence and determines the rate of evidence accumulation at the decision stage. By
contrast, LIP stimulation does not influence drift rate, but instead adds a constant to
the decision variable, moving the process closer to one response boundary. This is
tantamount to biasing the starting point of the accumulation process without
influencing the quality of the perceptual evidence or the rate of evidence
accumulation.
    An alternative way to use microstimulation to investigate decision-making is to
use it to evoke a saccade that is spatially orthogonal to the locations of the response
targets and to assess the extent to which the evoked saccade deviates toward one
response or another (Gold and Shadlen 2000, 2003). If the motor program
expressing the monkey’s decision is incrementally updated based on the level of
accumulated evidence, then the deviations of the evoked saccades should system-
atically relate to the monkey’s ﬁnal, voluntary, saccade response. The logic of this
approach resembles that of the response-signal procedure used with human par-
ticipants (e.g., Ratcliff 1988, 2006; Wickelgren 1977). In the response-signal task,
decision-making is interrupted by a response signal, which prompts the observer to
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                       279

immediately make a response. In the case of evoked saccades, microstimulation
serves as a response signal, which elicits a response directly. Gold and Shadlen
(2000) applied microstimulation to FEF neurons while monkeys performed the
random dots task. By varying the timing of the microstimulation, they were able to
map the time course of evoked saccade trajectories, and indirectly trace the growth
of decision-related information. Motion coherence and viewing duration had strong
and systematic effects on the deviation of the evoked saccade toward the response
target ultimately selected by the monkey: Stimuli with higher motion coherence that
were viewed for longer produced larger deviations in the evoked saccades.
   Results from experiments using the motion direction discrimination task provide
convergent support for the idea that LIP ﬁring rates reflect the time integral of
perceptual evidence. Manipulations of the input to the decision process, via the
stimulus itself (e.g., Huk and Shadlen 2005; Kiani et al. 2008) or brain areas
responsible for coding stimulus properties (Ditterich et al. 2003) influence both the
speed and accuracy of responses. Importantly, these behavioral effects are reflected
in the ﬁring rates of LIP neurons, and are detectable even when the nature of the
response mapping is not known in advance of stimulus onset (Bennur and Gold
2011). That ﬁring rates preceding a saccadic response increase to a common
threshold level (Roitman and Shadlen 2002; Shadlen and Newsome 1996, 2001)
lends strong support to the idea that LIP activity reflects bounded evidence accu-
mulation, as postulated by diffusion models.



14.3.2 Diffusion Modeling of Decision-Related Neural
       Activity

The striking similarity between decision-related neural activity and the accumula-
tion of noisy evidence to a criterion invites the obvious question of whether a single
model can simultaneously account for both neural and behavioral data. In the
context of the motion direction discrimination task, a number of studies have shown
that key aspects of the behavioral data can be accounted for within a diffusion or
hybrid diffusion-accumulator modeling framework. Mazurek et al. (2003) proposed
a hybrid diffusion-accumulator model driven by two populations of simulated MT
neurons coding for different response alternatives. The time integral of the differ-
ence in activation between MT populations was modeled with two evidence
accumulators. The levels of activation in the accumulators were assumed to cor-
respond to the spike rates of neural populations in LIP. The ﬁrst accumulator to
reach a criterion determined the response. The model is closely related to Ratcliff’s
(1978) diffusion model in that the inputs to the two accumulators are anticorrelated
—evidence for one alternative is evidence against the other. Behaviorally, the
Mazurek et al. model successfully accounted for accuracy data and mean RTs for
correct responses. The model was also able to capture presaccadic ramping of
neural activity to a threshold. However, it was not able to predict error RTs, nor was
280                                                          D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

it ﬁt to RT distributions. Ditterich (2006) subsequently showed that the model made
incorrect predictions for the RT distributions from Roitman and Shadlen’s (2002)
study. He modiﬁed the model by transforming the difference in MT activations
using a sigmoidal time-dependent gain function prior to integration in LIP. By
modifying the LIP input in this way, Ditterich showed that the model could account
for choice probabilities, correct and error RT distributions, and the pattern of LIP
activations simultaneously.
    Ditterich’s (2006) success with the modiﬁed Mazurek et al. (2003) model is
interesting because Ratcliff’s (1978) diffusion model has been shown to account for
behavioral data from the motion direction discrimination task with human partici-
pants (Palmer et al. 2005; Ratcliff and McKoon 2008). More generally, Ratcliff’s
diffusion model (and the related dual diffusion model), has been shown to account
for data from monkeys performing other simple decision tasks, such as gap dis-
crimination (Ratcliff et al. 2003) and brightness discrimination (Ratcliff et al. 2007,
2011). The important distinction between the Ratcliff diffusion model and that of
Ditterich is that the drift rate in the former is constant over the course of a trial,
whereas it is time-varying in the latter. By scaling the drift rate and diffusion
coefﬁcient by a common time-dependent gain—affecting ν and σ in Eq. 14.1—the
model was able to account for the error RT data and produce RT distributions that
were more symmetrical than they otherwise would be. The intuition for why the
shapes of the distributions change in this way is that the moment-to-moment
changes in evidence accumulation become larger in size (due to the increase in drift
rate), but more irregular (due to the increase in noise in the accumulation process
brought on by the change in the diffusion coefﬁcient). This increases the likelihood
that momentary noise will abruptly terminate the process by pushing it toward one
of the decision boundaries. Because gain increased as a sigmoid function of time,
slower RTs would be affected more than faster RTs, terminating faster than they
would under stationary drift. Changing the drift and diffusion coefﬁcients in this
way serves to truncate the tails of the RT distributions, resulting in more sym-
metrical predictions. Psychologically, this account is of interest because it suggests
that humans and macaques may be performing the task somewhat differently. One
possibility is that monkeys performing the motion direction discrimination task may
reduce their decision criterion over the course of a trial. Smith (1995, 2000) pointed
out that many diffusion processes with time-varying drift rate (such as the OU
process) can be modeled as processes with constant drift, but time-varying decision
criteria—a form of model mimicry. Although this was not Ditterich’s preferred
account for his result, time-varying response criteria have been proposed in other
tasks like visual search, where exhaustive search of distractor arrays can be very
time-consuming (e.g., Thornton and Gilden 2007). Ditterich’s explanation for
time-dependent drift, which was couched in terms of maximizing reward rate, is
consistent with the idea of observers seeking a balance between time spent on a
single trial and reward rate within an experiment by manipulating their response
criterion (cf. Bogacz 2007; Bogacz et al. 2006). Whether dynamically adjusting
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                          281

response criterion within a single trial provides a theoretically complete account of
maximizing reward rate remains to be seen.
    Whereas Ditterich (2006) successfully modeled behavioral and spike rate data
from LIP, Ratcliff, and colleagues have examined neural data from SC alongside
behavioral data from a variety of perceptual tasks (Ratcliff et al. 2003, 2007, 2011).
SC is part of the same oculomotor decision circuit as LIP, and some SC neurons
display many similar ramping to threshold characteristics as their LIP counterparts,
as we discuss below. Ratcliff et al. (2003) investigated the relationship between the
information processing dynamics of the diffusion model to SC ﬁring rates in
monkeys performing a gap discrimination task. In Ratcliff’s diffusion model, a
single accumulator integrates relative evidence for different response alternatives.
By simultaneously recording from SC neurons associated with each response
alternative, Ratcliff et al. (2003) were able to operationalize relative evidence in
neural terms as the difference in ﬁring rates. By ﬁtting the standard two-barrier
diffusion model to the choice-RT data, and then simulating sample evidence
accumulation trajectories from the ﬁtted model, they were able to compare the
accumulation of relative evidence in the diffusion model with the difference in ﬁring
rates between competing SC neurons. An interesting feature of their data was that
the time course of the growth of the difference in SC spike rates—a neural repre-
sentation of accumulated discriminative evidence—was strongly predictive of
behavioral RT (see Fig. 14.10; cf. Roitman and Shadlen 2002). Fast and slow
responses were related to fast and slow growth of the difference in ﬁring rates,
respectively. Figure 14.10 shows simulated evidence accumulation pathways for
fast, slow, and intermediate responses against (relative) SC ﬁring rates. The model
very closely reproduces the key features of the data, lending support to the idea that
SC neurons are accumulating evidence in a manner similar to how the diffusion
model characterizes the decision process.
    A limitation of the Ratcliff et al. (2003) study is that the standard diffusion model
is silent on the ﬁring rates of the individual SC neurons that code for the different
response alternatives. By showing a correspondence between neural data and evi-
dence accumulation trajectories in the two-barrier diffusion model, Ratcliff et al.
(2003) could only relate its information processing dynamics to the difference in
ﬁring rates. To address the neural data in more detail, and to generalize their
ﬁndings to a different perceptual task, Ratcliff et al. (2007) examined ﬁring rates of
individual SC neurons in macaques performing a brightness discrimination task. To
account for these data, they used a hybrid diffusion-accumulator model, suggested
by Smith (2000) and developed by Ratcliff and Smith (2004), which they termed
the dual diffusion model. This models the decision process as a race between two
independent diffusion processes to reach a criterion. The resulting model can be
thought of as a diffusion process implementation of an independent race model, like
the Poisson counter model discussed previously. After ﬁtting the dual diffusion
model to the behavioral choice-RT data, Ratcliff et al. (2007) simulated decision
trajectories from the ﬁtted model. Not only was the model able to account for the
individual neural ﬁring rates, it was also able to account for the difference in ﬁring
rates between SC neurons. This result provided a more direct interpretation of the
282                                                                   D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith




Fig. 14.10 Comparison of simulated evidence accumulation trajectories from Ratcliff’s diffusion
model with population response of SC neurons recorded from macaques completing a gap
discrimination task. The top panel shows simulated accumulation trajectories for fast, interme-
diate, and slow responses based on model parameters derived from ﬁtting the diffusion model to
the behavioral data. The bottom panel shows the difference in accumulation trajectories for the two
response alternatives (gray lines) alongside the difference in ﬁring rates for neurons coding for
different response alternatives (black lines). Reproduced from Ratcliff et al. (2003)



original Ratcliff et al. (2003) result, supporting the idea that the accumulation of
discriminative evidence is reflected in the relative ﬁring rates of different neural
populations.



14.3.3 Using Neural Data to Constrain Model Selection

The sequential sampling models developed in cognitive psychology have now
reached a point at which they are able to quantitatively account for all the key
features of choice-RT data observed behaviorally (Ratcliff and Smith 2004). As
noted by Ratcliff and McKoon (2008), this is a remarkable accomplishment for
psychology, where developing quantitatively precise theories is intrinsically difﬁ-
cult. Part of the success of sequential sampling models has come from adding
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                        283

between-trial parameter variability like variability in start-point (Laming 1968;
Ratcliff et al. 1999), and drift rate (Ratcliff 1978). This necessarily increases the
complexity (and flexibility) of the models. A consequence of this increased com-
plexity is that it has become quite difﬁcult to distinguish models purely on the basis
of ﬁt to behavioral data. As Ratcliff and Smith reported, a variety of hybrid
diffusion-accumulator models could produce ﬁts to behavioral data that were
quantitatively very similar to Ratcliff’s diffusion model. Importantly, these hybrid
models emphasized different psychological mechanisms. For example, Usher and
McClelland’s (2001) LCA model was shown to account for behavioral data by
assuming some combination of competition between accumulators and leakage (or
decay) of evidence during the decision process. Although ﬁts of these models
typically show that decay is not needed to account for behavioral data (i.e.,
best-ﬁtting estimates of decay parameters are typically quite small, exerting mini-
mal influence on model behavior; Ratcliff and Smith 2004), it is possible that decay
may operate at a neurophysiological level, but remain undetectable in behavioral
data. Indeed, the effects of short time scale decay that characterizes cellular
membrane potentials may be masked by long time scale integration that serves to
sustain spiking activity in a cortical network. The long time scale integration
assumed by cognitive models explains why Ratcliff’s diffusion model can ﬁt data
generated by a Poisson shot-noise model, as shown by Smith (2010), even though
the former does not involve decay, whereas the latter does. Given the biological
reality of short time scale decay at the cellular level, the key question concerning
the role of decay in choice-RT models is whether there is an additional level of
decay that operates over the longer time scales that characterize the time course of
the decision process.
    By collecting neural ﬁring rate data, it becomes possible to evaluate claims that
long time scale decay and mutual inhibition are needed to account for neural data.
Ratcliff et al. (2011) investigated the role of inhibition, recording from pairs of SC
neurons that coded for different response alternatives in a brightness discrimination
task and found no evidence of inhibition among SC neuron pairs. When condi-
tioned on the ﬁring rate of the neuron coding for the target response, there was little
difference in the ﬁring rate for the neuron coding the nontarget response, whereas an
inhibition account would predict a decrease. Ratcliff et al. also found that the dual
diffusion and LCA models provided similarly good ﬁts to the behavioral choice-RT
data, but that the amount of inhibition predicted by the LCA model was minimal.
As these conclusions were based on ﬁts to behavioral data, this result might have
been expected on the basis of similar ﬁts reported by Ratcliff and Smith (2004). To
investigate whether inhibition was needed to account for the neural data, simulated
evidence accumulation trajectories were generated from both models. As with the
behavioral data, both models closely captured the underlying neural dynamics.
Because the dual diffusion model assumes no inhibition, and the simulated LCA
trajectories also incorporated minimal inhibition, the result suggests that inhibition
was not needed to account for the neural data. Indeed, by increasing levels of
inhibition in the LCA model and generating simulated evidence accumulation
trajectories, Ratcliff et al. showed that the model produced poorer ﬁts to behavioral
284                                                          D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

data and, contrary to the data, predicted negatively correlated ﬁring rates in target
nontarget SC neuron pairs. They concluded that if inhibition were involved in
decision-making in SC neurons, the strength of the inhibition was so low as to be
undetectable.
   The studies by Ratcliff et al. (2003, 2007, 2011) illustrate one of the advantages
of using both behavioral and neural data in model testing. By ﬁtting models to
behavioral data and examining whether the model dynamics resemble the under-
lying neural dynamics, it is possible to draw strong conclusions about the rela-
tionship between the underlying cognitive and neural processes. In the case of
simple decision-making, combining analysis of neural data with mathematical
modeling of behavioral data provides support for the linking hypothesis that evi-
dence accumulation processes described by cognitive sequential sampling models
are functionally related to ﬁring rates in the underlying neural populations. By
examining data at the neural level, it is also possible to resolve model mimicry
problems that appear at the behavioral level. Whereas hybrid diffusion-accumulator
models are able to provide competitive ﬁts to behavioral data, they do so by
invoking different psychological mechanisms (e.g., mutual inhibition). While, it is
possible to appeal to neural plausibility to argue for the inclusion of certain pro-
cessing mechanisms, the requirement to account for neurophysiological and
behavioral data simultaneously allows these assumptions to be tested directly.
   Neurally Constrained Modeling. A new development in integrating neural and
cognitive-behavioral levels of analysis is that of neurally constrained modeling of
choice-RT data (e.g., Purcell et al. 2010). Like the approach of Ratcliff et al. (2003,
2007, 2011), who showed that models ﬁtted to behavioral data also predict neural
ﬁring rates, this approach investigates the relationship between ﬁring rates and
sequential sampling models. However, instead of treating accumulation rates as free
parameters, this approach uses empirical spike trains recorded from early sensory
areas as inputs to the decision process. By using neural data directly to constrain the
model parameters, this approach provides a direct way to test assumptions about
how neurons coding for different perceptual representations influence subsequent
decision process.
   Purcell et al. (2010) compared a range of sequential sampling models on their
ability to account for combined behavioral and neurophysiological data from
macaques performing a visual search task. In this task, the monkeys were required
to make a saccade response to a singleton target stimulus embedded in an array of
distractors (e.g., a red target among green distractors). Behavioral accuracy and RT
data were collected. While the monkeys performed the task, recordings from two
kinds of FEF neurons were made. Single-unit recordings from visual neurons in
FEF, which were assumed to code for the perceptual representations of the stimuli,
were collected. The spike trains recorded in these neurons were used as the input to
the decision process in the models. Recordings were also made from movement
neurons in FEF, which are responsible for executing the saccade response. Purcell
et al. assumed that spike rates for these neurons coded for the integration of per-
ceptual evidence over time.
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                        285

    Purcell et al. (2010) considered a number of different model architectures
including correlated, independent, and competitively interacting diffusion pro-
cesses, and examined the effect of different assumptions on the predicted evidence
accumulation process. Evidence accumulation was either perfect (as in Ratcliff’s
diffusion model; Eq. 14.1), leaky (as in the OU diffusion process; Eq. 14.2), or
required a threshold level of visual FEF activity prior to the onset of evidence
accumulation by movement neurons, which they termed a gated accumulation
model. Purcell et al. found that both leaky and gated accumulation models provided
the best account of the behavioral data. Because visual FEF neurons were assumed
to provide a continuous stream of perceptual evidence to movement neurons—
including the period before the neuron successfully discriminated the target—the
models that assumed perfect integration failed to account for behavioral data, as
they integrated input noise for the bulk of the trial. By contrast, the leaky and gated
accumulation models were able to account for the behavioral data because leakage
and the gating threshold counteracted the effects of input noise early in the trial.
Using model parameters that optimized ﬁt to behavioral data, Purcell et al. simu-
lated evidence accumulation trajectories and compared them with the ﬁring rates of
movement neurons during the task. They considered several aspects of the move-
ment neuron dynamics: the time at which spike activity increased from baseline
levels, the speed with which spike rate increased, the baseline ﬁring rate, and the
threshold ﬁring rate corresponding with initiation of a saccade. Whereas the leaky
and gated accumulation models both provided good ﬁts to the behavioral data, only
the gated accumulation model was able to account for the full suite of neural data.
    The work of Purcell et al. (2010) shows the value of neural constraints in
evaluating sequential sampling models. However, the properties of their proposed
gating mechanism have yet to be investigated in other settings. Their gating
mechanism represents one possible way to limit the accumulation of noise prior to
stimulus presentation, ﬁrst discussed by Laming (1968) and recently investigated by
Ratcliff and Smith (2010). Ratcliff and Smith investigated decision-making in a task
in which letter stimuli were presented in dynamic noise and found that the effect of
noise was to shift the leading edge of the RT distribution later in time. The shift was
interpreted as a delay in the onset of evidence accumulation by the decision process.
Their results showed that the onset of evidence accumulation by the decision
process must be sensitive to the temporal stability of the stimulus representation.
When stimuli are embedded in dynamic noise, the process of forming a stable
representation of the stimulus is slowed, resulting in delayed onset of
decision-making. It is not yet clear whether Purcell et al.’s gating mechanism can
also provide an explanation of the delay in the onset of evidence accumulation
produced by noise in Ratcliff and Smith’s (2010) task.
    To summarize, by making very simple assumptions about how neural activity
relates to coding of perceptual evidence, it is possible to simultaneously model data
at both behavioral and neurophysiological levels of analysis. From a theoretical
perspective, addressing both kinds of data has become increasingly important, as
different kinds of model architectures have proved equally capable of accounting
for behavioral data (Ratcliff and Smith 2004). Although there are a number of open
286                                                          D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

theoretical issues that remain to be settled, this approach to analyzing combined
neural and behavioral data constitutes a signiﬁcant methodological and theoretical
development.



14.4    Summary and Conclusions

In this chapter, we have attempted to provide an overview of the development of
different classes of sequential sampling models in cognitive and mathematical
psychology, and how they relate to data collected from single-unit recordings in
neural oculomotor circuits. Sequential sampling models are among the most rig-
orously tested models in psychology, and after many decades of reﬁnement, the
best models can account for all of the major behavioral phenomena of interest
(Ratcliff and McKoon 2008; Ratcliff and Smith 2004). One of the side effects of this
theoretical progress is that several classes of models (e.g., diffusion and hybrid
diffusion-accumulator models) have been shown to provide comparably good ﬁts to
behavioral data, and are consequently very difﬁcult to distinguish. This is a salient
issue because the assumptions of some models—such as those involving decay and
mutual inhibition—are motivated by appeals to neural plausibility. While we
appreciate such considerations, we note that such assumptions, like any theoretical
assumptions, must be subject to empirical test. It is clear from recent work that there
is much to be gained from the theoretical exchange between psychologists and
neuroscientists interested in decision-making. The rich history of choice-RT
research in cognitive and mathematical psychology provides a theoretical frame-
work for studying the neural basis of decision-making. Reciprocally, constraints
from neural data provide an opportunity to test and reﬁne decision models in ways
that would not have been possible using behavioral data alone.



14.4.1 Outstanding Questions and Future Directions

Despite the substantial progress that has been made over the last decade or so in
identifying neural correlates of decision processes and relating these two compo-
nents of successful sequential sampling models, there are a number of issues that
remain open. We briefly discuss three of these issues here.
   One Decision Architecture or Many? Although the studies reviewed above have
consistently shown links between neural ﬁring rates in oculomotor areas and evi-
dence accumulation rates in decision models, there are subtle differences in some of
the speciﬁc details of models associated with different brain areas. For example, for
SC neurons in monkeys performing a brightness discrimination task, Ratcliff et al.
(2011) found no functional role for mutual inhibition among decision neurons,
suggesting that models like the LCA, which ascribe a central role to inhibition, may
not be appropriate for modeling decision processes executed in SC. An open
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                       287

question is whether other brain areas show evidence for inhibition at the level of
decision processes, and whether an LCA-like model might be suitable for neurons
outside of SC.
    Recent work by Purcell et al. (2012), extended their previous study of FEF
movement neurons in monkeys performing a visual search task. Whereas, their
initial study only allowed modeling of correct RT distributions (Purcell et al. 2010)
their follow-up examined RT distributions for both correct and error responses
using the same neurally constrained modeling approach. In contrast to what Ratcliff
et al. (2011) found for SC neurons, Purcell et al. (2012) found support for a gated
accumulation model that involved mutual inhibition among accumulators. The
implication of these studies is that decision-making architectures and dynamics,
though fundamentally very similar, as they draw on common principles of evidence
accumulation, may vary in signiﬁcant ways across different brain areas. Additional
work is needed to better understand how and why neural decision architectures
might vary.
    Modeling Evidence Integration. The results from the neurally constrained
modeling approach of Purcell et al. (2010, 2012) provide support for a simple
linking proposition about the neural representation of perceptual evidence. Using
empirical spike train data to drive a decision mechanism is an important ﬁrst step in
developing a comprehensive neurocomputational account of decision-making.
However, this is only a partial solution. As the work of Wang and colleagues (e.g.,
Lo and Wang 2006; Wang 2001, 2002; Wong and Wang 2006) and Smith and
McKenzie (2011) highlighted, the question remains as to how temporal integration
of evidence is realized neurocomputationally. Owing to the large differences in time
scales between individual neurons involved in decision-making and the overall
decision-making process itself, the neural mechanism that integrates evidence over
behaviorally relevant time scales needs to be developed further. As with other
theoretical approaches (e.g., Ditterich 2006; Mazurek et al. 2003; Purcell et al.
2010, 2012; Ratcliff et al. 2003, 2007, 2011; Smith 2010), temporal integration of
perceptual evidence is assumed to be a theoretical primitive of the models. The
spiking neuron models developed by Wang and colleagues and recurrent loop
models, like Smith and McKenzie’s, suggest some theoretical possibilities for how
evidence might be integrated over long time scales. Combining such a theoretical
decision architecture with the neurally constrained approach provides an interesting
avenue for further development, as it could provide a strong test of the principles of
recurrence and superposition used by Smith and McKenzie.
    Neural Correlates of Bias and Reward. In addition to the work reviewed above
that has investigated neural correlates of evidence accumulation, recent work has
begun to use choice-RT modeling to investigate the neural correlates of prior
knowledge and bias effects in simple decision tasks in humans (e.g., Bode et al.
2012; Forstmann et al. 2010; Mulder et al. 2012) and monkeys (e.g., Rao et al.
2012; Rorie et al. 2010).
    For example, Rao et al. (2012) studied LIP responses of monkeys performing the
motion direction discrimination task. Using cues indicating the most likely direction
of motion for an upcoming stimulus, they observed systematic shifts in LIP ﬁring
288                                                          D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

rates following cue presentation, but no effect on the rate at which activity
approached a threshold ﬁring rate. A similar effect on LIP response was observed
by Rorie et al. (2010) who used a reward-based manipulation. For both studies,
choice-RT modeling revealed an effect on the start-point of the evidence accu-
mulation process.
    In human studies, Forstmann et al. (2010) had people complete a cued version of
the motion discrimination task similar to that used by Rao et al. (2012). Using
fMRI, Forstmann et al. found that cues produced changes in cortico-striatal brain
circuits, but only after accounting for the effects of response bias—as measured by
ﬁtting an accumulator model to behavioral data (Brown and Heathcote 2008). This
work has recently been extended by Mulder et al. (2012), who manipulated prior
probability with cues and reward using payoffs. Their fMRI analysis revealed
common effects of bias and reward on cortico-parietal decision circuits, which
produced changes in response bias—indexed by the estimated starting point of
evidence accumulation—in Ratcliff’s diffusion model.
    In a similar vein, Bode et al. (2012) investigated sequence effects in a perceptual
decision-making task, involving stimuli presented briefly in noise. They combined a
model-based behavioral analysis with a pattern-classiﬁcation analysis of EEG data.
Using Ratcliff’s diffusion model, Bode et al. showed that sequence effects in the
behavioral data were consistent with changes in the starting point of the evidence
accumulation process, reflecting a bias favoring the response made on the previous
trial. Consistent with this response bias account, it was also found that prestimulus
activity in the EEG trace was predictive of people’s responses on catch-trials where
only noise was presented.
    Taken together, these investigations into the neural correlates of bias and prior
knowledge effects add to the growing body of evidence that both neural and
behavioral choice-RT data can be accommodated by a common sequential sampling
framework.



14.4.2 Conclusion

With the recent reﬁnement of techniques for recording spike rates from monkeys
performing simple perceptual tasks, it has become possible to directly evaluate
modeling assumptions made on the basis of neural plausibility. A number of
research groups, using a variety of tasks and methods, have provided converging
evidence that the spiking dynamics of neurons in FEF, LIP, and SC bear a striking
resemblance to the evidence accumulation dynamics postulated by sequential
sampling models of decision-making. By recording from oculomotor areas known
to be involved in the processing of perceptual stimuli and preparation of saccadic
responses, one can evaluate the degree of convergence between cognitive theory
and neural data. Assumptions made in cognitive models have provided a basis for
testing hypotheses about how the brain integrates perceptual evidence over time,
and, importantly, how neural data can be used as a tool for model selection.
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                                 289

Acknowledgments This work was supported by ARC Discovery Grant DP110103406 awarded
to P.L. Smith and R. Ratcliff. We thank Simon Lilburn for helpful comments on a previous version
of the manuscript. David Sewell is now at the University of Queensland.




References

Audley RJ, Pike AR (1965) Some alternative stochastic models of choice. Br J Math Stat Psychol
    18:207–225
Bennur S, Gold JI (2011) Distinct representations of a perceptual decision and the associated
    oculomotor plan in the monkey lateral intraparietal area. J Neurosci 31:913–921
Bode S, Sewell DK, Lilburn SD, Forte JD, Smith PL, Stahl J (2012) Predicting perceptual decision
    biases from early brain activity. J Neurosci 32:12488–12498
Bogacz R (2007) Optimal decision-making theories: linking neurobiology with behaviour. Trends
    Cogn Sci 11:118–125
Bogacz R, Brown E, Moehlis J, Holmes P, Cohen JD (2006) The physics of optimal decision
    making: a formal analysis of models of performance in two-alternative forced-choice tasks.
    Psychol Rev 113:700–765
Britten KH, Shadlen MN, Newsome WT, Movshon JA (1993) Responses of neurons in macaque
    MT to stochastic motion signals. Vis Neurosci 10:1157–1169
Britten KH, Newsome WT, Shadlen MN, Celebrini S, Movshon JA (1996) A relationship between
    behavioral choice and the visual response of neurons in macaque MT. Vis Neurosci 13:87–100
Brown SD, Heathcote A (2008) The simplest complete model of choice response time: Linear
    ballistic accumulation. Cogn Psychol 57:153–178
Busemeyer JR, Townsend JT (1993) Decision ﬁeld theory: a dynamic-cognitive approach to
    decision making in an uncertain environment. Psychol Rev 100:432–459
Churchland AK, Kiani R, Shadlen MN (2008) Decision-making with multiple alternatives. Nat
    Neurosci 11:693–702
Ditterich J (2006) Evidence for time-variant decision making. Eur J Neurosci 24:3628–3641
Ditterich J, Mazurek ME, Shadlen MN (2003) Microstimulation of visual cortex affects the speed
    of perceptual decisions. Nat Neurosci 6:891–898
Edwards W (1965) Optimal strategies for seeking information: models for statistics, choice
    reaction times, and human information processing. J Math Psychol 2:312–329
Forstmann BU, Brown S, Dutilh G, Neumann J, Wagenmakers EJ (2010) The neural substrate of
    prior information in perceptual decision making: a model-based analysis. Frontiers in Human
    Neuroscience 4:1–12
Gnadt JW, Andersen RA (1988) Memory related motor planning activity in posterior parietal
    cortex of macaque. Exp Brain Res 70:216–220
Gold JI, Shadlen MN (2000) Representation of a perceptual decision in developing oculomotor
    commands. Nature 404:390–394
Gold JI, Shadlen MN (2001) Neural computations that underlie decisions about sensory stimuli.
    Trends in Cognitive Sciences 5:10–16
Gold JI, Shadlen MN (2002) Banburismus and the brain: decoding the relationship between
    sensory stimuli, decisions, and reward. Neuron 36:299–308
Gold JI, Shadlen MN (2003) The influence of behavioral context on the representation of a
    perceptual decision in developing oculomotor commands. J Neurosci 23:632–651
Gold JI, Shadlen MN (2007) The neural basis of decision making. Annu Rev Neurosci 30:
    535–574
Green DM, Swets JA (1966) Signal detection theory and psychophysics. Wiley, New York
Green DM, Smith AF, von Gierke SM (1983) Choice reaction time with a random foreperiod.
    Percept Psychophys 34:195–208
290                                                                   D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

Hanes DP, Schall JD (1996) Neural control of voluntary movement initiation. Science 274:
   427–430
Hanks TD, Ditterich J, Shadlen MN (2006) Microstimulation of macaque area LIP affects
   decision-making in a motion discrimination task. Nat Neurosci 9:682–689
Huk AC, Meister MLR (2012) Neural correlates and neural computations in posterior parietal
   cortex during perceptual decision-making. Front Integr Neurosci 6:1–13
Huk AC, Shadlen MN (2005) Neural activity in macaque parietal cortex reflects temporal
   integration of visual motion signals during perceptual decision making. J Neurosci 25:
   10420–10436
Kiani R, Hanks TD, Shadlen MN (2008) Bounded integration in parietal cortex underlies decisions
   even when viewing duration is dictated by the environment. J Neurosci 28:3017–3029
LaBerge D (1962) A recruitment theory of simple behavior. Psychometrika 27:375–396
LaBerge D (1994) Quantitative models of attention and response processing in shape identiﬁcation
   tasks. J Math Psychol 38:198–243
Laming DRJ (1968) Information theory of choice reaction time. Wiley, New York
Link SW, Heath RA (1975) A sequential theory of psychological discrimination. Psychometrika
   40:77–105
Lo C-C, Wang X-J (2006) Cortico-basal ganglia circuit mechanism for a decision threshold in
   reaction time tasks. Nat Neurosci 9:956–963
Luce RD (1986) Response times: Their role in inferring elementary mental organization. Oxford
   University Press, Oxford
Mazurek ME, Roitman JD, Ditterich J, Shadlen MN (2003) A role for neural integrators in
   perceptual decision making. Cereb Cortex 13:1257–1269
Mulder MJ, Wagenmakers EJ, Ratcliff R, Boekel W, Forstmann BU (2012) Bias in the brain: a
   diffusion model analysis of prior probability and potential payoff. J Neurosci 32:2335–2343
Palmer J, Huk AC, Shadlen MN (2005) The effect of stimulus strength on the speed and accuracy
   of a perceptual decision. Journal of Vision 5:376–404
Pike AR (1966) Stochastic models of choice behaviour: response probabilities and latencies of
   ﬁnite Markov chain systems. Br J Math Stat Psychol 21:161–182
Pike AR (1973) Response latency models for signal detection. Psychol Rev 80:53–68
Purcell BA, Heitz RP, Cohen JY, Schall JD, Logan GD, Palmeri TJ (2010) Neurally constrained
   modeling of perceptual decision making. Psychol Rev 117:1113–1143
Purcell BA, Schall JD, Logan GD, Palmeri TJ (2012) From salience to saccades:
   multiple-alternative gated stochastic accumulator model of visual search. J Neurosci 32:
   3433–3446
Rao V, DeAngelis GC, Snyder LH (2012) Neural correlates of prior expectations of motion in the
   lateral intraparietal and middle temporal areas. J Neurosci 32:10063–10074
Ratcliff R (1978) A theory of memory retrieval. Psychol Rev 85:59–108
Ratcliff R (1988) Continuous versus discrete information processing: modeling accumulation of
   partial information. Psychol Rev 95:238–255
Ratcliff R (2002) A diffusion model account of response time and accuracy in a brightness
   discrimination task: ﬁtting real data and failing to ﬁt fake but plausible data. Psychon Bull Rev
   9:278–291
Ratcliff R (2006) Modeling response signal and response time data. Cogn Psychol 53:195–237
Ratcliff R, McKoon G (2008) The diffusion decision model: theory and data for two-choice
   decision tasks. Neural Comput 20:873–922
Ratcliff R, Rouder JN (1998) Modeling response times for two-choice decisions. Psychol Sci
   9:347–356
Ratcliff R, Rouder JN (2000) A diffusion model account of masking in two-choice letter
   identiﬁcation. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 26:127–140
Ratcliff R, Smith PL (2004) A comparison of sequential sampling models for two-choice reaction
   time. Psychol Rev 111:333–367
Ratcliff R, Smith PL (2010) Perceptual discrimination in static and dynamic noise: the temporal
   relation between perceptual encoding and decision making. J Exp Psychol Gen 139:70–94
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                                   291

Ratcliff R, Van Zandt T, McKoon G (1999) Connectionist and diffusion models of reaction time.
   Psychol Rev 106:261–300
Ratcliff R, Cherian A, Segraves MA (2003) A comparison of macaque behavior and superior
   colliculus neuronal activity to predictions from models of two-choice decisions. J Neurophysiol
   90:1392–1407
Ratcliff R, Gomez P, McKoon G (2004) A diffusion model account of the lexical decision task.
   Psychol Rev 111:159–182
Ratcliff R, Hasegawa YT, Hasegawa RP, Smith PL, Segraves MA (2007) Dual diffusion model for
   single-cell recording data from the superior colliculus in a brightness-discrimination task.
   J Neurophysiol 97:1756–1774
Ratcliff R, Hasegawa YT, Hasegawa RP, Childers R, Smith PL, Segraves MA (2011) Inhibition in
   superior colliculus neurons in a brightness discrimination task? Neural Comput 23:1790–1820
Roe RM, Busemeyer JR, Townsend JT (2001) Multialternative decision ﬁeld theory: a dynamic
   connectionist model of decision making. Psychol Rev 108:370–392
Roitman JD, Shadlen MN (2002) Response of neurons in the later intraparietal area during a
   combined visual discrimination reaction time task. J Neurosci 22:9475–9489
Rorie AE, Gao J, McClelland JL, Newsome WT (2010) Integration of sensory and reward
   information during perceptual decision-making in lateral intraparietal cortex (LIP) of the
   macaque monkey. PLoS ONE 5:1–21
Schall JD (2004) On building a bridge between brain and behavior. Annu Rev Psychol 55:23–50
Seidemann E, Zohary E, Newsome WT (1998) Temporal gating of neural signals during
   performance of a visual discrimination task. Nature 394:72–75
Sewell DK, Smith PL (2012) Attentional control in visual signal detection: effects of abrupt-onset
   and no-onset stimuli. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 38:1043–1068
Shadlen MN, Newsome WT (1996) Motion perception: seeing and deciding. Proc Nat Acad Sci
   93:628–633
Shadlen MN, Newsome WT (2001) Neural basis of a perceptual decision in the parietal cortex
   (area LIP) of the rhesus monkey. J Neurophysiol 86:1916–1936
Smith PL (1995) Psychophysically principled models of visual simple reaction time. Psychol Rev
   102:567–593
Smith PL (2000) Stochastic dynamic models of response time and accuracy: a foundational primer.
   J Math Psychol 44:408–463
Smith PL (2010) From poisson shot noise to the integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process: neurally
   principled models of information accumulation in decision-making and response time. J Math
   Psychol 54:266–283
Smith PL, McKenzie CRL (2011) Diffusive information accumulation by minimal recurrent neural
   models of decision-making. Neural Comput 23:2000–2031
Smith PL, Ratcliff R (2004) Psychology and neurobiology of simple decisions. Trends Neurosci
   27:161–168
Smith PL, Ratcliff R (2009) An integrated theory of attention and decision making in visual signal
   detection. Psychol Rev 116:283–317
Smith PL, Van Zandt T (2000) Time-dependent poisson counter models of response latency in
   simple judgment. Br J Math Stat Psychol 53:293–315
Smith PL, Vickers D (1988) The accumulator model of two-choice discrimination. J Math Psychol
   32:135–168
Smith PL, Ratcliff R, Wolfgang BJ (2004) Attention orienting and the timecourse of perceptual
   decisions: response time distributions with masked and unmasked displays. Vision Res
   44:1297–1320
Smith PL, Ellis R, Sewell DK, Wolfgang BJ (2010) Cued detection with compound
   integration-interruption masks reveals multiple attentional mechanisms. J Vis 10:1–28
Stone M (1960) Models for choice-reaction time. Psychometrika 25:251–260
Teller DY (1984) Linking propositions. Vision Res 10:1233–1246
292                                                                 D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

Thompson KG, Hanes DP, Bichot NP, Schall JD (1996) Perceptual and motor processing stages
   identiﬁed in the activity of macaque frontal eye ﬁeld neurons during visual search.
   J Neurophysiol 76:4040–4055
Thompson KG, Bichot NP, Schall JD (1997) Dissociation of visual discrimination from saccade
   programming in macaque frontal eye ﬁeld. J Neurophysiol 77:1046–1050
Thornton TL, Gilden DL (2007) Parallel and serial processes in visual search. Psychol Rev
   114:71–103
Townsend JT, Ashby FG (1983) Stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes.
   Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Usher M, McClelland JL (2001) The time course of perceptual choice: the leaky, competing
   accumulator model. Psychol Rev 108:550–592
Van Zandt T, Colonius H, Proctor RW (2000) A comparison of two response time models applied
   to perceptual matching. Psychon Bull Rev 7:208–256
Vickers D (1970) Evidence for an accumulator model of psychophysical discrimination.
   Ergonomics 13:37–58
Vickers D (1979) Decision processes in visual perception. Academic Press, New York
Wagenmakers EJ, Brown S (2007) On the linear relation between the mean and the standard
   deviation of a response time distribution. Psychol Rev 114:830–841
Wald A (1947) Sequential analysis. Wiley, New York
Wang X-J (2001) Synaptic reverberation underlying mnemonic persistent activity. Trends
   Neurosci 24:455–463
Wang X-J (2002) Probabilistic decision making by slow reverberation in cortical circuits. Neuron
   36:955–968
Wickelgren WA (1977) Speed-accuracy tradeoff and information processing dynamics. Acta
   Psychol 41:67–85
Wong K-F, Wang X-J (2006) A recurrent network mechanism of time integration in perceptual
   decisions. J Neurosci 26:1314–1328