Chapter 14
The Psychology and Psychobiology
of Simple Decisions: Speeded Choice
and Its Neural Correlates

David K. Sewell and Philip L. Smith


Abstract In this chapter, we provide a tutorial review of the class of sequential
sampling models of two-choice decision-making. These models, which have been
developed in cognitive and mathematical psychology over the last 50 years, pro-
vide a detailed quantitative account of performance in simple, speeded choice tasks.
The models explain the major ﬁndings from a wide variety of behavioral decision
tasks, including the relationship between choice probabilities and response time
(RT), the speed-accuracy tradeoff, the shapes of RT distributions, and the relative
speed of correct and error responses. More recently, electrophysiological recordings
from decision-related brain areas in awake behaving monkeys have revealed a
correspondence between patterns of neural ﬁring and the statistical processes of
evidence accumulation assumed in the psychological models. We discuss the the-
oretical relationship between the cognitive process of evidence accumulation and
neural ﬁring rates and show how neural data can constrain behavioral models.
Importantly, constraints from neurophysiological data can be used to test between
models that are otherwise difﬁcult to distinguish. The convergence of psychological
theory and neurophysiological data suggests that a common theoretical and math-
ematical framework is sufﬁcient to account for simple decision-making data at
neural and behavioral levels of analysis.



14.1     The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple
         Decisions: Speeded Choice and Its Neural Correlates

The simplest decision an organism can make involves choosing between two
alternatives. The importance of such two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) deci-
sions is reflected in the extent to which they have been studied in psychology and,

D.K. Sewell  P.L. Smith (&)
The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
e-mail: philipls@unimelb.edu.au
D.K. Sewell
e-mail: d.sewell@uq.edu.au

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                        253
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_14
254                                                          D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

more recently, in behavioral economics. For both psychologists and economists,
the fundamental theoretical questions involve what is chosen, as a function of
the discriminability or desirability of the alternatives, how long it takes to make the
choice, and what mechanisms determine the choice. A wealth of 2AFC data col-
lected over the last 50 years has led to detailed analyses of the relationship between
psychology’s two ubiquitous dependent variables: choice probability and response
time (RT). Probably the most familiar expression of this relationship is in the speed-
accuracy tradeoff, which describes people’s ability to trade speed against accuracy
in decision-making tasks (e.g., Luce 1986; Wickelgren 1977). In psychology, the
theoretical understanding of the choice-RT relationship has been guided by the
development of the influential class of sequential sampling models. According to
these models, decisions are made by summing, or accumulating, samples of noisy
evidence over time. Statistical variability in the moment-to-moment quality of the
evidence is assumed to reflect noise in the cognitive or neural processes that code
for different response alternatives. A response is initiated only after sufﬁcient evi-
dence for a decision is obtained. Successful sequential sampling models, such as
Ratcliff’s (1978), Ratcliff and McKoon (2008) diffusion model, account for
behavioral data at the level of choice probabilities and the shapes of correct and
error RT distributions. The model’s ability to provide very detailed accounts of data
suggests that decision-making in simple decision tasks does indeed occur via a
process of accumulating evidence to a criterion.
    The characterization of decision-making as a process of accumulating evidence
over time has attracted the attention of neuroscientists studying the neural correlates
of decision-making. Using analogs of 2AFC decision tasks, in which monkeys
respond to visually presented stimuli by making saccadic eye movements, neuro-
scientists have uncovered striking similarities between the ﬁring rates of neurons in
lateral intraparietal area (LIP), superior colliculus (SC), and the frontal eye ﬁelds
(FEF) on the one hand, and the dynamics of evidence accumulation postulated by
sequential sampling models on the other. Neurons in these brain areas are part of the
oculomotor control circuit that is active when making saccadic eye movements. This
invites the theoretical linking proposition (Schall 2004; Teller 1984) that activity in
this circuit provides an online reflection of the accumulating evidence state prior to
executing an eye movement. Indeed, patterns of neuronal ﬁring rate data in regions
involved in perceptual decision-making appear to reflect the temporal integration, or
accumulation, of evidence over relatively long time scales (e.g., Shadlen and
Newsome 1996; for a review see Gold and Shadlen 2007). The correspondence
between psychological theory and neurophysiological data suggests that phenomena
at both cognitive and neural levels of analysis may be understood in terms of a
common theoretical and mathematical framework (Smith and Ratcliff 2004). The
principal beneﬁt of such correspondence is that insights at one level of analysis
impose constraints on the other. The development of sequential sampling models
from psychology has guided neurophysiological empirical investigations (e.g.,
Ratcliff et al. 2003, 2007), and neurophysiological data have proved diagnostic in
testing between models that are otherwise difﬁcult to distinguish on the basis of
behavioral data alone (e.g., Purcell et al. 2010; Ratcliff et al. 2011).
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                        255

    In this chapter, we use models of simple decision-making as a link between
psychological and neurophysiological levels of analysis. We focus particularly on
the similarities between the time course of neural ﬁring rates preceding an eye
movement response and the time course of the process of evidence accumulation
estimated from sequential sampling models. Although most of the studies we dis-
cuss involved neural data collected from monkeys performing simple perceptual
decision tasks, sequential sampling models have also been successfully applied to
behavioral data from other kinds of tasks involving higher order cognitive judg-
ments including, but not limited to, recognition memory (e.g., Ratcliff 1978),
lexical decision (e.g., Ratcliff et al. 2004), as well as tasks involving more complex
value-based decisions (e.g., Busemeyer and Townsend 1993; Roe et al. 2001). For
these kinds of “one-shot” tasks, a decision is usually made within a second or so
after stimulus presentation. Because performance in these tasks is well described by
sequential sampling models (e.g., Ratcliff and Smith 2004), we argue that the
relationship between these sequential sampling models and neural processing
dynamics likely extends beyond perceptual decision-making to other domains.
    The chapter is organized into two parts. In the ﬁrst part, we discuss the
benchmark patterns of empirical results that have been used to evaluate competing
sequential sampling models in psychology. We then provide a nontechnical tutorial
overview of the main classes of sequential sampling models that have been
developed in cognitive and mathematical psychology, and discuss how different
models succeed or fail in addressing the benchmark results. Different models reflect
differing assumptions about the architecture of the decision process: whether evi-
dence is represented in continuous or discrete quantities, is sampled in continuous
or discrete time, and whether there is competitive interaction among decision units.
We discuss the empirical and theoretical implications of these distinctions in fairly
general, qualitative, terms and omit the technical details. Readers interested in these
details are referred to the sources cited herein.
    As we discuss below, models that assume that evidence is accumulated by a
diffusion process provide a better account of behavioral data than models that
assume it is accumulated by other kinds of processes (Ratcliff and Smith 2004).
This provides strong support for the class of diffusion models, as opposed to
plausible alternatives like accumulator and counter models. However, more recent
neurally inspired models have successfully combined elements of diffusion models
with decision architectures traditionally used in accumulator and counter models
(e.g., Ratcliff et al. 2007; Smith 2000; Usher and McClelland 2001). Throughout
our discussion, we focus on Ratcliff’s (1978), Ratcliff and McKoon (2008) diffu-
sion model, as it has been tested extensively, and has been shown to provide a good
account of decision-making in simple cognitive tasks (Ratcliff and Smith 2004). We
then discuss recent theoretical developments showing that the simulated behavior of
neural network circuits provides a biologically plausible basis for implementing a
diffusion decision process in the brain (e.g., Smith 2010; Wang 2002). These
studies provide a theoretical basis for understanding the neural computations that
underpin decision processes, and provide an account of why diffusion models have
proved successful in accounting for behavioral data.
256                                                                    D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

    In the second part of the chapter, we review ﬁndings that identify patterns of
ﬁring rates in LIP, SC, and FEF neurons as neural correlates of evidence accu-
mulation processes. In a variety of perceptual decision tasks, shortly after stimulus
presentation, ﬁring rates in these brain areas exhibit systematic ramping to a
threshold (e.g., Churchland et al. 2008; Hanes and Schall 1996; Purcell et al. 2010;
Ratcliff et al. 2003, 2007, 2011; Shadlen and Newsome 1996, 2001), consistent
with accumulation of evidence to a decision criterion. Much of the work we review
here focuses on neural data collected from populations of macaque LIP neurons
while the animals completed variants of a random dot motion direction discrimi-
nation task developed by Newsome, Shadlen, and colleagues (see Gold and Shadlen
2007, and Huk and Meister 2012, for reviews and discussion). In this task, a
monkey is presented with a random dot motion stimulus, where some proportion of
the dots move coherently in a single direction. To indicate the perceived direction of
motion, the monkey makes a saccadic eye movement to a response target (see
Fig. 14.1).
    A striking aspect of the response of LIP neurons in tasks like these is that
direction-speciﬁc ﬁring rates remain elevated even after the stimulus is extinguished
(e.g., Gnadt and Andersen 1988; Shadlen and Newsome 1996, 2001). When viewed
in terms of the general theoretical distinction between categorical and precategorical
stimulus representations, the asymptotic level of ﬁring can be identiﬁed with for-
mation of a response-related categorical representation of the stimulus, whereas the
ramping of activity toward asymptote can be related to the evolving state of a
precategorical representation. This is consistent with the idea that aspects of LIP




Fig. 14.1 Overview of two versions of the random dot motion direction discrimination task
developed by Newsome, Shadlen, and colleagues. In the response time version of the task (left
panel), a monkey ﬁxates the cross in the center of the screen. Two saccade targets corresponding to
different response alternatives are presented. One of the targets is positioned in the receptive ﬁeld
of an LIP neuron. The random dot stimulus is then presented. Once the monkey makes a decision
about the direction of coherent motion in the stimulus, it makes an eye movement to one of the
saccade targets. The procedure is similar in the ﬁxed viewing duration version of the task (right
panel) with the exception that there is an experimenter-enforced delay between offset of the
random dot stimulus and when the monkey is allowed to make a response. Reproduced from
Roitman and Shadlen (2002)
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                       257

activity reflect memory for the outcome of a decision process. Importantly, this
sustained neural activity can also be distinguished from activity related to planning
a speciﬁc oculomotor response, reinforcing the idea that decision outcomes have
explicit—and experimentally identiﬁable—neural correlates (Bennur and Gold
2011).
   Beyond identifying neural correlates of the decision process, several studies
have attempted to provide a joint account of behavioral and neural data through
mathematical modeling (e.g., Purcell et al. 2010; Ratcliff et al. 2003, 2007, 2011).
These studies bring to bear constraints from the neural data themselves, which have
proved useful in distinguishing sequential sampling models that mimic each other at
a purely behavioral level of analysis. We conclude the chapter with a brief dis-
cussion of outstanding questions, and future directions for research.



14.2     Sequential Sampling Models

In this section, we review the three major classes of sequential sampling models that
have been studied in psychology. Following Ratcliff and Smith (2004), we sum-
marize the key benchmark effects that have been used to assess the models, along
with how well-different classes of models address such data. A complementary
evaluation of sequential sampling models was conducted by Bogacz et al. (2006),
who examined how closely different model classes approached optimal behavior—
deﬁned in terms of maximizing the rate of reward during an experiment—and the
conditions under which the different models are formally equivalent. As we do not
cover the broad scope of their review here, the interested reader is referred to their
work for discussion.
    All sequential sampling models of decision-making assume three common ele-
ments: (1) an encoded representation of the stimulus or evidence that drives the
decision process, (2) a mechanism that integrates, or accumulates, evidence over
time, and (3) a stopping rule that determines when to halt evidence accumulation
and initiate an appropriate response. Figure 14.2 shows a taxonomy of sequential
sampling models. Individual models outlined in the ﬁgure are obtained by varying
assumptions about these common elements.
    Historically, the major distinction among sequential sampling models was in
terms of decision architecture, which refers to the number of simultaneous evidence
totals assumed in the model, or equivalently, whether decisions are based on
absolute or relative levels of evidence. Models based on random walk and diffusion
processes—the left-hand branch in Fig. 14.2—assume only a single signed evi-
dence total is accumulated over the course of a trial. The single evidence total
implements a decision rule that is based on the relative level of evidence. For
example, in Ratcliff’s diffusion model, a decision is made only when the difference
in the amount of evidence favoring one response over the other exceeds a criterion.
By contrast, the decision architecture assumed by accumulator and counter models
—the right-hand branch in Fig. 14.2—assumes that evidence for competing
258                                                                  D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith




Fig. 14.2 Taxonomy of sequential sampling models. The branch on the left depicts random walk
and diffusion models. The branch on the right depicts different accumulator and counter models.
The class of models listed in the lower right of the ﬁgure are hybrid diffusion-accumulator models
that combine aspects of diffusion models within a multi-accumulator architecture


responses is accumulated in separate evidence totals. According to these models,
there is a separate accumulator for each response alternative. The value of each
accumulator’s evidence total reflects the level of evidence supporting that response.
The ﬁrst accumulator to accrue a criterion amount of evidence determines the
response, implementing a decision rule based on absolute levels of evidence.
   The second major distinction among sequential sampling models is whether time
and evidence are represented as discrete or continuous quantities. These factors
deﬁne the statistical properties of the evidence accumulation process. For example,
random walk models (e.g., Edwards 1965; Laming 1968; Link and Heath 1975;
Stone 1960) assume continuous-valued evidence that is sampled in discrete time
steps. As we discuss below, different assumptions about decision architecture and
the nature of the evidence accumulation process lead to differences in the abilities of
models to predict key benchmark effects like the shapes of RT distributions and the
relative ordering of correct and error response times. A third distinction, which
applies to more recently developed hybrid diffusion-accumulator models (e.g.,
Usher and McClelland 2001; Ratcliff et al. 2007, 2011; Smith 2000), is whether
accumulators for different response alternatives compete by mutually inhibiting one
another. We defer discussion of this distinction to when we discuss neurophysio-
logical data, as the relevant models are difﬁcult to distinguish with just behavioral
data (see Ratcliff and Smith 2004). Before discussing the different model classes,
we review the key benchmark effects that must be addressed by any successful
model of choice-RT.
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                      259


14.2.1 Behavioral Benchmarks for Evaluating Sequential
       Sampling Models

In the cognitive and mathematical psychology literature, three benchmark effects
have guided the development of models of decision-making. These are the
speed-accuracy tradeoff, the right-skewed shape of RT distributions, and differences
in the relative speeds of correct and error response times. Ratcliff and Smith (2004)
examined how well different models accounted for these benchmark effects.
    Speed-Accuracy Tradeoff. A common experimental manipulation in many kinds
of tasks requires participants to differentially favor response speed and accuracy,
and it is well known that participants are responsive to such instructions (Luce
1986; Wickelgren 1977). When speed is emphasized, responding is faster, but more
error-prone. When accuracy is emphasized, accuracy increases, along with response
time. Across conditions, the differences in performance can be quite striking. For
example, accuracy varies by around 10 %, whereas mean RTs can differ dramati-
cally across speed- and accuracy-emphasis conditions. In some cases, mean RTs in
conditions emphasizing accuracy are double those in conditions emphasizing speed
(Ratcliff and Rouder 1998). The pattern of changes in accuracy and mean RT across
speed and accuracy conditions, when combined with the other empirical benchmark
phenomena discussed below, impose powerful constraints on sequential sampling
models.
    Shape of Response Time Distributions. Accounting for the shapes of RT dis-
tributions has proved particularly diagnostic in evaluating sequential sampling
models because the shapes of RT distributions impose more constraints than
summary measures like mean RT. Typically, the mean and standard deviation of
empirical RT distributions increase roughly in proportion to one another
(Wagenmakers and Brown 2007). A characteristic property of RT distributions
obtained from experiments with human participants is that they are right-skewed:
Relative to median RT, the difference between the fastest RTs in different experi-
mental conditions is much smaller than the difference between the slowest RTs.
Moreover, as stimulus difﬁculty increases—for example, by increasing stimulus
confusability—increases in mean RT are primarily associated with changes in the
tails of the RT distribution. The fastest RTs—those that deﬁne the ‘leading edge’ of
the RT distribution—change very little as difﬁculty increases, whereas the slowest
RTs slow down dramatically.
    Correct and Error Response Times. Early comparisons of sequential sampling
models focused primarily on their ability to predict the empirical orderings of mean
RTs for correct and error responses. In experiments where accuracy is stressed or
the task is very difﬁcult, error RTs tend to be slower than correct RTs. By contrast
when speed is stressed, or task difﬁculty is low, error RTs tend to be faster than
correct RTs (Luce 1986). Moreover, in some cases, there is a crossover pattern, in
which error RTs are slower than correct RTs in some conditions, but faster in other
conditions of the same experiment (e.g., Ratcliff and Rouder 1998; Ratcliff and
Smith 2004; Ratcliff et al. 1999; Smith and Vickers 1988). Accounting for these
260                                                         D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

different RT orderings has been one of the biggest theoretical challenges in
developing sequential sampling models. We now introduce the major classes of
sequential sampling models investigated by Ratcliff and Smith (2004), noting how
well each model class addresses the benchmark phenomena.



14.2.2 Accumulator and Counter Models

According to accumulator and counter models, separate evidence totals for each
response alternative are incremented until one of the totals exceeds a response
criterion. In a 2AFC task, there are two separate evidence totals, one for each
response alternative. In accumulator and counter models, the decision process can
be conceptualized as a race between evidence accumulators to reach a decision
threshold. The response is controlled by the accumulator that wins the race,
implementing an absolute decision rule.
    One of the earliest models of choice-RT was LaBerge’s (1962) recruitment model,
which assumed that evidence for different response alternatives is sampled in unit
increments at discrete, equally spaced time steps. At each time step, one of the two
counters is incremented by one unit. The probability that the counter receiving the
increment is the one associated with a correct response is a function of the stimulus
discriminability. When discriminability is high, one of the counters increments at a
much faster rate than the other; when discriminability is low, the two counters
increment at more similar rates. The class of accumulator (e.g., Audley and Pike
1965; Smith and Vickers 1988; Vickers 1970, 1979) and counter models (e.g.,
LaBerge 1994; Pike 1966; Smith and Van Zandt 2000; Townsend and Ashby 1983)
can be viewed as extensions of the recruitment model. According to these models,
evidence accumulation for different response alternatives proceeds in parallel.
    The class of accumulator models developed by Vickers and colleagues (e.g.,
Smith and Vickers 1988; Vickers 1970, 1979) retained the recruitment model’s
assumption of a constant sampling rate in discrete time, but assumed
continuous-valued evidence. Figure 14.3 illustrates the mechanics of the Vickers
accumulator model. At each time step, evidence is sampled from a continuous
distribution, which is usually assumed to be Gaussian, as shown in the ﬁgure—
although Smith and Vickers (1988) also considered a model with a double-
exponential distribution of evidence, and showed its predictions were similar to
those of the Gaussian model. The strength of the evidence favoring different
alternatives is controlled by the parameters of the evidence distribution. For a
Gaussian distribution, the mean is set to μ, which is a function of the discrim-
inability of the stimulus alternatives, and the standard deviation is set to 1. The
standard deviation determines within-trial variability in the accumulation process,
meaning that different samples will provide different levels of evidence. A sensory
referent determines how evidence samples are classiﬁed. Samples falling above the
referent increment one accumulator; samples falling below the referent increment
the other accumulator. In either instance, the increment to the accumulator is the
14    The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                                           261


     Vickers Accumulator Model                                               Sensory Evidence~N(μ,1)


    Continuous evidence is
 sampled at discrete time steps

                                               Below Referent    Above Referent



                                   Accumulator 1                                 Accumulator 2
                      10                                                10

                          9                                             9

                          8                                             8

                          7                                             7

                          6                                             6



                                                                X2(t)
                  X1(t)




                          5                                             5

                          4                                             4

                          3                                             3

                          2                                             2

                          1                                             1

                          0                                             0
                           0   5     10   15     20   25   30            0   5     10   15   20   25   30

                                    Time Step                                     Time Step

Fig. 14.3 Overview of the Vickers accumulator model. On each trial, continuous-valued evidence
is sampled at a ﬁxed rate, in discrete time. At each time step, a sample is drawn from a Gaussian
distribution of sensory evidence with mean µ and standard deviation 1. The stimulus alternative
the sample provides evidence for depends on the value of the sample relative to a sensory referent,
and the corresponding accumulator is incremented by the appropriate amount. The response is
controlled by the ﬁrst accumulator to reach a criterion (set to 10 here). Response time is
determined by the number of steps required to reach the criterion. Sample trajectories from two
trials are shown. On one trial, the response is determined by Accumulator 1 (solid line), on the
other trial, Accumulator 2 controls the response (dashed line)


absolute value of the difference between the sample and the referent. Once an
accumulator has accrued a criterion amount of evidence, the corresponding
response is initiated. To allow for trial-to-trial variability in the efﬁciency of
stimulus processing (e.g., stimulus encoding), for the accumulator model and other
models of different classes, some model parameters are allowed to vary across
trials. Between-trial variability reflects the assumption of noise in the encoding
process, which results in variability in the representations of nominally identical
stimuli across different trials of an experiment. This assumption is a standard one in
psychology and is fundamental to statistical decision frameworks such as signal
detection theory (Green and Swets 1966). In the accumulator model, there is
trial-to-trial variability in accumulation rates. Across trials, the accumulation rate μ
is assumed to be Gaussian distributed with standard deviation rl , making the model
262                                                                                                            D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

doubly stochastic. The accumulation rate for a single trial is determined by a
random sample from this distribution.
   The time and evidence assumptions of the Poisson counter model (LaBerge
1994; Pike 1966; Smith and Van Zandt 2000; Townsend and Ashby 1983) are
complementary to those of the Vickers accumulator model. Unlike the accumulator
model, evidence is accumulated in unit increments, as assumed in the recruitment
model, but is sampled in continuous time. Figure 14.4 illustrates the properties of
the Poisson counter model. The name of the model derives from the fact that, for
each response alternative, the arrival times between consecutive evidence samples
are exponentially distributed with means 1=a and 1=b. The relative magnitudes of
the parameters a and b depend on stimulus discriminability. For each response


                                                                             0.1

  Poisson Counter Model
                                                      Probability Density


                                                                            0.08               Interarrival Time ~ Exponential (α)

                                                                            0.06               Interarrival Time ~ Exponential (β )
 Discrete evidence sampled
    in continuous time                                                      0.04


                                                                            0.02


                                                                              0
                                                                                   0                20         40        60         80           100
                                                                                                         Interarrival Time (ms)


                              Accumulator 1                                                                   Accumulator 2
                   10                                                                          10

                    9                                                                          9

                    8                                                                          8

                    7                                                                          7

                    6                                                                          6
           X1(t)




                                                                                       X2(t)




                    5                                                                          5

                    4                                                                          4

                    3                                                                          3

                    2                                                                          2

                    1                                                                          1

                    0                                                                          0
                     0   20    40   60   80   100   120                     140                 0        20    40   60   80   100    120   140
                               Time (ms)                                                                       Time (ms)

Fig. 14.4 Overview of the Poisson counter model. Discrete valued evidence is accrued in separate
accumulators in continuous time. Waiting times between successive evidence samples are
exponentially distributed with different mean interarrival times for the two alternatives. In this
case, α > β, resulting in shorter periods between arrival times for Accumulator 1. The response is
determined by the ﬁrst accumulator to accrue a criterion number of evidence samples, set here to
10. Response time is determined by the sum of the interarrival times for the fastest accumulator.
Two simulated evidence accumulation trajectories are shown in the ﬁgure. In both cases,
Accumulator 1 determines the response
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                        263

alternative, the number of evidence samples accrued in some interval of time is
therefore described by a Poisson process with respective intensities a and b. Like
the Vickers accumulator model, when a criterion amount of evidence for one
alternative has accrued, the corresponding response is initiated.
    Speed-Accuracy Tradeoff. Accumulator and counter models, like all sequential
sampling models, account for the speed-accuracy tradeoff in the same way, by
varying the decision criterion across conditions. Under speed instructions, the cri-
terion is relatively low, requiring only a small amount of evidence before a response
is initiated. Because the accumulation process needs less evidence to reach the
criterion, responses are faster. However, the low response criterion makes
the process susceptible to decisions being initiated by random perturbations in the
accumulation process, resulting in a greater proportion of errors. Under accuracy
instructions, the decision criterion is relatively high. This means the accumulation
process needs more evidence before a response can be initiated, resulting in longer
RTs. However, responding becomes more accurate because the increased evidence
sampling provides the accumulation process with more opportunity to average out
the effects of momentary fluctuations due to noise.
    Shapes of RT Distributions. Capturing the shapes of empirical RT distributions
has proved especially difﬁcult for counter and accumulator models. For example,
the original recruitment model (LaBerge 1962), predicted negatively skewed RT
distributions under some circumstances, and RT distributions that became more
normally distributed with increasing response criterion. The latter prediction is
inconsistent with data from studies emphasizing accuracy, which typically show
that increases in RT with changing stimulus discriminability are primarily due to
changes in the tails of the distributions rather than a change in central tendency
(e.g., Ratcliff and Rouder 1998). In Ratcliff and Smith’s (2004) evaluation of
sequential sampling models, both the Poisson counter model and the Vickers
accumulator model, were found to underestimate the extent of right skew in data,
especially at low stimulus discriminabilities. Although the Vickers accumulator
model could be made to better capture the shapes of RT distributions by assuming
long-tailed (exponential) distributions of response criteria, the Poisson counter
model could not. The reason for the difference is because the evidence totals in the
Poisson counter model are independent of one another, whereas in the accumulator
model there is an implied dependency between the totals because only one accu-
mulator is incremented at any time step.
    Correct and Error RTs. An appealing feature of the early accumulator and
counter models (e.g., LaBerge 1962; Townsend and Ashby 1983; Vickers 1970)
was that they predicted mean error RTs to be slower than correct RTs, as found in
many studies with difﬁcult to discriminate stimulus alternatives. However, as noted
above, this is only one of the patterns that have been observed in data. Under
speed-emphasis in tasks with highly discriminable stimuli, error RTs are typically
faster than correct responses. Pike (1973) suggested that trial-to-trial variability in
accumulation rate allowed counter and accumulator models to predict faster error
RTs, but Ratcliff and Smith (2004) found that the error RTs predicted by both the
Poisson counter model and the Vickers accumulator model were only marginally
264                                                           D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

faster than correct RTs, and that both models underpredicted the magnitude of the
effect. Ratcliff and Smith (2004) also found that the Poisson counter model was
unable to account for crossover patterns in mean RT orderings. For the Vickers
accumulator model, assuming between-trial variation in both the criterion and rate
of evidence accrual can allow the model to account for crossover effects in some
(Smith and Vickers 1988), but not all circumstances (Ratcliff and Smith 2004).
   Summary of Accumulator and Counter Models. To summarize, accumulator and
counter models only provide a partial account of the existing behavioral data.
Although they address the speed-accuracy tradeoff and slow error RTs, they cannot
provide an accurate account of the shapes of RT distributions without additional ad
hoc assumptions about the distribution of response criteria, nor can they account for
fast errors.



14.2.3 Diffusion and Random Walk Models

Unlike the counter and accumulator models discussed above, random walk and
diffusion models assume a decision architecture involving a single signed evidence
total, or equivalently, a relative decision rule (e.g., Edwards 1965; Laming 1968;
Link and Heath 1975; Ratcliff 1978; Stone 1960). That is, evidence for one
response alternative is simultaneously evidence against the other. The decision rule
in these models can be viewed as initiating a response once the difference between
two absolute evidence totals exceeds a criterion.
    Early random walk models (Edwards 1965; Laming 1968; Stone 1960) were
influenced by Wald’s (1947) sequential probability ratio test (SPRT). The SPRT is
an optimal way of choosing between two competing hypotheses: For any desired
level of accuracy, the SPRT takes the minimum expected time to reach a decision.
In the context of decision-making, the optimality property of the SPRT addresses
costs associated with both time and accuracy, which is what initially recommended
it as a psychological model of the decision process. The relationship between
decision-making and optimality, as formalized in the SPRT, continues to influence
researchers interested in the neuroscience of decision-making (Bogacz 2007;
Bogacz et al. 2006; Gold and Shadlen 2001, 2002). The SPRT works by accu-
mulating log-likelihood ratios in discrete time steps. To frame the SPRT in terms of
perceptual decision-making, stimulus information is sampled at a constant rate by a
mechanism that evaluates which response alternative is favored by each sample. In
the SPRT, the evidence provided by each sample is computed by taking the
log-likelihood of the ratio of probabilities of obtaining the sample, given the truth of
each response alternative.
    A limitation of early random walk models based on the SPRT was that they
predicted mean RTs for correct and error responses would be equal, which is
inconsistent with data. (A notable exception to this was a study by Green et al.
(1983), who collected RTs from very highly practiced participants and found no
difference between RTs for correct responses and errors, but their ﬁndings are
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                                     265

atypical.) To account for the relative orderings of mean RTs for correct and error
responses, (Link and Heath 1975), in their relative judgment theory, proposed a
random walk model that omitted computation of likelihood ratios. In their model,
noisy evidence samples are accumulated by the decision process directly, in much
the same way as in the Vickers accumulator model. The relative judgment model is
illustrated in Fig. 14.5. At the ﬁrst time step, the initial state of evidence accu-
mulation is set to z. The evidence total required to initiate a response is determined
by a boundary separation parameter, a, which sets the decision criterion. At each
time step, a new sample of evidence is accumulated, which moves the process
toward either the upper or lower response boundary. When the process reaches one
of the boundaries, the corresponding response is initiated.
    Whereas random walk models sample evidence at a constant rate in discrete
time, diffusion models sample evidence continuously in time (Ratcliff 1978; Ratcliff
and McKoon 2008). In the Wiener diffusion model of Ratcliff, the accumulation of
evidence can be described mathematically by the stochastic differential equation,

                                      dXt ¼ mdt þ rdWt :                                    ð14:1Þ

   Equation 14.1 describes the change in accumulated evidence, dXt, in an
inﬁnitesimal time interval, dt. Like the random walk model, evidence accumulation
starts at some point, z, situated between response boundaries at a and 0. The mean
rate at which evidence accumulates toward a response boundary is deﬁned by the




Fig. 14.5 Random walk and Wiener diffusion model. Relative evidence for two alternatives is
accumulated from some starting point, z, toward one of two response boundaries at a and 0. The
rate of evidence accumulation is deﬁned by the drift rate of the diffusion process, which varies
between trials according to a Gaussian distribution with mean ν and standard deviation η. The
response is determined by the ﬁrst boundary the process reaches. Two simulated evidence
accumulation trajectories are shown. In one case, the upper boundary is reached, resulting in an ‘A’
response (solid line). In the other, the lower boundary is reached, resulting in a ‘B’ response
(dashed line)
266                                                             D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

drift rate, which is normally distributed across trials with mean ν and standard
deviation η. This means the diffusion model, like the version of the accumulator
model described by Smith and Vickers (1988) is doubly stochastic.
    In Eq. 14.1, ν controls deterministic changes in the quantity of accumulated
evidence. In addition to this deterministic change, diffusion models incorporate
moment-to-moment stochastic changes in the accumulated evidence. This is
modeled as a white noise process, dWt, which is the formal derivative of the
Brownian motion, or Wiener diffusion, process. The variance of the stochastic part
of Eq. 14.1 is determined by the diffusion coefﬁcient of the process, σ2. In Ratcliff’s
model, both the drift rate and diffusion coefﬁcient are constant over the course of a
trial, but other authors have proposed models with time dependencies in both drift
rate and diffusion coefﬁcient (e.g., Sewell and Smith 2012; Smith et al. 2010; Smith
and Ratcliff 2009). The reason for introducing time dependencies is to try to capture
the temporal properties of the perceptual and memory processes that encode the
evidence in some cognitive tasks.
    In principle, a limitation of the Wiener diffusion model is that, unless trial-to-trial
variability in drift rate is assumed, the model allows accuracy to grow unboundedly
as decision time increases (Smith 1995; Usher and McClelland 2001). This implies
that decision-makers can achieve any desired level of accuracy, regardless of the
discriminability of the stimulus alternatives, by setting sufﬁciently high-decision
criteria. One way to impose a bound on accuracy without assuming between-trial
parameter variability is to add a decay term to the drift. Augmenting the model in
this way leads to an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) diffusion process (Busemeyer and
Townsend 1993), which is described by the stochastic differential equation

                              dXt ¼ ðm  bXt Þdt þ rdWt :                           ð14:2Þ

    The −βXt term in Eq. 14.2 is interpreted psychologically as a ‘leak’ or temporal
decay on the accumulated evidence total. This reflects the idea that the evidence
available to the decision process may not be integrated perfectly over time.
Mathematically, the decay term serves as a restoring force that pulls the accumu-
lated evidence total toward the starting point. When β = 0, the OU process becomes
the Wiener diffusion process, and evidence is integrated, without loss, over the
course of an experimental trial. In practice, when ﬁtting the OU model to behavioral
data, the best ﬁts are often achieved when the model mimics the Wiener diffusion
model (i.e., when the decay term approaches 0; Ratcliff and Smith 2004). Ratcliff
and Smith concluded that the decay term in the OU model is usually not necessary
for modeling behavioral data in decision architectures with a single evidence total,
but it can lead to improved ﬁts in other decision architectures, like the dual diffusion
model discussed subsequently (Smith and Ratcliff 2009).
    Speed-Accuracy Tradeoff. As mentioned previously in relation to accumulator
and counter models, diffusion and random walk models account for the
speed-accuracy tradeoff by varying the position of the decision criterion. In these
models, this is accomplished by allowing the boundary separation parameter to
differ under speed and accuracy instructions. Under speed instructions, boundary
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                          267

separation is small, which means that, geometrically, the starting point of the
decision process is much closer to the two response boundaries. The process does
not need to accumulate as much discriminative evidence to reach a response
boundary, resulting in reduced RT, but because the process is more susceptible to
random moment-to-moment perturbations in the accumulation process, it also leads
to a higher proportion of errors. Under accuracy instructions, boundary separation is
large, meaning that the process must accrue a relatively large amount of discrim-
inative evidence before reaching a response boundary. This results in longer RTs
and higher accuracy, as the effects of moment-to-moment noise are small, relative
to the distance between the starting point of the accumulation process and the
response boundaries.
    Shapes of RT Distributions. In contrast to counter and accumulator models, the
shapes of RT distributions are naturally predicted by the geometry of diffusion
processes. Both diffusion and random walk models predict right-skewed RT dis-
tributions without requiring any additional assumptions. The effects of between-trial
noise can be illustrated by progressively decreasing drift rate and projecting
accumulation trajectories onto one of the response boundaries (see Fig. 14.6a).
When drift rate is incrementally decreased, the expected ﬁnishing times of the
decision process becomes progressively longer. This geometric constraint on dif-
fusion model predictions was discussed in detail by Ratcliff (2002), who showed
that his diffusion model was unable to ﬁt simulated data that were not right-skewed.
This showed that the good performance of the model is not a function of its
flexibility, but rather, because it predicts a restricted range of RT distribution shapes
that happen to be precisely those usually found in empirical data.
    More recently, Ditterich (2006) showed RT distribution data collected by
Roitman and Shadlen (2002) from monkeys performing the motion direction dis-
crimination task (see Fig. 14.1) were highly symmetrical, and could not be
accommodated by Ratcliff’s diffusion model. Ditterich’s result is interesting as the
monkey RT data from that task differ from data from human participants per-
forming the same task, who produce right-skewed RT distributions that are well
described by Ratcliff’s model (Palmer et al. 2005; Ratcliff and McKoon 2008).
However, highly symmetric RT distributions are sometimes found with human
participants who are required to respond to an external deadline (e.g., Van Zandt
et al. 2000). We discuss the implications of Ditterich’s result in more detail below,
but note that symmetrical RT distributions are not characteristic of all monkey data.
For example, the RT distributions from monkeys performing brightness discrimi-
nation tasks and gap discrimination tasks are well described by diffusion models
(Ratcliff et al. 2003, 2007, 2011).
    Correct and Error RTs. Accounting for any differences between correct and error
RTs proved difﬁcult for early random walk models, which predicted equal mean RTs
(Stone 1960). Indeed, an appealing feature of the early accumulator and counter
models (e.g., LaBerge 1962; Townsend and Ashby 1983; Vickers 1970) was that they
predicted mean error RTs that were slower than correct RTs. Ratcliff (1978) later
showed that introducing trial-to-trial variability in drift rate allowed his diffusion
model to predict error RTs that are slower than correct RTs. This prediction follows
268                                                D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith


 (a)                                                  Drift Variability
                                                    Produces slow errors



       1


           2




                                                             Weighted
                                   v1         v2              Mean
               Prop (Correct)      .92        .70               .81
               MRT (Correct)      251 ms     341 ms           290 ms
                Prop (Error)       .08        .30               .19
                MRT (Error)       251 ms     341 ms           321 ms

 (b)                                                 Start-Point Variability
                                                     Produces fast errors




 z1


 z2



                                                              Weighted
                                        z1      z2             Mean
                 Prop (Correct)      .93       .72               .83
                 MRT (Correct)     206 ms     349 ms           268 ms
                  Prop (Error)       .07       .28               .17
                  MRT (Error)      349 ms     206 ms           233 ms
  14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                                         269

b Fig. 14.6 Illustration of how variability in drift rate (top panel) and start-point (bottom panel)
  determine the relative speed of correct and error responses in Ratcliff’s diffusion model. In each
  panel, the top and bottom response boundaries are associated with correct and error responses,
  respectively. The top panel illustrates how trial-to-trial variability in drift rate allows the diffusion
  model to account for errors that are slower than correct responses. When drift rate varies across
  trials, some decision processes will be driven by a drift rate close to 0. For these trials, evidence
  accumulation will be slow, and more error prone. Because of the larger proportion of error trials
  driven by low drift rates, combining data from trials with different drift rates results in error
  responses that are, on average, slower than correct responses. To account for errors that are faster
  than correct responses, trial-to-trial variability in start-point is needed. When the decision process
  starts near the correct response boundary, errors will be very slow, but far less frequent. By
  contrast, when the process starts near the error boundary, the errors will be much faster, and occur
  with much higher probability. The result is an overall mean error RT that is less than that for
  correct responses


  from the geometry of the diffusion process (see Fig. 14.6a). When there is
  between-trial variability in drift rate, accuracy, and RT for any individual trial is
  determined primarily by the drift rate sampled for that trial. When drift rate is low and
  takes on a value near 0, evidence accumulation is slow, and the probability of an error
  increases. When drift rate is high, evidence accumulation is fast, and the probability of
  an error is reduced. Combining data from individual trials with different drift rates
  results in slower mean error RTs because a greater proportion of the error responses
  are from trials with lower drift rates, and hence, slower RTs. This is illustrated in the
  table included in Fig. 14.6a. Diffusion models based on the OU process account for
  slow errors in the same way as Ratcliff’s model.
     Trial-to-trial variability in drift rate, however, is only a partial solution to the
  problem of orderings for correct and error RTs. To account for fast error responses,
  a different sort of trial-to-trial variability is required. For random walk models,
  Laming (1968) showed that trial-to-trial variability in starting point sufﬁced to
  predict mean error RTs that were faster than correct RTs. This was subsequently
  conﬁrmed for Ratcliff’s diffusion model (Ratcliff et al. 1999; Ratcliff and Rouder
  1998; Ratcliff and Smith 2004). With variability in the starting point of the accu-
  mulation process, fast errors arise in the diffusion model for the same kinds of
  geometric reasons as slow errors are predicted with drift rate variability (see
  Fig. 14.6b). When the decision process starts near the incorrect response boundary,
  correct responses will be relatively slower and less frequent: The process must
  travel further to reach the correct boundary, and is more susceptible to random
  moment-by-moment perturbations leading it to terminate at the error boundary. By
  contrast, under the same conditions, error responses will be faster and more
  probable. The increase in the proportion of fast errors when the process starts near
  the incorrect boundary combined with the decrease in proportion of slow errors
  when the process starts near the correct boundary results in the overall mean error
  RT being faster than the mean correct RT (Ratcliff and Rouder 1998). To account
  for crossover patterns in mean RT orderings, the diffusion model requires both drift
  variability and start-point variability (Ratcliff et al. 1999; Ratcliff and Rouder 1998;
  Ratcliff and Smith 2004).
270                                                           D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith


14.2.4 Hybrid Diffusion-Accumulator Models

More recently, models that combine elements of accumulator and diffusion models
have been proposed. In these hybrid models, there are separate accumulators for
different response alternatives, but unlike the Vickers (1970) accumulator model,
the accumulation process is modeled as a diffusion process. Decision-making in
these models is determined by the ﬁrst of multiple racing diffusion processes to
reach a criterion (Ratcliff et al. 2007, 2011; Ratcliff and Smith 2004; Smith 2000;
Usher and McClelland 2001). Although the majority of hybrid models use an
absolute decision rule, models with relative decision rules have been investigated
by Ratcliff and Smith (2004), and make similar predictions. Hybrid models have
been motivated, at least in part, by the pursuit of increased neural plausibility (e.g.,
Usher and McClelland 2001).
    Perhaps the most well-known hybrid diffusion-accumulator model is the leaky
competing accumulator (LCA) model of Usher and McClelland (2001; see
Fig. 14.7). In this model, separate accumulators integrate evidence for different
response alternatives. The accumulation process is modeled using a coupled pair of
racing OU diffusion processes. In the LCA model, the two accumulators mutually
inhibit each other with strength proportional to the amount of evidence in each
accumulator. With two accumulators, i and j, the stochastic differential equation that
describes the change of evidence in accumulator i in the LCA model is

                     dXi ¼ ðmi  bXi  kXj Þdt þ ri dWi ;    i 6¼ j:             ð14:3Þ

    Ratcliff and Smith (2004) explored several alternatives to the LCA model that
were all based on Eq. 14.3. For example, a racing accumulator model with leakage
but no competition is obtained when k = 0, and the model reduces to a race between
two independent OU diffusion processes. As these variations on the LCA model
produced similar ﬁts to behavioral data, Ratcliff and Smith (2004) concluded that
the existing behavioral data were insufﬁcient to distinguish different hybrid models.
    Speed-Accuracy Tradeoff. Like other sequential sampling models, hybrid
diffusion-accumulator models account for the speed-accuracy tradeoff by adjusting
decision criteria in response to speed and accuracy instructions.
    Shapes of RT Distributions. Because evidence accumulation is modeled as a
diffusion process, hybrid models are able to account for the shapes of RT distri-
butions in the same way as standard diffusion models. That is, the geometry of the
accumulation process, which is characterized by within-trial noise, naturally pro-
duces right-skewed RT distributions without requiring additional assumptions.
    Correct and Error RTs. Depending on speciﬁc assumptions, hybrid
diffusion-accumulator models can account for the relative speeds of correct and error
RTs in different ways. Mutual inhibition between accumulators accounts for slow
error RTs in Usher and McClelland’s (2001) LCA model, whereas variation in starting
point—because it is accompanied by inhibition—allows it to predict fast error
responses. Indeed, Ratcliff and Smith (2004) found the LCA model to be highly
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                                      271



  Leaky Competing Accumulator

 Diffusive evidence accumulation
   Decay and mutual inhibition




                     Accumulator 1                                   Accumulator 2
               1                                                1

              0.9                                              0.9

              0.8                                              0.8

              0.7                                              0.7

              0.6                                              0.6
      X1(t)




                                                       X2(t)
              0.5                                              0.5

              0.4                                              0.4

              0.3                                              0.3

              0.2                                              0.2

              0.1                                              0.1

               0                                                0
                0     30       60       90       120             0    30       60      90       120

                           Time (ms)                                       Time (ms)
Fig. 14.7 Overview of the leaky competing accumulator model with moderate values of decay, β,
and inhibition, k. The quality of perceptual evidence drives separate accumulators coding for
different response alternatives. The accumulators interact competitively by inhibiting each other
with strength proportional to the current value of the decision variable, X(t). In addition to mutual
inhibition, there is passive decay, or leakage from each accumulator. The response is determined
by the ﬁrst accumulator to accrue a criterion amount of evidence, set here to 1. Two example
evidence accumulation trajectories are shown. In one case, Accumulator 2 determines the response
(solid lines), and in the other, Accumulator 1 determines the response (dashed lines). The effect of
inhibition can be seen in the accumulation trajectories. As the level of accumulated evidence for
one response increases, the level of evidence for the other decreases


sensitive to initial start-point conditions. The accumulator that started with the larger
amount of initial evidence almost always controlled the response for that trial. When
there is no inhibition between accumulators, hybrid diffusion-accumulator models can
predict slower error RTs if the accrual rates for each accumulator are constrained to
sum to a constant, imposing the condition that the overall rate at which evidence
becomes available to the decision process is constant. The mechanism for predicting
slow errors is then identical to that in standard accumulator and counter models: The
accrual rate for the error response is lower than that for the correct response. To predict
fast errors, starting point variability is also required.
272                                                         D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

   Summary of Diffusion and Hybrid Diffusion-Accumulator Models. Both diffusion
and hybrid diffusion-accumulator models provide a complete account of benchmark
behavioral data. They account for the speed-accuracy tradeoff, the shapes of RT
distributions, and the relative speeds of correct and error RTs. A complication in
evaluating these models with just behavioral data is that they can be quite difﬁcult
to distinguish. Later on in the chapter, we discuss how neurophysiological data
might assist in selecting among these different kinds of models.



14.2.5 Relating Neurocomputational Principles
       and Sequential Sampling Models

The behavioral phenomena discussed above converge to show that models
assuming diffusive accumulation of evidence provide the best account of human
behavioral data. Diffusion models, including hybrid diffusion-accumulator models,
predict the shapes of empirical RT distributions, the differences in performance
under instructions emphasizing speed or accuracy, and the relative ordering of
correct and error RTs. By contrast, counter and accumulator models can only
partially handle these data. The evidence for diffusive evidence accumulation at a
behavioral-level places a strong constraint on neurocomputational models of simple
decision-making: In order to simultaneously account for data at neural and
behavioral levels of analysis, computations carried out at the neural level need to
make predictions at the behavioral level that are well described by diffusion models.
Before we review neurophysiological data that bear on this issue, we briefly
summarize recent theoretical work that has shown that biologically plausible net-
work models can exhibit behavior that is consistent with the predictions of diffusion
models.
    The issue of how behavioral data characterized by diffusion processes are
realized by neural ﬁring processes was addressed analytically by Smith (2010). He
proposed the Poisson shot-noise process as an idealized model of neural
population-level ﬁring rates. The shot-noise process describes the aggregated effect
of a large number of small, independent, time-varying disturbances or perturba-
tions, each of which occurs according to a Poisson process. In the shot-noise model,
the Poisson process represents a sequence of action potentials in a bundle of neural
ﬁbers and the disturbances represent the flux in postsynaptic potentials in the
population of cells on which the action potentials impinge. In Smith’s model, pairs
of excitatory-inhibitory shot-noise processes code evidence for different response
alternatives. The difference between these pairs of processes is integrated until a
criterion is reached, after which the corresponding response is initiated. Smith’s
analysis drew on the weak convergence properties of excitatory-inhibitory
shot-noise pairs to an OU velocity process at high ﬁring intensities. When the
OU velocity process is integrated over time it becomes a model for behavioral-level
evidence accumulation. At the long time scales of behavioral data, the integrated
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                        273

OU process has similar statistics to the Wiener process in Ratcliff’s (1978) diffusion
model. Smith showed that simulated data generated by the shot-noise model were
well ﬁt by Ratcliff’s model, providing evidence that aggregated neural processing
dynamics give rise to evidence accumulation processes of the kind that can be
characterized by diffusion models.
    An issue that was not addressed by Smith’s (2010) analysis is how the neural
representation of accumulated evidence is maintained over time. Indeed, one of the
difﬁculties in linking behavioral-level data with neural mechanisms arises from the
discrepant time scales on which behavioral and neural processes operate. Models of
behavioral decision-making data assume integration of evidence over time scales
measured in hundreds of milliseconds, whereas intracellular integration processes,
operate on time scales around an order of magnitude less—no more than 50 ms
(Wang 2001, 2002; Wong and Wang 2006). The question then is how the long time
scale integration needed to support decision-making is realized by short time scale
neural processes. Smith’s (2010) integrated OU model assumed long time scale
integration as a theoretical primitive of the model, but gave no account of how such
integration could be realized neurally.
    Wang (2001, 2002), Wong and Wang (2006) has investigated models that
attempt to address the time scale issue by incorporating slow reverberative feedback
in the neural circuits involved in the decision process. In Wang’s models, accu-
mulated evidence is represented by patterns of ﬁring rates in spiking neuron net-
works. These models, which incorporate recurrent activation and inhibitory
feedback, produce attractor dynamics that result in patterns of ﬁring activity that are
sustained within the network. The sustained activity serves to maintain a short-term
memory representation of the stimulus for the second or so required to make a
decision, which is consistent with behavioral-level modeling of data from simple
decision-making experiments (e.g., Ratcliff and Rouder 2000; Sewell and Smith
2012; Smith et al. 2004, 2010; Smith and Ratcliff 2009). Recent extensions of the
spiking network model have incorporated a burst-cell mechanism for implementing
detection of when the decision process reaches a response threshold, producing a
more comprehensive account of how decision-making might be implemented in
such circuits (Lo and Wang 2006).
    The analysis of Wang and colleagues was complemented by a recent study by
Smith and McKenzie (2011), who showed that very simple, stochastic, recurrent
loop architectures exhibit the same dynamic properties as Wang’s larger scale
spiking network model. Smith and McKenzie extended the Poisson shot-noise
model of Smith (2010) by adding a loop in which previously emitted spikes were
maintained by recurrence, and new spikes were added by superposition. Whereas
the dynamics of the Poisson shot-noise process served as a model of the short time
scale integration of individual neurons, the recurrent loop dynamics served as a way
of modeling long time scale dynamics exhibited by populations of neurons. Smith
and McKenzie showed that the Poisson superposition model exhibited similar
information accumulation properties to the integrated OU process derived from the
shot-noise model. They also ﬁt the recurrent loop model to group-averaged data
from one of the experiments reported by Ratcliff and Smith (2004) and found the ﬁt
274                                                           D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

to be quantitatively similar to that of Ratcliff’s diffusion model. These results
support Smith’s (2010) conjecture that behavioral data that are well described by a
Wiener diffusion process may be generated neurally by an integrated OU process.
   The analyses of Wang and colleagues (Lo and Wang 2006; Wang 2001, 2002;
Wong and Wang 2006) and Smith and colleagues (Smith 2010; Smith and
McKenzie 2011) provide insight into the relationship between sequential sampling
models in psychology and computations performed in the underlying neural pop-
ulations. Spiking network models and the Poisson shot-noise networks implement
neurally plausible decision processes that characterize important aspects of
behavioral data. In the next section of this chapter, we discuss how neurophysio-
logical data and choice-RT modeling that directly incorporates neurophysiological
data as input provide a complementary perspective on relating psychology and
neuroscience.



14.3    Neurophysiological Correlates of Decision Processes

As noted in the introduction, a large number of studies have identiﬁed a link
between patterns of neural ﬁring rates in oculomotor brain circuits and the
dynamics of evidence accumulation during decision-making. The key ﬁnding
relating neural activity to evidence accumulation is the characteristic ramping of
ﬁring rates to a threshold level prior to initiating a saccade response. Using a variety
of stimuli and tasks, it has been shown that neurons in FEF (Hanes and Schall 1996;
Thompson et al. 1996, 1997), LIP (Shadlen and Newsome 1996, 2001), and SC
(Ratcliff et al. 2003, 2007) all exhibit this ramping behavior. The consistency of the
ﬁring rate data in the face of considerable variation in stimulus and task properties
suggests that this activity reflects the evolution of a visual decision-making process
rather than simple sensory processing. In this section, we ﬁrst discuss some of the
research that has linked neural patterns of activity with cognitive representations of
decision processes. We then focus on several recent studies that show how neural
data can impose strong constraints on sequential sampling models, and can con-
sequently be used to select among models that are very difﬁcult to distinguish by
behavioral data alone.



14.3.1 Identifying Decision-Related Neural Activity: The
       Case of LIP

A common task used to study the neural correlates of visual decision-making is the
motion direction discrimination task developed by Newsome, Shadlen, and col-
leagues (see Fig. 14.1; for recent reviews, see Gold and Shadlen 2007; Huk and
Meister 2012). Monkeys judge the global direction of motion of a random dot
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                       275

stimulus and make a saccade-to-target response to indicate their choice. Task dif-
ﬁculty is manipulated by varying the proportion of dots that move coherently in one
direction. For these stimuli, it is well-established that motion coherence correlates
closely with activity in macaque visual area MT (an extrastriate visual cortical area
also known as V5), and that this activity forms the sensory basis for
decision-making in this task. The response rate of MT increases roughly linearly
with motion coherence, exhibits a time course that is tightly coupled with the onset
of the stimulus, and quickly reaches a constant ﬁring rate during stimulus viewing
(e.g., Britten et al. 1993). However, MT ﬁring rates are tightly linked to the
presence of the stimulus on screen, and only correlate somewhat weakly with
behavioral indices of judged direction of motion (Britten et al. 1996). For example,
microstimulation of direction-selective MT neurons during stimulus viewing speeds
responses favoring the preferred direction, and slows responses for the opposite
direction (Ditterich et al. 2003), but the influence of microstimulation on behavioral
choice becomes progressively weaker as the delay between stimulus offset and
onset of microstimulation increases (Seidemann et al. 1998).
    Perhaps the most striking distinction in activity patterns between MT and LIP
neurons is that only the latter exhibit gradual ramping of ﬁring rates to a threshold
following presentation of a stimulus (e.g., Shadlen and Newsome 1996, 2001),
making LIP activity, but not MT activity, consistent with the kinds of evidence
accumulation processes assumed by sequential sampling models. A simple
hypothesis linking LIP activity with evidence accumulation is that the two are
related linearly (e.g., LIP activity reflects discriminative perceptual evidence,
integrated over time). The implication is that the rate of increase in LIP activity—or
more generally, activity closely related to the decision process—would be reflected
in the rate of evidence accumulation, corresponding to the drift rate in a diffusion
decision model (e.g., Ratcliff 1978; Ratcliff and McKoon 2008), which indexes the
average quality of stimulus information driving the decision process, and sets the
average rate at which the evidence total changes over time. Although drift rate is
commonly estimated as a free parameter from data in human behavioral studies, for
the motion direction discrimination task, it is possible to derive estimates of drift
rate directly from the motion coherence of the stimulus because the neural repre-
sentation in MT is well approximated by a linear transformation of the motion
signal (Britten et al. 1993). Deriving drift rates from the motion signal in this way
has proved successful in modeling data from the motion direction discrimination
task (Ditterich 2006; Mazurek et al. 2003). We now discuss several strands of
research that provide convergent support for directly linking neural ﬁring rates with
the process of evidence accumulation.
    Figure 14.8 shows neural ﬁring rate data averaged across 104 LIP neurons of
macaques performing the random dots task from a study by Shadlen and Newsome
(2001). Monkeys viewed the stimulus for a variable amount of time before it was
extinguished. After a variable retention interval, during which ﬁxation had to be
maintained, the monkeys indicated their response by making a saccadic eye
movement. The data are presented in two ways: In the left panel, ﬁring rate for
different levels of motion coherence is presented relative to the onset of the
276                                                                   D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith




Fig. 14.8 Population response of 104 LIP neurons recorded from macaques performing the
motion discrimination task. Solid lines are for responses to saccade targets within the neuron’s
receptive ﬁeld, dashed lines are for responses to targets outside the receptive ﬁeld. The left panel
shows ﬁring rates for stimuli at different levels of motion coherence, aligned on stimulus onset.
The right panel shows ﬁring rates aligned on the saccade response. Reproduced from Shadlen and
Newsome (2001)


stimulus. In the right panel, the neural response is presented relative to initiation of
the saccade. The key ﬁndings are that (1) increasing the viewing time increases the
level of spiking activity, (2) increases in spike rate occur faster with higher levels of
motion coherence, and (3) prior to initiating a saccade, spike rates reach a common
asymptote regardless of motion coherence. Results such as these led Gold and
Shadlen (2001) to suggest LIP neurons might be performing a ‘read out’ function
from sensory neurons in MT, integrating relative levels of evidence for different
response alternatives. Although these results are intriguing, a limitation of the
original version of the random dots task was that monkeys made their decisions
after an experimenter-enforced delay, which meant the task did not yield the kind of
RT data that have been used to test sequential sampling models in psychology.
   Roitman and Shadlen (2002) subsequently investigated an RT version of the
motion direction discrimination task that allowed the monkey to respond imme-
diately upon making a decision. The ﬁndings from the RT task replicated the main
ﬁndings from the original task: LIP ﬁring rates increased as a function of stimulus
viewing time at a rate determined by motion coherence, reaching a common
threshold ﬁring rate prior to making a saccade. Because monkeys initiated a saccade
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                     277

Fig. 14.9 Population
response of LIP neurons
recorded from macaques
performing the response time
version of the motion
discrimination task.
Responses are grouped
according to behavioral
response time, and are aligned
on initiation of a saccade
response. Note that the rate at
which activity approaches the
threshold ﬁring rate varies
according to response time.
Reproduced from Roitman
and Shadlen (2002)




upon making a decision, additional RT-related aspects of the data could be
examined. Consistent with the notion of LIP activity reflecting evidence accumu-
lation to a criterion, both behavioral RTs and LIP ramping activity were system-
atically dependent on motion coherence. At higher levels of coherence, LIP ﬁring
rates more rapidly approached asymptote, and behavioral RTs were shorter. The
relationship between behavioral RT and ramping of LIP activity is shown in
Fig. 14.9, which plots response-aligned LIP activity associated with different RT
bands. Whereas the slowest RTs exhibit gradual ramping of LIP activity approxi-
mately 700–800 ms prior to a saccade, the fastest RTs are associated with LIP
ramping commencing only 300–400 ms prior to a response.
    The issue of whether LIP represents the time integral of perceptual evidence was
tested experimentally by Huk and Shadlen (2005). They presented monkeys with a
random motion texture overlaid with the familiar random dots stimulus. During
stimulus viewing, motion coherence was briefly perturbed by adding a 100 ms
pulse of coherent motion to the texture. The direction of the motion pulse either
matched or opposed that of the random dot stimulus. Consistent with the time
278                                                           D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

integration hypothesis, the motion pulse not only biased decision outcomes, but
also exerted a sustained influence on LIP activity for up to 800 ms. This result was
extended by Kiani et al. (2008), who showed that the timing of the motion pulse
delivered during stimulus viewing was critical. When the motion pulse was added
around the onset of the stimulus, the direction of motion affected both behavioral
choice and LIP activity. However, when the pulse was delivered toward the end of
stimulus presentation, choice probability and LIP ﬁring rates were unaffected. Kiani
et al. interpreted their results as showing that evidence accumulation does not occur
indeﬁnitely for ﬁxed duration stimuli, but that integration only occurs until a
response criterion is reached. When the motion pulse was presented late in the trial,
the monkey had most likely already made a decision, and apparently discounted
subsequently presented stimulus information.
    Microstimulation studies provide further insight into the relationship between
LIP activity and decision-making that go beyond the correlational results discussed
so far. Whereas the studies reviewed so far have observed a correlation between LIP
activity and decision processes, microstimulation allows for more direct causal
influences, as LIP activity is manipulated directly. Ditterich et al. (2003) established
the causal connection between MT neurons and direction of motion decisions by
showing that microstimulation of MT neurons induced a bias in choice behavior
and RT favoring the preferred direction of the stimulated neuron. Hanks et al.
(2006) adopted a similar approach for neurons in LIP. By applying microstimula-
tion to neurons with receptive ﬁelds overlapping the response target, Hanks et al.
showed that decision-making could be biased in a way similar to that demonstrated
by Ditterich et al. Crucially, however, microstimulation to LIP produced smaller
effects on choice and RT than MT stimulation. This is consistent with the idea that
MT codes for the sensory data that provides the input to the decision process,
whereas LIP codes for the value of the decision variable itself (i.e., the current level
of accumulated evidence). In diffusion model terms, MT stimulation affects the drift
rate of the diffusion process, which characterizes the quality of the perceptual
evidence and determines the rate of evidence accumulation at the decision stage. By
contrast, LIP stimulation does not influence drift rate, but instead adds a constant to
the decision variable, moving the process closer to one response boundary. This is
tantamount to biasing the starting point of the accumulation process without
influencing the quality of the perceptual evidence or the rate of evidence
accumulation.
    An alternative way to use microstimulation to investigate decision-making is to
use it to evoke a saccade that is spatially orthogonal to the locations of the response
targets and to assess the extent to which the evoked saccade deviates toward one
response or another (Gold and Shadlen 2000, 2003). If the motor program
expressing the monkey’s decision is incrementally updated based on the level of
accumulated evidence, then the deviations of the evoked saccades should system-
atically relate to the monkey’s ﬁnal, voluntary, saccade response. The logic of this
approach resembles that of the response-signal procedure used with human par-
ticipants (e.g., Ratcliff 1988, 2006; Wickelgren 1977). In the response-signal task,
decision-making is interrupted by a response signal, which prompts the observer to
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                       279

immediately make a response. In the case of evoked saccades, microstimulation
serves as a response signal, which elicits a response directly. Gold and Shadlen
(2000) applied microstimulation to FEF neurons while monkeys performed the
random dots task. By varying the timing of the microstimulation, they were able to
map the time course of evoked saccade trajectories, and indirectly trace the growth
of decision-related information. Motion coherence and viewing duration had strong
and systematic effects on the deviation of the evoked saccade toward the response
target ultimately selected by the monkey: Stimuli with higher motion coherence that
were viewed for longer produced larger deviations in the evoked saccades.
   Results from experiments using the motion direction discrimination task provide
convergent support for the idea that LIP ﬁring rates reflect the time integral of
perceptual evidence. Manipulations of the input to the decision process, via the
stimulus itself (e.g., Huk and Shadlen 2005; Kiani et al. 2008) or brain areas
responsible for coding stimulus properties (Ditterich et al. 2003) influence both the
speed and accuracy of responses. Importantly, these behavioral effects are reflected
in the ﬁring rates of LIP neurons, and are detectable even when the nature of the
response mapping is not known in advance of stimulus onset (Bennur and Gold
2011). That ﬁring rates preceding a saccadic response increase to a common
threshold level (Roitman and Shadlen 2002; Shadlen and Newsome 1996, 2001)
lends strong support to the idea that LIP activity reflects bounded evidence accu-
mulation, as postulated by diffusion models.



14.3.2 Diffusion Modeling of Decision-Related Neural
       Activity

The striking similarity between decision-related neural activity and the accumula-
tion of noisy evidence to a criterion invites the obvious question of whether a single
model can simultaneously account for both neural and behavioral data. In the
context of the motion direction discrimination task, a number of studies have shown
that key aspects of the behavioral data can be accounted for within a diffusion or
hybrid diffusion-accumulator modeling framework. Mazurek et al. (2003) proposed
a hybrid diffusion-accumulator model driven by two populations of simulated MT
neurons coding for different response alternatives. The time integral of the differ-
ence in activation between MT populations was modeled with two evidence
accumulators. The levels of activation in the accumulators were assumed to cor-
respond to the spike rates of neural populations in LIP. The ﬁrst accumulator to
reach a criterion determined the response. The model is closely related to Ratcliff’s
(1978) diffusion model in that the inputs to the two accumulators are anticorrelated
—evidence for one alternative is evidence against the other. Behaviorally, the
Mazurek et al. model successfully accounted for accuracy data and mean RTs for
correct responses. The model was also able to capture presaccadic ramping of
neural activity to a threshold. However, it was not able to predict error RTs, nor was
280                                                          D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

it ﬁt to RT distributions. Ditterich (2006) subsequently showed that the model made
incorrect predictions for the RT distributions from Roitman and Shadlen’s (2002)
study. He modiﬁed the model by transforming the difference in MT activations
using a sigmoidal time-dependent gain function prior to integration in LIP. By
modifying the LIP input in this way, Ditterich showed that the model could account
for choice probabilities, correct and error RT distributions, and the pattern of LIP
activations simultaneously.
    Ditterich’s (2006) success with the modiﬁed Mazurek et al. (2003) model is
interesting because Ratcliff’s (1978) diffusion model has been shown to account for
behavioral data from the motion direction discrimination task with human partici-
pants (Palmer et al. 2005; Ratcliff and McKoon 2008). More generally, Ratcliff’s
diffusion model (and the related dual diffusion model), has been shown to account
for data from monkeys performing other simple decision tasks, such as gap dis-
crimination (Ratcliff et al. 2003) and brightness discrimination (Ratcliff et al. 2007,
2011). The important distinction between the Ratcliff diffusion model and that of
Ditterich is that the drift rate in the former is constant over the course of a trial,
whereas it is time-varying in the latter. By scaling the drift rate and diffusion
coefﬁcient by a common time-dependent gain—affecting ν and σ in Eq. 14.1—the
model was able to account for the error RT data and produce RT distributions that
were more symmetrical than they otherwise would be. The intuition for why the
shapes of the distributions change in this way is that the moment-to-moment
changes in evidence accumulation become larger in size (due to the increase in drift
rate), but more irregular (due to the increase in noise in the accumulation process
brought on by the change in the diffusion coefﬁcient). This increases the likelihood
that momentary noise will abruptly terminate the process by pushing it toward one
of the decision boundaries. Because gain increased as a sigmoid function of time,
slower RTs would be affected more than faster RTs, terminating faster than they
would under stationary drift. Changing the drift and diffusion coefﬁcients in this
way serves to truncate the tails of the RT distributions, resulting in more sym-
metrical predictions. Psychologically, this account is of interest because it suggests
that humans and macaques may be performing the task somewhat differently. One
possibility is that monkeys performing the motion direction discrimination task may
reduce their decision criterion over the course of a trial. Smith (1995, 2000) pointed
out that many diffusion processes with time-varying drift rate (such as the OU
process) can be modeled as processes with constant drift, but time-varying decision
criteria—a form of model mimicry. Although this was not Ditterich’s preferred
account for his result, time-varying response criteria have been proposed in other
tasks like visual search, where exhaustive search of distractor arrays can be very
time-consuming (e.g., Thornton and Gilden 2007). Ditterich’s explanation for
time-dependent drift, which was couched in terms of maximizing reward rate, is
consistent with the idea of observers seeking a balance between time spent on a
single trial and reward rate within an experiment by manipulating their response
criterion (cf. Bogacz 2007; Bogacz et al. 2006). Whether dynamically adjusting
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                          281

response criterion within a single trial provides a theoretically complete account of
maximizing reward rate remains to be seen.
    Whereas Ditterich (2006) successfully modeled behavioral and spike rate data
from LIP, Ratcliff, and colleagues have examined neural data from SC alongside
behavioral data from a variety of perceptual tasks (Ratcliff et al. 2003, 2007, 2011).
SC is part of the same oculomotor decision circuit as LIP, and some SC neurons
display many similar ramping to threshold characteristics as their LIP counterparts,
as we discuss below. Ratcliff et al. (2003) investigated the relationship between the
information processing dynamics of the diffusion model to SC ﬁring rates in
monkeys performing a gap discrimination task. In Ratcliff’s diffusion model, a
single accumulator integrates relative evidence for different response alternatives.
By simultaneously recording from SC neurons associated with each response
alternative, Ratcliff et al. (2003) were able to operationalize relative evidence in
neural terms as the difference in ﬁring rates. By ﬁtting the standard two-barrier
diffusion model to the choice-RT data, and then simulating sample evidence
accumulation trajectories from the ﬁtted model, they were able to compare the
accumulation of relative evidence in the diffusion model with the difference in ﬁring
rates between competing SC neurons. An interesting feature of their data was that
the time course of the growth of the difference in SC spike rates—a neural repre-
sentation of accumulated discriminative evidence—was strongly predictive of
behavioral RT (see Fig. 14.10; cf. Roitman and Shadlen 2002). Fast and slow
responses were related to fast and slow growth of the difference in ﬁring rates,
respectively. Figure 14.10 shows simulated evidence accumulation pathways for
fast, slow, and intermediate responses against (relative) SC ﬁring rates. The model
very closely reproduces the key features of the data, lending support to the idea that
SC neurons are accumulating evidence in a manner similar to how the diffusion
model characterizes the decision process.
    A limitation of the Ratcliff et al. (2003) study is that the standard diffusion model
is silent on the ﬁring rates of the individual SC neurons that code for the different
response alternatives. By showing a correspondence between neural data and evi-
dence accumulation trajectories in the two-barrier diffusion model, Ratcliff et al.
(2003) could only relate its information processing dynamics to the difference in
ﬁring rates. To address the neural data in more detail, and to generalize their
ﬁndings to a different perceptual task, Ratcliff et al. (2007) examined ﬁring rates of
individual SC neurons in macaques performing a brightness discrimination task. To
account for these data, they used a hybrid diffusion-accumulator model, suggested
by Smith (2000) and developed by Ratcliff and Smith (2004), which they termed
the dual diffusion model. This models the decision process as a race between two
independent diffusion processes to reach a criterion. The resulting model can be
thought of as a diffusion process implementation of an independent race model, like
the Poisson counter model discussed previously. After ﬁtting the dual diffusion
model to the behavioral choice-RT data, Ratcliff et al. (2007) simulated decision
trajectories from the ﬁtted model. Not only was the model able to account for the
individual neural ﬁring rates, it was also able to account for the difference in ﬁring
rates between SC neurons. This result provided a more direct interpretation of the
282                                                                   D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith




Fig. 14.10 Comparison of simulated evidence accumulation trajectories from Ratcliff’s diffusion
model with population response of SC neurons recorded from macaques completing a gap
discrimination task. The top panel shows simulated accumulation trajectories for fast, interme-
diate, and slow responses based on model parameters derived from ﬁtting the diffusion model to
the behavioral data. The bottom panel shows the difference in accumulation trajectories for the two
response alternatives (gray lines) alongside the difference in ﬁring rates for neurons coding for
different response alternatives (black lines). Reproduced from Ratcliff et al. (2003)



original Ratcliff et al. (2003) result, supporting the idea that the accumulation of
discriminative evidence is reflected in the relative ﬁring rates of different neural
populations.



14.3.3 Using Neural Data to Constrain Model Selection

The sequential sampling models developed in cognitive psychology have now
reached a point at which they are able to quantitatively account for all the key
features of choice-RT data observed behaviorally (Ratcliff and Smith 2004). As
noted by Ratcliff and McKoon (2008), this is a remarkable accomplishment for
psychology, where developing quantitatively precise theories is intrinsically difﬁ-
cult. Part of the success of sequential sampling models has come from adding
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                        283

between-trial parameter variability like variability in start-point (Laming 1968;
Ratcliff et al. 1999), and drift rate (Ratcliff 1978). This necessarily increases the
complexity (and flexibility) of the models. A consequence of this increased com-
plexity is that it has become quite difﬁcult to distinguish models purely on the basis
of ﬁt to behavioral data. As Ratcliff and Smith reported, a variety of hybrid
diffusion-accumulator models could produce ﬁts to behavioral data that were
quantitatively very similar to Ratcliff’s diffusion model. Importantly, these hybrid
models emphasized different psychological mechanisms. For example, Usher and
McClelland’s (2001) LCA model was shown to account for behavioral data by
assuming some combination of competition between accumulators and leakage (or
decay) of evidence during the decision process. Although ﬁts of these models
typically show that decay is not needed to account for behavioral data (i.e.,
best-ﬁtting estimates of decay parameters are typically quite small, exerting mini-
mal influence on model behavior; Ratcliff and Smith 2004), it is possible that decay
may operate at a neurophysiological level, but remain undetectable in behavioral
data. Indeed, the effects of short time scale decay that characterizes cellular
membrane potentials may be masked by long time scale integration that serves to
sustain spiking activity in a cortical network. The long time scale integration
assumed by cognitive models explains why Ratcliff’s diffusion model can ﬁt data
generated by a Poisson shot-noise model, as shown by Smith (2010), even though
the former does not involve decay, whereas the latter does. Given the biological
reality of short time scale decay at the cellular level, the key question concerning
the role of decay in choice-RT models is whether there is an additional level of
decay that operates over the longer time scales that characterize the time course of
the decision process.
    By collecting neural ﬁring rate data, it becomes possible to evaluate claims that
long time scale decay and mutual inhibition are needed to account for neural data.
Ratcliff et al. (2011) investigated the role of inhibition, recording from pairs of SC
neurons that coded for different response alternatives in a brightness discrimination
task and found no evidence of inhibition among SC neuron pairs. When condi-
tioned on the ﬁring rate of the neuron coding for the target response, there was little
difference in the ﬁring rate for the neuron coding the nontarget response, whereas an
inhibition account would predict a decrease. Ratcliff et al. also found that the dual
diffusion and LCA models provided similarly good ﬁts to the behavioral choice-RT
data, but that the amount of inhibition predicted by the LCA model was minimal.
As these conclusions were based on ﬁts to behavioral data, this result might have
been expected on the basis of similar ﬁts reported by Ratcliff and Smith (2004). To
investigate whether inhibition was needed to account for the neural data, simulated
evidence accumulation trajectories were generated from both models. As with the
behavioral data, both models closely captured the underlying neural dynamics.
Because the dual diffusion model assumes no inhibition, and the simulated LCA
trajectories also incorporated minimal inhibition, the result suggests that inhibition
was not needed to account for the neural data. Indeed, by increasing levels of
inhibition in the LCA model and generating simulated evidence accumulation
trajectories, Ratcliff et al. showed that the model produced poorer ﬁts to behavioral
284                                                          D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

data and, contrary to the data, predicted negatively correlated ﬁring rates in target
nontarget SC neuron pairs. They concluded that if inhibition were involved in
decision-making in SC neurons, the strength of the inhibition was so low as to be
undetectable.
   The studies by Ratcliff et al. (2003, 2007, 2011) illustrate one of the advantages
of using both behavioral and neural data in model testing. By ﬁtting models to
behavioral data and examining whether the model dynamics resemble the under-
lying neural dynamics, it is possible to draw strong conclusions about the rela-
tionship between the underlying cognitive and neural processes. In the case of
simple decision-making, combining analysis of neural data with mathematical
modeling of behavioral data provides support for the linking hypothesis that evi-
dence accumulation processes described by cognitive sequential sampling models
are functionally related to ﬁring rates in the underlying neural populations. By
examining data at the neural level, it is also possible to resolve model mimicry
problems that appear at the behavioral level. Whereas hybrid diffusion-accumulator
models are able to provide competitive ﬁts to behavioral data, they do so by
invoking different psychological mechanisms (e.g., mutual inhibition). While, it is
possible to appeal to neural plausibility to argue for the inclusion of certain pro-
cessing mechanisms, the requirement to account for neurophysiological and
behavioral data simultaneously allows these assumptions to be tested directly.
   Neurally Constrained Modeling. A new development in integrating neural and
cognitive-behavioral levels of analysis is that of neurally constrained modeling of
choice-RT data (e.g., Purcell et al. 2010). Like the approach of Ratcliff et al. (2003,
2007, 2011), who showed that models ﬁtted to behavioral data also predict neural
ﬁring rates, this approach investigates the relationship between ﬁring rates and
sequential sampling models. However, instead of treating accumulation rates as free
parameters, this approach uses empirical spike trains recorded from early sensory
areas as inputs to the decision process. By using neural data directly to constrain the
model parameters, this approach provides a direct way to test assumptions about
how neurons coding for different perceptual representations influence subsequent
decision process.
   Purcell et al. (2010) compared a range of sequential sampling models on their
ability to account for combined behavioral and neurophysiological data from
macaques performing a visual search task. In this task, the monkeys were required
to make a saccade response to a singleton target stimulus embedded in an array of
distractors (e.g., a red target among green distractors). Behavioral accuracy and RT
data were collected. While the monkeys performed the task, recordings from two
kinds of FEF neurons were made. Single-unit recordings from visual neurons in
FEF, which were assumed to code for the perceptual representations of the stimuli,
were collected. The spike trains recorded in these neurons were used as the input to
the decision process in the models. Recordings were also made from movement
neurons in FEF, which are responsible for executing the saccade response. Purcell
et al. assumed that spike rates for these neurons coded for the integration of per-
ceptual evidence over time.
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                        285

    Purcell et al. (2010) considered a number of different model architectures
including correlated, independent, and competitively interacting diffusion pro-
cesses, and examined the effect of different assumptions on the predicted evidence
accumulation process. Evidence accumulation was either perfect (as in Ratcliff’s
diffusion model; Eq. 14.1), leaky (as in the OU diffusion process; Eq. 14.2), or
required a threshold level of visual FEF activity prior to the onset of evidence
accumulation by movement neurons, which they termed a gated accumulation
model. Purcell et al. found that both leaky and gated accumulation models provided
the best account of the behavioral data. Because visual FEF neurons were assumed
to provide a continuous stream of perceptual evidence to movement neurons—
including the period before the neuron successfully discriminated the target—the
models that assumed perfect integration failed to account for behavioral data, as
they integrated input noise for the bulk of the trial. By contrast, the leaky and gated
accumulation models were able to account for the behavioral data because leakage
and the gating threshold counteracted the effects of input noise early in the trial.
Using model parameters that optimized ﬁt to behavioral data, Purcell et al. simu-
lated evidence accumulation trajectories and compared them with the ﬁring rates of
movement neurons during the task. They considered several aspects of the move-
ment neuron dynamics: the time at which spike activity increased from baseline
levels, the speed with which spike rate increased, the baseline ﬁring rate, and the
threshold ﬁring rate corresponding with initiation of a saccade. Whereas the leaky
and gated accumulation models both provided good ﬁts to the behavioral data, only
the gated accumulation model was able to account for the full suite of neural data.
    The work of Purcell et al. (2010) shows the value of neural constraints in
evaluating sequential sampling models. However, the properties of their proposed
gating mechanism have yet to be investigated in other settings. Their gating
mechanism represents one possible way to limit the accumulation of noise prior to
stimulus presentation, ﬁrst discussed by Laming (1968) and recently investigated by
Ratcliff and Smith (2010). Ratcliff and Smith investigated decision-making in a task
in which letter stimuli were presented in dynamic noise and found that the effect of
noise was to shift the leading edge of the RT distribution later in time. The shift was
interpreted as a delay in the onset of evidence accumulation by the decision process.
Their results showed that the onset of evidence accumulation by the decision
process must be sensitive to the temporal stability of the stimulus representation.
When stimuli are embedded in dynamic noise, the process of forming a stable
representation of the stimulus is slowed, resulting in delayed onset of
decision-making. It is not yet clear whether Purcell et al.’s gating mechanism can
also provide an explanation of the delay in the onset of evidence accumulation
produced by noise in Ratcliff and Smith’s (2010) task.
    To summarize, by making very simple assumptions about how neural activity
relates to coding of perceptual evidence, it is possible to simultaneously model data
at both behavioral and neurophysiological levels of analysis. From a theoretical
perspective, addressing both kinds of data has become increasingly important, as
different kinds of model architectures have proved equally capable of accounting
for behavioral data (Ratcliff and Smith 2004). Although there are a number of open
286                                                          D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

theoretical issues that remain to be settled, this approach to analyzing combined
neural and behavioral data constitutes a signiﬁcant methodological and theoretical
development.



14.4    Summary and Conclusions

In this chapter, we have attempted to provide an overview of the development of
different classes of sequential sampling models in cognitive and mathematical
psychology, and how they relate to data collected from single-unit recordings in
neural oculomotor circuits. Sequential sampling models are among the most rig-
orously tested models in psychology, and after many decades of reﬁnement, the
best models can account for all of the major behavioral phenomena of interest
(Ratcliff and McKoon 2008; Ratcliff and Smith 2004). One of the side effects of this
theoretical progress is that several classes of models (e.g., diffusion and hybrid
diffusion-accumulator models) have been shown to provide comparably good ﬁts to
behavioral data, and are consequently very difﬁcult to distinguish. This is a salient
issue because the assumptions of some models—such as those involving decay and
mutual inhibition—are motivated by appeals to neural plausibility. While we
appreciate such considerations, we note that such assumptions, like any theoretical
assumptions, must be subject to empirical test. It is clear from recent work that there
is much to be gained from the theoretical exchange between psychologists and
neuroscientists interested in decision-making. The rich history of choice-RT
research in cognitive and mathematical psychology provides a theoretical frame-
work for studying the neural basis of decision-making. Reciprocally, constraints
from neural data provide an opportunity to test and reﬁne decision models in ways
that would not have been possible using behavioral data alone.



14.4.1 Outstanding Questions and Future Directions

Despite the substantial progress that has been made over the last decade or so in
identifying neural correlates of decision processes and relating these two compo-
nents of successful sequential sampling models, there are a number of issues that
remain open. We briefly discuss three of these issues here.
   One Decision Architecture or Many? Although the studies reviewed above have
consistently shown links between neural ﬁring rates in oculomotor areas and evi-
dence accumulation rates in decision models, there are subtle differences in some of
the speciﬁc details of models associated with different brain areas. For example, for
SC neurons in monkeys performing a brightness discrimination task, Ratcliff et al.
(2011) found no functional role for mutual inhibition among decision neurons,
suggesting that models like the LCA, which ascribe a central role to inhibition, may
not be appropriate for modeling decision processes executed in SC. An open
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                       287

question is whether other brain areas show evidence for inhibition at the level of
decision processes, and whether an LCA-like model might be suitable for neurons
outside of SC.
    Recent work by Purcell et al. (2012), extended their previous study of FEF
movement neurons in monkeys performing a visual search task. Whereas, their
initial study only allowed modeling of correct RT distributions (Purcell et al. 2010)
their follow-up examined RT distributions for both correct and error responses
using the same neurally constrained modeling approach. In contrast to what Ratcliff
et al. (2011) found for SC neurons, Purcell et al. (2012) found support for a gated
accumulation model that involved mutual inhibition among accumulators. The
implication of these studies is that decision-making architectures and dynamics,
though fundamentally very similar, as they draw on common principles of evidence
accumulation, may vary in signiﬁcant ways across different brain areas. Additional
work is needed to better understand how and why neural decision architectures
might vary.
    Modeling Evidence Integration. The results from the neurally constrained
modeling approach of Purcell et al. (2010, 2012) provide support for a simple
linking proposition about the neural representation of perceptual evidence. Using
empirical spike train data to drive a decision mechanism is an important ﬁrst step in
developing a comprehensive neurocomputational account of decision-making.
However, this is only a partial solution. As the work of Wang and colleagues (e.g.,
Lo and Wang 2006; Wang 2001, 2002; Wong and Wang 2006) and Smith and
McKenzie (2011) highlighted, the question remains as to how temporal integration
of evidence is realized neurocomputationally. Owing to the large differences in time
scales between individual neurons involved in decision-making and the overall
decision-making process itself, the neural mechanism that integrates evidence over
behaviorally relevant time scales needs to be developed further. As with other
theoretical approaches (e.g., Ditterich 2006; Mazurek et al. 2003; Purcell et al.
2010, 2012; Ratcliff et al. 2003, 2007, 2011; Smith 2010), temporal integration of
perceptual evidence is assumed to be a theoretical primitive of the models. The
spiking neuron models developed by Wang and colleagues and recurrent loop
models, like Smith and McKenzie’s, suggest some theoretical possibilities for how
evidence might be integrated over long time scales. Combining such a theoretical
decision architecture with the neurally constrained approach provides an interesting
avenue for further development, as it could provide a strong test of the principles of
recurrence and superposition used by Smith and McKenzie.
    Neural Correlates of Bias and Reward. In addition to the work reviewed above
that has investigated neural correlates of evidence accumulation, recent work has
begun to use choice-RT modeling to investigate the neural correlates of prior
knowledge and bias effects in simple decision tasks in humans (e.g., Bode et al.
2012; Forstmann et al. 2010; Mulder et al. 2012) and monkeys (e.g., Rao et al.
2012; Rorie et al. 2010).
    For example, Rao et al. (2012) studied LIP responses of monkeys performing the
motion direction discrimination task. Using cues indicating the most likely direction
of motion for an upcoming stimulus, they observed systematic shifts in LIP ﬁring
288                                                          D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

rates following cue presentation, but no effect on the rate at which activity
approached a threshold ﬁring rate. A similar effect on LIP response was observed
by Rorie et al. (2010) who used a reward-based manipulation. For both studies,
choice-RT modeling revealed an effect on the start-point of the evidence accu-
mulation process.
    In human studies, Forstmann et al. (2010) had people complete a cued version of
the motion discrimination task similar to that used by Rao et al. (2012). Using
fMRI, Forstmann et al. found that cues produced changes in cortico-striatal brain
circuits, but only after accounting for the effects of response bias—as measured by
ﬁtting an accumulator model to behavioral data (Brown and Heathcote 2008). This
work has recently been extended by Mulder et al. (2012), who manipulated prior
probability with cues and reward using payoffs. Their fMRI analysis revealed
common effects of bias and reward on cortico-parietal decision circuits, which
produced changes in response bias—indexed by the estimated starting point of
evidence accumulation—in Ratcliff’s diffusion model.
    In a similar vein, Bode et al. (2012) investigated sequence effects in a perceptual
decision-making task, involving stimuli presented briefly in noise. They combined a
model-based behavioral analysis with a pattern-classiﬁcation analysis of EEG data.
Using Ratcliff’s diffusion model, Bode et al. showed that sequence effects in the
behavioral data were consistent with changes in the starting point of the evidence
accumulation process, reflecting a bias favoring the response made on the previous
trial. Consistent with this response bias account, it was also found that prestimulus
activity in the EEG trace was predictive of people’s responses on catch-trials where
only noise was presented.
    Taken together, these investigations into the neural correlates of bias and prior
knowledge effects add to the growing body of evidence that both neural and
behavioral choice-RT data can be accommodated by a common sequential sampling
framework.



14.4.2 Conclusion

With the recent reﬁnement of techniques for recording spike rates from monkeys
performing simple perceptual tasks, it has become possible to directly evaluate
modeling assumptions made on the basis of neural plausibility. A number of
research groups, using a variety of tasks and methods, have provided converging
evidence that the spiking dynamics of neurons in FEF, LIP, and SC bear a striking
resemblance to the evidence accumulation dynamics postulated by sequential
sampling models of decision-making. By recording from oculomotor areas known
to be involved in the processing of perceptual stimuli and preparation of saccadic
responses, one can evaluate the degree of convergence between cognitive theory
and neural data. Assumptions made in cognitive models have provided a basis for
testing hypotheses about how the brain integrates perceptual evidence over time,
and, importantly, how neural data can be used as a tool for model selection.
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                                 289

Acknowledgments This work was supported by ARC Discovery Grant DP110103406 awarded
to P.L. Smith and R. Ratcliff. We thank Simon Lilburn for helpful comments on a previous version
of the manuscript. David Sewell is now at the University of Queensland.




References

Audley RJ, Pike AR (1965) Some alternative stochastic models of choice. Br J Math Stat Psychol
    18:207–225
Bennur S, Gold JI (2011) Distinct representations of a perceptual decision and the associated
    oculomotor plan in the monkey lateral intraparietal area. J Neurosci 31:913–921
Bode S, Sewell DK, Lilburn SD, Forte JD, Smith PL, Stahl J (2012) Predicting perceptual decision
    biases from early brain activity. J Neurosci 32:12488–12498
Bogacz R (2007) Optimal decision-making theories: linking neurobiology with behaviour. Trends
    Cogn Sci 11:118–125
Bogacz R, Brown E, Moehlis J, Holmes P, Cohen JD (2006) The physics of optimal decision
    making: a formal analysis of models of performance in two-alternative forced-choice tasks.
    Psychol Rev 113:700–765
Britten KH, Shadlen MN, Newsome WT, Movshon JA (1993) Responses of neurons in macaque
    MT to stochastic motion signals. Vis Neurosci 10:1157–1169
Britten KH, Newsome WT, Shadlen MN, Celebrini S, Movshon JA (1996) A relationship between
    behavioral choice and the visual response of neurons in macaque MT. Vis Neurosci 13:87–100
Brown SD, Heathcote A (2008) The simplest complete model of choice response time: Linear
    ballistic accumulation. Cogn Psychol 57:153–178
Busemeyer JR, Townsend JT (1993) Decision ﬁeld theory: a dynamic-cognitive approach to
    decision making in an uncertain environment. Psychol Rev 100:432–459
Churchland AK, Kiani R, Shadlen MN (2008) Decision-making with multiple alternatives. Nat
    Neurosci 11:693–702
Ditterich J (2006) Evidence for time-variant decision making. Eur J Neurosci 24:3628–3641
Ditterich J, Mazurek ME, Shadlen MN (2003) Microstimulation of visual cortex affects the speed
    of perceptual decisions. Nat Neurosci 6:891–898
Edwards W (1965) Optimal strategies for seeking information: models for statistics, choice
    reaction times, and human information processing. J Math Psychol 2:312–329
Forstmann BU, Brown S, Dutilh G, Neumann J, Wagenmakers EJ (2010) The neural substrate of
    prior information in perceptual decision making: a model-based analysis. Frontiers in Human
    Neuroscience 4:1–12
Gnadt JW, Andersen RA (1988) Memory related motor planning activity in posterior parietal
    cortex of macaque. Exp Brain Res 70:216–220
Gold JI, Shadlen MN (2000) Representation of a perceptual decision in developing oculomotor
    commands. Nature 404:390–394
Gold JI, Shadlen MN (2001) Neural computations that underlie decisions about sensory stimuli.
    Trends in Cognitive Sciences 5:10–16
Gold JI, Shadlen MN (2002) Banburismus and the brain: decoding the relationship between
    sensory stimuli, decisions, and reward. Neuron 36:299–308
Gold JI, Shadlen MN (2003) The influence of behavioral context on the representation of a
    perceptual decision in developing oculomotor commands. J Neurosci 23:632–651
Gold JI, Shadlen MN (2007) The neural basis of decision making. Annu Rev Neurosci 30:
    535–574
Green DM, Swets JA (1966) Signal detection theory and psychophysics. Wiley, New York
Green DM, Smith AF, von Gierke SM (1983) Choice reaction time with a random foreperiod.
    Percept Psychophys 34:195–208
290                                                                   D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

Hanes DP, Schall JD (1996) Neural control of voluntary movement initiation. Science 274:
   427–430
Hanks TD, Ditterich J, Shadlen MN (2006) Microstimulation of macaque area LIP affects
   decision-making in a motion discrimination task. Nat Neurosci 9:682–689
Huk AC, Meister MLR (2012) Neural correlates and neural computations in posterior parietal
   cortex during perceptual decision-making. Front Integr Neurosci 6:1–13
Huk AC, Shadlen MN (2005) Neural activity in macaque parietal cortex reflects temporal
   integration of visual motion signals during perceptual decision making. J Neurosci 25:
   10420–10436
Kiani R, Hanks TD, Shadlen MN (2008) Bounded integration in parietal cortex underlies decisions
   even when viewing duration is dictated by the environment. J Neurosci 28:3017–3029
LaBerge D (1962) A recruitment theory of simple behavior. Psychometrika 27:375–396
LaBerge D (1994) Quantitative models of attention and response processing in shape identiﬁcation
   tasks. J Math Psychol 38:198–243
Laming DRJ (1968) Information theory of choice reaction time. Wiley, New York
Link SW, Heath RA (1975) A sequential theory of psychological discrimination. Psychometrika
   40:77–105
Lo C-C, Wang X-J (2006) Cortico-basal ganglia circuit mechanism for a decision threshold in
   reaction time tasks. Nat Neurosci 9:956–963
Luce RD (1986) Response times: Their role in inferring elementary mental organization. Oxford
   University Press, Oxford
Mazurek ME, Roitman JD, Ditterich J, Shadlen MN (2003) A role for neural integrators in
   perceptual decision making. Cereb Cortex 13:1257–1269
Mulder MJ, Wagenmakers EJ, Ratcliff R, Boekel W, Forstmann BU (2012) Bias in the brain: a
   diffusion model analysis of prior probability and potential payoff. J Neurosci 32:2335–2343
Palmer J, Huk AC, Shadlen MN (2005) The effect of stimulus strength on the speed and accuracy
   of a perceptual decision. Journal of Vision 5:376–404
Pike AR (1966) Stochastic models of choice behaviour: response probabilities and latencies of
   ﬁnite Markov chain systems. Br J Math Stat Psychol 21:161–182
Pike AR (1973) Response latency models for signal detection. Psychol Rev 80:53–68
Purcell BA, Heitz RP, Cohen JY, Schall JD, Logan GD, Palmeri TJ (2010) Neurally constrained
   modeling of perceptual decision making. Psychol Rev 117:1113–1143
Purcell BA, Schall JD, Logan GD, Palmeri TJ (2012) From salience to saccades:
   multiple-alternative gated stochastic accumulator model of visual search. J Neurosci 32:
   3433–3446
Rao V, DeAngelis GC, Snyder LH (2012) Neural correlates of prior expectations of motion in the
   lateral intraparietal and middle temporal areas. J Neurosci 32:10063–10074
Ratcliff R (1978) A theory of memory retrieval. Psychol Rev 85:59–108
Ratcliff R (1988) Continuous versus discrete information processing: modeling accumulation of
   partial information. Psychol Rev 95:238–255
Ratcliff R (2002) A diffusion model account of response time and accuracy in a brightness
   discrimination task: ﬁtting real data and failing to ﬁt fake but plausible data. Psychon Bull Rev
   9:278–291
Ratcliff R (2006) Modeling response signal and response time data. Cogn Psychol 53:195–237
Ratcliff R, McKoon G (2008) The diffusion decision model: theory and data for two-choice
   decision tasks. Neural Comput 20:873–922
Ratcliff R, Rouder JN (1998) Modeling response times for two-choice decisions. Psychol Sci
   9:347–356
Ratcliff R, Rouder JN (2000) A diffusion model account of masking in two-choice letter
   identiﬁcation. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 26:127–140
Ratcliff R, Smith PL (2004) A comparison of sequential sampling models for two-choice reaction
   time. Psychol Rev 111:333–367
Ratcliff R, Smith PL (2010) Perceptual discrimination in static and dynamic noise: the temporal
   relation between perceptual encoding and decision making. J Exp Psychol Gen 139:70–94
14   The Psychology and Psychobiology of Simple Decisions …                                   291

Ratcliff R, Van Zandt T, McKoon G (1999) Connectionist and diffusion models of reaction time.
   Psychol Rev 106:261–300
Ratcliff R, Cherian A, Segraves MA (2003) A comparison of macaque behavior and superior
   colliculus neuronal activity to predictions from models of two-choice decisions. J Neurophysiol
   90:1392–1407
Ratcliff R, Gomez P, McKoon G (2004) A diffusion model account of the lexical decision task.
   Psychol Rev 111:159–182
Ratcliff R, Hasegawa YT, Hasegawa RP, Smith PL, Segraves MA (2007) Dual diffusion model for
   single-cell recording data from the superior colliculus in a brightness-discrimination task.
   J Neurophysiol 97:1756–1774
Ratcliff R, Hasegawa YT, Hasegawa RP, Childers R, Smith PL, Segraves MA (2011) Inhibition in
   superior colliculus neurons in a brightness discrimination task? Neural Comput 23:1790–1820
Roe RM, Busemeyer JR, Townsend JT (2001) Multialternative decision ﬁeld theory: a dynamic
   connectionist model of decision making. Psychol Rev 108:370–392
Roitman JD, Shadlen MN (2002) Response of neurons in the later intraparietal area during a
   combined visual discrimination reaction time task. J Neurosci 22:9475–9489
Rorie AE, Gao J, McClelland JL, Newsome WT (2010) Integration of sensory and reward
   information during perceptual decision-making in lateral intraparietal cortex (LIP) of the
   macaque monkey. PLoS ONE 5:1–21
Schall JD (2004) On building a bridge between brain and behavior. Annu Rev Psychol 55:23–50
Seidemann E, Zohary E, Newsome WT (1998) Temporal gating of neural signals during
   performance of a visual discrimination task. Nature 394:72–75
Sewell DK, Smith PL (2012) Attentional control in visual signal detection: effects of abrupt-onset
   and no-onset stimuli. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 38:1043–1068
Shadlen MN, Newsome WT (1996) Motion perception: seeing and deciding. Proc Nat Acad Sci
   93:628–633
Shadlen MN, Newsome WT (2001) Neural basis of a perceptual decision in the parietal cortex
   (area LIP) of the rhesus monkey. J Neurophysiol 86:1916–1936
Smith PL (1995) Psychophysically principled models of visual simple reaction time. Psychol Rev
   102:567–593
Smith PL (2000) Stochastic dynamic models of response time and accuracy: a foundational primer.
   J Math Psychol 44:408–463
Smith PL (2010) From poisson shot noise to the integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process: neurally
   principled models of information accumulation in decision-making and response time. J Math
   Psychol 54:266–283
Smith PL, McKenzie CRL (2011) Diffusive information accumulation by minimal recurrent neural
   models of decision-making. Neural Comput 23:2000–2031
Smith PL, Ratcliff R (2004) Psychology and neurobiology of simple decisions. Trends Neurosci
   27:161–168
Smith PL, Ratcliff R (2009) An integrated theory of attention and decision making in visual signal
   detection. Psychol Rev 116:283–317
Smith PL, Van Zandt T (2000) Time-dependent poisson counter models of response latency in
   simple judgment. Br J Math Stat Psychol 53:293–315
Smith PL, Vickers D (1988) The accumulator model of two-choice discrimination. J Math Psychol
   32:135–168
Smith PL, Ratcliff R, Wolfgang BJ (2004) Attention orienting and the timecourse of perceptual
   decisions: response time distributions with masked and unmasked displays. Vision Res
   44:1297–1320
Smith PL, Ellis R, Sewell DK, Wolfgang BJ (2010) Cued detection with compound
   integration-interruption masks reveals multiple attentional mechanisms. J Vis 10:1–28
Stone M (1960) Models for choice-reaction time. Psychometrika 25:251–260
Teller DY (1984) Linking propositions. Vision Res 10:1233–1246
292                                                                 D.K. Sewell and P.L. Smith

Thompson KG, Hanes DP, Bichot NP, Schall JD (1996) Perceptual and motor processing stages
   identiﬁed in the activity of macaque frontal eye ﬁeld neurons during visual search.
   J Neurophysiol 76:4040–4055
Thompson KG, Bichot NP, Schall JD (1997) Dissociation of visual discrimination from saccade
   programming in macaque frontal eye ﬁeld. J Neurophysiol 77:1046–1050
Thornton TL, Gilden DL (2007) Parallel and serial processes in visual search. Psychol Rev
   114:71–103
Townsend JT, Ashby FG (1983) Stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes.
   Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Usher M, McClelland JL (2001) The time course of perceptual choice: the leaky, competing
   accumulator model. Psychol Rev 108:550–592
Van Zandt T, Colonius H, Proctor RW (2000) A comparison of two response time models applied
   to perceptual matching. Psychon Bull Rev 7:208–256
Vickers D (1970) Evidence for an accumulator model of psychophysical discrimination.
   Ergonomics 13:37–58
Vickers D (1979) Decision processes in visual perception. Academic Press, New York
Wagenmakers EJ, Brown S (2007) On the linear relation between the mean and the standard
   deviation of a response time distribution. Psychol Rev 114:830–841
Wald A (1947) Sequential analysis. Wiley, New York
Wang X-J (2001) Synaptic reverberation underlying mnemonic persistent activity. Trends
   Neurosci 24:455–463
Wang X-J (2002) Probabilistic decision making by slow reverberation in cortical circuits. Neuron
   36:955–968
Wickelgren WA (1977) Speed-accuracy tradeoff and information processing dynamics. Acta
   Psychol 41:67–85
Wong K-F, Wang X-J (2006) A recurrent network mechanism of time integration in perceptual
   decisions. J Neurosci 26:1314–1328
