Chapter 15
A Neurocognitive Perspective
on the Development of Social
Decision-Making

Geert-Jan Will and Berna Güroğlu


Abstract In this chapter, we review evidence for the hypothesis that developmental
changes in cognitive control and perspective taking are crucial in understanding
age-related changes in social behavior. Studies that have examined the develop-
mental roots of prosocial behavior using experimental economic games show that
other-oriented concern and a preference for fairness emerge early in development.
Continued development of intentionality understanding and strategic behavior in
bargaining situations suggest that perspective taking and cognitive control undergo
extended development and continue to contribute to changes in social behavior well
into adolescence. Functional neuroimaging studies have shown that these behavioral
changes are accompanied by an increased recruitment of brain regions implicated in
cognitive control (e.g., dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) and perspective taking (e.g.,
temporoparietal junction). Together these studies show that developmental changes
in cognitive control and perspective taking and their underlying neural circuitry are
associated with progressively more strategic thinking and an increased incorporation
of other’s perspectives into social decision-making across development.


Beginning early in ontogeny humans show levels of sociality that surpass those of
other species (Tomasello and Vaish 2013). For example, 1-year-old toddlers help
others to achieve a goal by picking up objects that are needed to successfully
complete an action without any explicit request or reward (Warneken and
Tomasello 2006). Despite the early emergence of key social tendencies, social



G.-J. Will (&)  B. Güroğlu
Institute of Psychology, Leiden University,
Wassenaarseweg 52, 2333 AK Leiden, The Netherlands
e-mail: g.j.will@fsw.leidenuniv.nl
B. Güroğlu
e-mail: BGuroglu@fsw.leidenuniv.nl
G.-J. Will  B. Güroğlu
Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), Leiden University
Medical Center, P.O. Box 9600, Leiden 2300 RC, The Netherlands

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                          293
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_15
294                                                            G.-J. Will and B. Güroğlu

behavior continues to develop and grow in complexity across childhood and ado-
lescence. Children expand their behavioral repertoire with social tactics, such as
teasing and deception, and they increasingly learn to take other people’s feelings
into account in their social responses (Burnett and Blakemore 2009b). For instance,
whereas preschoolers mainly use deception to their own beneﬁt, school-aged
children increasingly start to use deception to protect other’s feelings (e.g., telling
‘white lies’) (Talwar et al. 2007).
    Developmental changes in social behavior are thought to be supported by
developmental changes in general cognitive functions like impulse control and
speciﬁc social cognitive functions such as the ability to adopt another person’s
perspective (e.g., perspective taking). Cognitively controlling impulses is of crucial
importance for the regulation of social behavior and continues to develop across
childhood and adolescence (Davidson et al. 2006; Rueda et al. 2005). Children
acquire a core component of perspective taking when they develop an under-
standing that other people’s mental states might differ from their own (Wellman
et al. 2001). Even though this ‘theory of mind’ emerges before adolescence, more
advanced forms of perspective taking needed to act on the understanding of other
people’s mental states continue to develop during adolescence (Dumontheil et al.
2010; Selman 1980). This rather protracted development of both impulse control
and perspective taking is likely to contribute to developmental changes in social
behavior across adolescence and into adulthood. This implication is central in the
neurobiological models of social development which posit that continued structural
development of the brain is associated with functional changes in brain networks
implicated in cognitive control and social cognition, which in turn contribute to
developmental changes in social behavior (Blakemore 2008; Crone and Dahl 2012;
Nelson et al. 2005).
    In this chapter, we review evidence for the hypothesis that the gradual devel-
opment of impulse control and perspective-taking skills are associated with pro-
gressively more strategic thinking and an increased incorporation of other’s
intentions in social decision-making. In the following sections, we ﬁrst describe
why paradigms from behavioral economics provide valuable tools to study devel-
opmental changes in social behavior and its underlying mechanisms (Sect. 15.1).
Subsequently, we describe the age-related behavioral changes in these games
(Sect. 15.2), followed by evidence linking these behavioral changes to children’s
developing abilities to control selﬁsh impulses and to take other people’s per-
spective (Sect. 15.3). Next, we focus on functional neuroimaging studies showing
that social decision-making in adults relies on separable, but interacting, networks
in the brain (Sect. 15.4). Finally, we review recent neuroimaging studies demon-
strating differential development of the brain networks involved in social
decision-making (Sect. 15.5), supporting the proposition that increased intention-
ality understanding and strategic motivations in social decision-making are asso-
ciated with developmental changes in these networks.
15   A Neurocognitive Perspective on the Development …                               295


15.1     Why Use Economic Games to Study Social
         Development?

To investigate the psychological and neural mechanisms underlying social
decision-making, psychologists and neuroscientists have turned to game theoretical
paradigms derived from behavioral economics (Rilling and Sanfey 2011). These
paradigms offer a context of social interactions where the decisions people make
have actual consequences for their own and their interaction partner’s outcomes.
Two of these games, namely the Ultimatum Game and the Dictator Game, have
proven to be valuable tools to study concerns about fairness (for a detailed
description of these games please see Chap. 20 in this book). In these two-player
exchange games one player (i.e., the proposer) is given a set of valuable rewards,
such as money, candy or stickers and is given the opportunity to propose a split of
the rewards between themselves and a second player. In the Ultimatum Game, the
second player (i.e., the responder) can either accept or reject the proposal. If the
proposal is accepted, both players receive their part of the stake as proposed. In case
of rejection, neither of the players receives anything (Güth et al. 1982). The Dictator
Game is different in the sense that the responder (i.e., the recipient in this case) does
not have the power to reject the proposal and thus passively receives the amount of
rewards that the ﬁrst player transfers (Forsythe et al. 1994).
   Game theoretical models assume that humans are rational decision-makers who
act to maximize personal outcomes (Camerer 2003). Accordingly, game theory
predicts that Ultimatum Game proposers would make the smallest offer possible
and that responders would accept any offer greater than zero. However, ﬁndings
show that (adult) proposers and responders do not follow the game theoretical
predictions: proposers offer most often an equal split and responders usually reject
offers smaller than 20 % of the stake (Camerer 2003). In the Dictator Game, there is
no possibility for reciprocation or retribution for the recipient, so game theory
would predict that proposers would keep the entire set of rewards to themselves.
Interestingly, proposers in the Dictator Game rarely act in accordance with these
predictions. Adult humans transfer on average 20–30 % of the stake to anonymous
others with 50 % of the stake typically being one of the most frequently occurring
offers (Forsythe et al. 1994; Hoffman et al. 1994). These deviations from the game
theoretical predictions suggest that people not only have an interest in maximizing
their own payoffs but also have a concern for the other person’s outcomes.
Importantly, whereas the positive offers in the Dictator Game reflect
other-regarding concern, the comparatively larger offers in the Ultimatum Game
suggest that strategic considerations aimed at reducing the possibility of rejection
also play a role in decisions about fairness. In addition, the consistently found
rejections of unfair Ultimatum Game offers suggest an aversive response to
receiving less than the proposer (known as ‘disadvantageous inequity aversion’)
and rejection of the offer possibly provides the responder with a way of correcting
such inequity (Fehr and Schmidt 1999).
296                                                            G.-J. Will and B. Güroğlu

   Using these games for developmental research offers several advantages
(Gummerum et al. 2008a, b). First, an important advantage is that the same para-
digm can be used across a wide age range (from children as young as 3 years old to
adults), enabling meaningful comparisons between different age groups. Second,
the structured nature of the games makes it possible to quantify complex social
behavior, which makes them useful for neuroimaging research. Third, these games
allow for experimental manipulations where subcomponents of social
decision-making, such as understanding another person’s intentions and controlling
selﬁsh impulses, can be disentangled. Such subcomponents of decision-making
might be differentially sensitive to developmental change. For example, emotional
reactions to unfairness might mature earlier than an understanding of an interaction
partner’s intentions, which might depend on slowly developing cognitive functions.
Psychological and neural mechanisms underlying such subprocesses can further be
investigated by relating age-related and age-independent individual differences in
behavior and neural activation to external measures of cognitive control (e.g.
inhibition tasks) or perspective taking (e.g. ‘theory of mind’ tasks). By doing so,
one can examine how different cognitive functions and their underlying neural
substrates are involved in developmental changes in social behavior.



15.2    Development of a Preference for Fairness

Concern for another person’s wellbeing has strong developmental roots and
emerges at very young ages. Twelve- to 18-month-old infants willingly engage in
instrumental helping of an adult who has dropped (Warneken and Tomasello 2006)
or misplaced (Liszkowski et al. 2008) an object that is needed to complete an action
and during the second year of life toddlers start to comfort others in distress
(Zahn-Waxler et al. 1992). Nonetheless, infants and toddlers are much more
reluctant to show prosocial behavior when it is costly, i.e., when they have to give
up some of their own possessions to beneﬁt another person (Svetlova et al. 2010).
Developmental studies employing the Dictator Game have shown that although
children tend to keep most of the resources to themselves, the size of their donations
increase with age between the ages of 3 and 8 (Benenson et al. 2007; Blake and
Rand 2010; Smith et al. 2013) and by age 9 no longer differs from donations made
by adults (Gummerum et al. 2008a, b; Güroğlu et al. 2009; Steinbeis et al. 2012).
   Interestingly, this developmental increase in costly sharing is not due to
developmental differences in explicit knowledge about what constitutes a fair (i.e.,
in most cases equal) distribution of resources. Infants as young as 15 months
already expect resources to be distributed equally as indicated by prolonged eye
gazes in situations when resources are distributed unequally between two recipients
compared to situations where both recipients receive an equal amount of resources
(Schmidt and Sommerville 2011; Sloane et al. 2012). A recent study showed that,
although 3-year-olds do not differ from 8-year-olds in their judgments about what
constitutes an equal division of rewards, they still tend to keep more than half of the
15   A Neurocognitive Perspective on the Development …                             297

rewards to themselves in a Dictator Game and the willingness to give away half of
the rewards increases between the ages of 3–8 (Smith et al. 2013). Furthermore,
converging evidence from developmental investigations of rejections of unequal
distributions conﬁrms that the willingness to incur costs to avoid unequal outcomes
(“I’d rather receive nothing than less than the other”) increases between age 3 and 8
(Blake and McAuliffe 2011). Also when distributing resources, 8-year-olds appear
not to choose a distribution that favors a peer; even when this has no consequences
for their own outcomes (Fehr et al. 2008; Shaw and Olson 2012; Shaw et al. 2013).
Taken together, these ﬁndings suggest that a developing sense of fairness makes
children increasingly enforce equality when this is costly, but that it does not make
them necessarily more generous or tolerant of higher outcomes for a peer.
    Investigations of proposer behavior in the Ultimatum Game show that not only a
prosocial concern about the other person’s proﬁts or equal outcomes plays a role in
fairness considerations, but also that strategic considerations aimed at reducing the
possibility of rejection come into play. That is, adults tend to offer higher shares of
the stake (closer to an equal split of the rewards) when the second player can punish
unfair offers (e.g., by rejecting them in an Ultimatum Game) (Fehr and Fischbacher
2004; Spitzer et al. 2007). As such, the difference in Ultimatum Game and Dictator
Game offers provides a measure of strategic social behavior. During late childhood
(age 7–10), children start making higher Ultimatum Game proposals compared to
Dictator Game allocations, but their Ultimatum Game proposals are still smaller
than those proposed by adults (Harbaugh et al. 2003). During adolescence, the
difference between Ultimatum Game and Dictator Game offers becomes progres-
sively greater, suggesting a developmental increase in strategic behavior across
adolescence (Güroğlu et al. 2009; Leman et al. 2009). The results from these studies
also demonstrate that the increasing discrepancy between Ultimatum Game and
Dictator Game offers is driven by increasingly higher Ultimatum Game offers and
that Dictator Game offers made by children in late childhood do not differ from
adult Dictator Game offers (Güroğlu et al. 2009; Steinbeis et al. 2012). Taken
together these studies show that a prosocial tendency to share resources with
another person emerges early in development, but also that social behavior
becomes increasingly strategic across childhood and adolescence.



15.3     Cognitive Mechanisms Underlying Developmental
         Change in Strategic Social Behavior: Impulse
         Control and Perspective Taking

Strategic bargaining depends on the notion that unfair Ultimatum Game proposals
can be punished, while Dictator Game proposals cannot. Crucially, strategic bar-
gaining—assessed as the difference between Ultimatum Game and Dictator Game
offers—develops across childhood and is associated with the developing capacity to
control impulses (Steinbeis et al. 2012). That is, the difference between the number
298                                                                   G.-J. Will and B. Güroğlu

of rewards transferred in the Ultimatum Game and in the Dictator Game increases
between the ages of 6 and 14 (see Fig. 15.1a) and irrespective of age, children, and
adults who were better at controlling a prepotent motor response in a stop-signal
reaction time (SSRT) task, also showed more strategic bargaining (see Fig. 15.1b).
These ﬁndings suggest that strategic social behavior relies on the capacity to
implement behavioral control over a selﬁsh impulse of keeping all resources to
oneself in situations where selﬁsh behavior can be punished.
   In addition, it has been argued that proposers have to take the responder’s
perspective in order to infer what kind of offers are likely to be rejected (Singer
2006; Singer and Fehr 2005). Indeed, 4–5 year old children who passed a
false-belief task (a task to probe the acquisition of a ‘theory of mind’), more often
proposed a fair offer in the Ultimatum Game than same-aged peers who failed to
pass this task (Takagishi et al. 2010). Furthermore, children with deﬁcits in per-
spective taking such as children with autism spectrum disorders tend to propose
self-serving unfair offers in the Ultimatum Game (Sally and Hill 2006).
Interestingly, a prosocial tendency to share at least some part of one’s resources
with a peer in a Dictator Game is no different in children with autism spectrum
disorders, suggesting that perspective-taking abilities are especially important when
social interactions have a strategic component.



(a)                                 (b)




                    (c)                       (d)                      (e)




Fig. 15.1 Age-related changes in strategic behavior and recruitment of the left dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (dlPFC): a Strategic behavior (Ultimatum Game (UG) proposals—Dictator Game
(DG) proposals) increased with age; b More strategic behavior was associated with better
performance on a measure of impulse control (lower stop-signal reaction times [SSRTs] represent
enhanced impulse control); c Older children recruited the left dlPFC to a larger extent when
making offers in the UG compared to the DG; d More strategic behavior was associated with
higher activation in left dlPFC when making offers in the UG compared to the DG; e Higher levels
of impulse control were associated with higher activation levels in left dlPFC when making offers
in the UG compared to the DG. Adapted from Steinbeis et al. (2012) reprinted with permission
15   A Neurocognitive Perspective on the Development …                                299

    Further evidence for a role of perspective taking in decisions about fairness
comes from studies that have shown that identical unfair Ultimatum Game offers (in
terms of monetary outcomes) are rejected at different rates, depending on the
alternative offer that was available to the proposer (Falk et al. 2003). Speciﬁcally,
an unfair offer is less often rejected when the proposer had no better alternative
(e.g., a less unfair distribution of the stake) compared to cases where the proposer
had a fair alternative to share the stake equally. This suggests that responders not
only judge the fairness of an offer by its absolute value or the relative proﬁts in
comparison with the proposer’s proﬁts, but also in terms of the proposer’s inten-
tions behind an unfair offer. Several studies examining developmental differences in
responses to unfair Ultimatum Game offers with varying alternative options indeed
showed interesting age differences in such intentionality understanding in fairness
considerations (Güroğlu et al. 2009; Sutter 2007). A comparison of four age groups
in distinct phases of development (9-year-old preadolescents, 12-year-old early
adolescents, 15-year-old mid-adolescents and 18-year-old late adolescents/young
adults) showed that rejection rates of an unfair offer where the proposer had no
other alternative decreased between the ages of 9 and 18. Furthermore, 9-year-olds
rejected monetarily identical unfair offers regardless of whether the proposer had a
fair alternative, no alternative or an even more unfair alternative. With increasing
age, adolescent proposers and responders flexibly adapted their bargaining behavior
in accordance with the alternative that is available to an unfair distribution, sug-
gesting an age-related increase in the incorporation of the proposer’s intentionality
behind an unfair offer (“it is unfair, but there was no better alternative”) into the
decision-making process (Güroğlu et al. 2009).
    The role of perspective taking in social decision-making has also been investi-
gated using another economic game called the Trust Game (for a detailed
description of Trust Game please see Chap. 20 in this book) (Berg et al. 1995). In
the Trust Game, the ﬁrst player (the trustor) is given the choice of either splitting the
stake with a second player (the trustee) or transferring the entire endowment to the
trustee and let the trustee split the stake. When the trustor decides to trust the trustee
by transferring everything, the stake is multiplied (usually by 3 or 4). The trustee
can reciprocate trust by sharing this higher stake equally, or defect trust and keep all
the money. Developmental studies have shown that the frequency of trusting the
second player continues to increase during adolescence (Sutter and Kocher 2007;
van den Bos et al. 2010). Furthermore, young adults and older adolescents show
higher levels of reciprocity than early adolescents and children (van den Bos et al.
2010). Moreover, these age differences are most pronounced in situations where the
trustor takes a larger risk of losing money by trusting the second player (van den
Bos et al. 2010). Trust-decisions become riskier when the amount of money that
can be lost in case of defection increases. In adults, riskier trust-decisions are met by
higher levels of reciprocity, which possibly reflects a recognition of the trustor’s
positive intentions and an appreciation of the risk the trustor took by investing in
the trustee (Malhotra 2004; Pillutla et al. 2003). Van den Bos et al. (2010) showed
that 9-year-olds did not reciprocate more when the trustor took a larger risk than
when he/she took a relatively lower risk. This ‘risk-dependent’ reciprocity gradually
300                                                                  G.-J. Will and B. Güroğlu

increased across adolescence, again suggesting a continuing increase in the sensi-
tivity to other people’s intentions well into adulthood.
    Taken together, behavioral studies employing different economic exchange
paradigms consistently show that cognitive development related to both impulse
control and perspective taking play a crucial role in understanding age-related
changes in social behavior. In the following sections, we will review results from
neuroimaging studies that show that developmental changes in neural circuitry
implicated in impulse control and perspective taking contribute to developmental
changes in social decision-making.


15.4     Neural Networks Involved in Social Decision-Making

Neuroimaging studies have elucidated a role for three distinct, but interacting, brain
networks in social decision-making: a basic affective network, a cognitive regula-
tory network, and a ‘mentalizing’ network (see Fig. 15.2) (Rilling and Sanfey
2011). We will ﬁrst briefly summarize ﬁndings that provide support for the notion
that these three networks contribute to social decision-making. Subsequently, we
will review the evidence from developmental functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) studies that show that these networks are differentially sensitive to
developmental change. Findings from these studies support the hypothesis that
asynchronous development of these systems is associated with age-related increases
in strategic social behavior and intentionality understanding in social interactions.
   First, neural structures implicated in the processing of basic positive and negative
affect, such as the anterior insula (Sanfey et al. 2003), ventral striatum (Tabibnia




Fig. 15.2 Schematic representation of brain networks involved in social decision-making: basic
affective network (pink), cognitive-regulatory network (blue) and mentalizing network (green).
TPJ = Temporoparietal junction; STS = Superior Temporal Sulcus; TP = Temporal pole;
dlPFC = dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex; vlPFC = ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex; ACC = Anterior
Cingulate Cortex; dmPFC = dorsomedial Prefrontal Cortex; vmPFC = ventromedial Prefrontal
Cortex
15   A Neurocognitive Perspective on the Development …                               301

et al. 2008), and the amygdala (Haruno and Frith 2010) are involved in biasing
social decisions, i.e., whether certain social stimuli should be approached (associated
with a positive emotional signal) or avoided (associated with a negative emotional
signal). For example, increased activation of the anterior insula, a brain region that is
involved in encoding representations of the physiological state of the body and
negative affect, such as disgust, anger, and sadness, has been associated with
unreciprocated trust (Rilling et al. 2008) and receiving unfair offers in an Ultimatum
Game (Sanfey et al. 2003). Interestingly, the anterior insula is activated not only
when people receive unfair offers, but also when people observe someone else
receiving an unfair offer (Corradi-Dell’Acqua et al. 2013) and when people have to
divide resources unequally themselves (Hsu et al. 2008). In contrast, activation of the
ventral striatum, a region important for processing rewards, has been associated with
mutual cooperation in a prisoner’s dilemma (Rilling et al. 2002, 2004b) and
receiving an equal split of the stake in the Ultimatum Game (Tabibnia et al. 2008).
Based on such ﬁndings, it has been argued that brain structures involved in basic
emotion processing might play a role in signaling pleasantness (ventral striatum) and
unpleasantness (anterior insula) of social interactions and consequently might give
rise to the maintenance or elimination of such interactions.
    Second, brain regions that are involved in the processing of basic positive and
negative affect interact with a cognitive regulatory network including the dorsal
anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and regions in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), such as
the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC) and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(dlPFC) (Rilling and Sanfey 2011). Activation in this cognitive regulatory network
has been associated with cognitive control over selﬁsh impulses and allows indi-
viduals to act in a goal-directed manner when there is a conflict between
self-interest and social norms (Knoch et al. 2006; Sanfey et al. 2003). For example,
activation in lateral regions of the PFC has been associated with strategic bargaining
(Spitzer et al. 2007) and temporarily disrupting activity in the dlPFC using repet-
itive transcranial magnetic stimulation decreases rejection rates of unfair offers in an
Ultimatum Game, while leaving explicit fairness judgments unaffected (Knoch
et al. 2006). These ﬁndings suggest that control-related brain regions are of crucial
importance for the regulation of (strategic) social behavior.
    Third, when making social decisions, affective, and cognitive regulatory regions
interact with a third system, namely the ‘mentalizing’ network. The mentalizing
network includes the left and right temporoparietal junction (TPJ), superior tem-
poral sulci, ventral, and dorsal regions of the medial PFC and the temporal poles
(Frith and Frith 2010; Saxe et al. 2004). Regions in this network are consistently
identiﬁed in tasks that probe reasoning about other people’s mental states (i.e.,
mental state reasoning or mentalizing), for instance when people have to infer other
people’s thoughts, beliefs or desires (Blakemore et al. 2007; Saxe and Kanwisher
2003). Moreover, taking other people’s perspective in economic exchange has
repeatedly been associated with activation in regions of the mentalizing network,
such as the TPJ (Güroğlu et al. 2010) and the dorsomedial PFC (Rilling et al.
2004a; van den Bos et al. 2009).
302                                                            G.-J. Will and B. Güroğlu


15.5    Understanding Changing Social Behavior
        from a Developmental Neuroscience Perspective

Longitudinal research examining changes in brain structure over time has shown
that different brain regions reach maturity at different ages (Giedd et al. 1999;
Gogtay et al. 2004; Shaw et al. 2008; Sowell et al. 2003). That is, sensorimotor
regions in the occipital and parietal lobes reach maturity ﬁrst, followed by other
parts of the cortex in a posterior to anterior direction. In particular, the dlPFC and
the TPJ are among the brain regions latest to fully mature, developing well into
early adulthood, which in turn might (partially) explain a similar protracted
developmental pattern in their associated functions, such as cognitive control
(dlFPC) and perspective taking (TPJ). Indeed, models of functional brain devel-
opment have posited that structural brain development might underlie emerging
contributions of later maturing brain networks to social behavior (Blakemore 2008;
Crone and Dahl 2012). Importantly, whereas affective networks including sub-
cortical brain structures might reach maturity during childhood or puberty, regions
of the cognitive regulatory network and the mentalizing network show continued
structural changes well into the second and third decades of life (Goddings et al.
2013; Mills et al. 2012). This interplay between structural and functional brain
development could underlie a developmental asynchrony between earlier maturing
affective reactions to unfairness (associated with activity in basic affective network)
and continued development of strategic considerations and intentionality under-
standing in social decision-making (associated with later maturing cognitive reg-
ulatory and mentalizing networks).
    To investigate developmental changes in the neural networks involved in
fairness-related decision-making Güroğlu et al. (2011) examined the neural corre-
lates of intentionality understanding in reactions to unfairness in four phases of
development: 10-year-olds, 13-year-olds, 16-year-olds, and young adults aged 20.
Their results showed that age was positively associated with TPJ and dlPFC activity
when participants were confronted with an unfair offer where the proposer had no
alternative to making an unfair offer (see Fig. 15.3a). Rejection rates of such unfair
offers decreased across adolescence, which again suggests that with age, adoles-
cents become increasingly sensitive to the proposer’s intentions behind an unfair
proposal. Furthermore, mediation analyses showed that age-related decreases in
rejection rates in this ‘no alternative’ condition were fully mediated by activation in
the dlPFC (Fig. 15.3b) and the TPJ (Fig. 15.3c). Moreover, no developmental
differences were observed in dACC and bilateral insula activation during reactions
to unfair proposals. Together these ﬁndings suggest that the detection of violations
of fairness norms and underlying neural responses in the insula and dACC mature
prior to entering adolescence and that the continued development of intentionality
understanding in fairness decisions across adolescence is accompanied by
age-related increases in neural activity in brain regions important for perspective
taking (i.e., TPJ) and impulse control (i.e., dlPFC).
15   A Neurocognitive Perspective on the Development …                                         303

  (a)




  (b)




  (c)




Fig. 15.3 Age-related changes in intentionality understanding in fairness are mediated by
age-related increases in recruitment of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) and the
temporoparietal junction (TPJ): a Rejection rates of unfair offers when the proposer could not
make a fair offer decrease with age; b Rejection of unfair offers when the proposer could not make
a fair offer is associated with increased recruitment of the dlPFC (b) and TPJ (c); the age-related
changes in behavior are mediated by neural activation in these regions. Adapted from Güroğlu
et al. (2011) reprinted with permission


    The importance of the emerging contribution of dlPFC to the development of
strategic social behavior was elegantly demonstrated by Steinbeis et al. (2012) in a
study where they asked children (aged 6–13) to be a proposer in both the Ultimatum
Game (where unfair offers can be punished) and a Dictator Game (where there is no
sanction to unfair offers). They showed that activity in both left and right dlPFC
when making Ultimatum Game proposals compared to Dictator Game proposals
correlated positively with two measures of strategic behavior: (1) the difference
between Ultimatum Game and Dictator Game offers (Fig. 15.1d) and (2) the dif-
ference between Ultimatum Game offers and the proposers’ beliefs about the
smallest acceptable offer to the responder. Moreover, they also showed that activity
in the left dlPFC when making Ultimatum Game proposals compared to Dictator
Game proposals increases between the ages of 6 and 13 (Fig. 15.1c).
    The involvement of brain regions in both the cognitive regulatory network (e.g.,
dlPFC) and the mentalizing network (e.g., the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex and the
TPJ) in social interactions has also been studied using the Trust Game.
Neuroimaging studies with adult participants have demonstrated the involvement of
304                                                             G.-J. Will and B. Güroğlu

the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) in decisions to trust (Rilling et al.
2004a), as well as in decisions to defect (McCabe et al. 2001; van den Bos et al.
2009). Given the involvement of the dmPFC in self-referential thinking (Amodio
and Frith 2006), it has been suggested that these ﬁndings reflect an increased
attention to one’s own outcomes because both decisions maximize payoffs (i.e.,
trust-decisions lead to a multiplication of the stake and defect decisions lead to sure
gains). Decisions to trust another person have also been shown to coincide with TPJ
activation, which increases with age into adulthood (Fett et al. 2013). In addition,
TPJ activity has been associated with receiving trust, in particular in situations in
which people received trust from a trustor who took a larger risk by trusting them
(van den Bos et al. 2009), suggesting that the TPJ is involved in shifting attention to
the trustor’s perspective when evaluating the risk he/she took.
    To investigate the development of the neural correlates of reciprocity and the
role of perspective taking herein, van den Bos et al. (2011) examined trustee
behavior in three different age groups (early adolescents aged 12–14 years;
mid-adolescents aged 15–17 years; and young adults aged 18–22 years). They
showed that receiving trust (compared to receiving no trust) was associated with
increased activation in the left TPJ and right dlPFC and that activation in these
regions increased linearly with age. Importantly, higher levels of risk taken by the
trustor were associated with higher levels of activation of the TPJ and the dlFPC
during reciprocity choices. Moreover, they showed that participants of all ages
activated the dmPFC during defection, but that early adolescents also activated the
dmPFC when they reciprocated trust. This latter result corroborates ﬁndings from
developmental neuroimaging studies that show an age-related decrease in dmPFC
activity across adolescence during mentalizing in ‘theory of mind’ tasks
(Blakemore et al. 2007; Moriguchi et al. 2007) and an age-related increase in
functional speciﬁcity of the TPJ to processing information about people’s mental
states compared to other forms of social information (Gweon et al. 2012; Saxe et al.
2009). It has been suggested that the age-related shift in the relative contributions of
the dmPFC and the TPJ to social reasoning might tip early adolescents toward more
self-oriented choices (associated with higher mPFC activation) and late adolescents
toward more other-oriented choices (associated with higher TPJ activation) (Crone
2013).



15.6    Conclusions and Future Directions

In this chapter, we reviewed evidence for the notion that the abilities to control
impulses and to take others’ perspectives when making social decisions undergo
extended development, and that these behavioral changes can be traced to brain
networks involved in social decision-making developing at different rates. Much of
this evidence comes from studies employing experimental paradigms with eco-
nomic games, which have proven to be valuable tools for studying the development
15   A Neurocognitive Perspective on the Development …                            305

of social behavior and in particular for successfully dissecting subprocesses
involved in social decision-making. Behavioral studies show that other-oriented
concern and a preference for fairness have strong developmental roots. Greater
sensitivity to others’ intentions and more strategic behavior in bargaining situations
provide evidence that continued development in perspective taking and impulse
control contribute to changes in social behavior that occur across adolescence.
Finally, these behavioral changes are accompanied by an increased recruitment of
regions involved in impulse control (e.g., dlPFC) and perspective taking (e.g., TPJ)
in decisions where perspectives of interaction partners have to be weighed against
self-interest and social norms.
    While elucidating developmental differences in recruitment of the dlPFC and
TPJ and their involvement in social decision-making is a crucial ﬁrst step, many
fundamental questions remain unanswered. First, it is important not only to
understand how the different brain regions (such as the TPJ or the dlPFC) are
differentially recruited across development, but also how these regions interact and
communicate with one another. For example, increased functional connectivity
between regions of the mentalizing network (e.g., pSTS/TPJ) and brain structures
implicated in the computation of value (e.g., ventral MPFC) has been associated
with higher levels of prosocial behavior in adults (Hare et al. 2010). Functional
connectivity in the cognitive regulatory network (Fair et al. 2008) and the men-
talizing network (Burnett and Blakemore 2009a; Klapwijk et al. 2013) changes
across adolescence, suggesting that developmental changes in functional connec-
tivity may further contribute to changes in social behavior.
    Second, the majority of developmental functional neuroimaging studies are
based on cross-sectional data sets with participants of different ages. Although
cross-sectional studies are an excellent ﬁrst step to demonstrate developmental
differences, there is a great need for longitudinal studies of social brain develop-
ment. Longitudinal designs rule out the role of possible cohort differences and can
give us insight on actual developmental changes within participants. One of the
major questions in the ﬁeld of developmental neuroimaging centers around the
speciﬁc contributions of maturational processes relative to environmental or societal
influences on the development of (social) behavior. For example, children who are
accepted by their peers during childhood express higher levels of prosocial behavior
and show advanced development of empathy and ‘theory of mind’ compared to
children who are rejected by their peers (Slaughter et al. 2002). Longitudinal studies
can provide insights on how developmental trajectories of individual characteristics
(such as long-term peer acceptance or rejection by peers) are related to social
cognitive development and how they relate to developmental trajectories of both
brain structure and function. An increased understanding of this intricate interplay
between a dynamic social context and a maturing brain will be crucial for devel-
oping interventions that can help children and adolescents in navigating their social
worlds.

Acknowledgments The authors thank Eduard Klapwijk and Amy Skerry for helpful comments
on an earlier version of this chapter and Anouk Haegens for help with the ﬁgures.
306                                                                   G.-J. Will and B. Güroğlu


References

Amodio DM, Frith CD (2006) Meeting of minds: the medial frontal cortex and social cognition.
    Nat Rev Neurosci 7:268–277
Benenson J, Pascoe J, Radmore N (2007) Children’s altruistic behavior in the dictator game. Evol
    Hum Behav 28:168–175
Berg J, Dickhaut J, McCabe K (1995) Trust, reciprocity, and social history. Game Econ Behav
    10:122–142
Blake PR, McAuliffe K (2011) “I had so much it didn’t seem fair”: Eight-year-olds reject two
    forms of inequity. Cognition 120:215–224
Blake PR, Rand DG (2010) Currency value moderates equity preference among young children.
    Evol Hum Behav 31:210–218
Blakemore SJ (2008) The social brain in adolescence. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:267–277
Blakemore SJ, den Ouden H, Choudhury S, Frith C (2007) Adolescent development of the neural
    circuitry for thinking about intentions. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2:130–139
Burnett S, Blakemore SJ (2009a) Functional connectivity during a social emotion task in
    adolescents and in adults. Eur J Neurosci 29:1294–1301
Burnett S, Blakemore SJ (2009b) The development of adolescent social cognition. Ann N Y Acad
    Sci 1167:51–56
Camerer C (2003) Behavioral game theory: experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton
    University Press, Princeton, NJ
Corradi-Dell’Acqua C, Civai C, Rumiati RI, Fink GR (2013) Disentangling self- and
    fairness-related neural mechanisms involved in the ultimatum game: an fMRI study. Soc
    Cogn Affect Neurosci 8:424–431
Crone EA (2013) Considerations of fairness in the adolescent brain. Child Dev Perspect 7:97–103
Crone EA, Dahl RE (2012) Understanding adolescence as a period of social-affective engagement
    and goal flexibility. Nat Rev Neurosci 13:636–650
Davidson MC, Amso D, Anderson LC, Diamond A (2006) Development of cognitive control and
    executive functions from 4 to 13 years: Evidence from manipulations of memory, inhibition,
    and task switching. Neuropsychologia 44:2037–2078
Dumontheil I, Apperly I, Blakemore S (2010) Online usage of theory of mind continues to develop
    in late adolescence. Developmental Science 13:331–338
Fair DA, Cohen AL, Dosenbach NU, Church JA, Miezin FM, Barch DM, Raichle ME,
    Petersen SE, Schlaggar BL (2008) The maturing architecture of the brain’s default network.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:4028–4032
Falk A, Fehr E, Fischbacher U (2003) On the nature of fair behavior. Econ Inq 41:20–26
Fehr E, Fischbacher U (2004) Third-party punishment and social norms. Evol Hum Behav 25:63–
    87
Fehr E, Schmidt KM (1999) A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. Quart J Econ
    114:817–868
Fehr E, Bernhard H, Rockenbach B (2008) Egalitarianism in young children. Nature 454:1079–
    1083
Fett AK, Gromann PM, Giampietro V, Shergill SS, Krabbendam L (2013) Default distrust? An
    fMRI investigation of the neural development of trust and cooperation. Soc Cogn Affect
    Neurosci
Forsythe R, Horowitz JL, Savin NE, Sefton M (1994) Fairness in simple bargaining experiments.
    Game Econ Behav 6:347–369
Frith U, Frith C (2010) The social brain: allowing humans to boldly go where no other species has
    been. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 365:165–176
Giedd JN, Blumenthal J, Jeffries NO, Castellanos FX, Liu H, Zijdenbos A, Paus T, Evans AC,
    Rapoport JL (1999) Brain development during childhood and adolescence: a longitudinal MRI
    study. Nat Neurosci 2:861–863
15   A Neurocognitive Perspective on the Development …                                           307

Goddings AL, Mills KL, Clasen LS, Giedd JN, Viner RM, Blakemore SJ (2013) The influence of
   puberty on subcortical brain development. Neuroimage
Gogtay N, Giedd JN, Lusk L, Hayashi KM, Greenstein D, Vaituzis AC, Nugent TF 3rd,
   Herman DH, Clasen LS, Toga AW, Rapoport JL, Thompson PM (2004) Dynamic mapping of
   human cortical development during childhood through early adulthood. Proc Natl Acad
   Sci USA 101:8174–8179
Gummerum M, Hanoch Y, Keller M (2008a) When child development meets economic game
   theory: an interdisciplinary approach to investigating social development. Hum Dev 51:235–
   261
Gummerum M, Keller M, Takezawa M, Mata J (2008b) To give or not to give: Children’s and
   adolescents’ sharing and moral negotiations in economic decision situations. Child Dev
   79:562–576
Güroğlu B, van den Bos W, Crone EA (2009) Fairness considerations: increasing understanding of
   intentionality during adolescence. J Exp Child Psychol 104:398–409
Güroğlu B, van den Bos W, Rombouts SA, Crone EA (2010) Unfair? It depends: neural correlates
   of fairness in social context. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 5:414–423
Güroğlu B, van den Bos W, van Dijk E, Rombouts SA, Crone EA (2011) Dissociable brain
   networks involved in development of fairness considerations: understanding intentionality
   behind unfairness. Neuroimage 57:634–641
Güth W, Schmittberger R, Schwarze B (1982) An experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining.
   J Econ Behav Organ 3:367–388
Gweon H, Dodell-Feder D, Bedny M, Saxe R (2012) Theory of mind performance in children
   correlates with functional specialization of a brain region for thinking about thoughts. Child
   Dev 83:1853–1868
Harbaugh WT, Krause K, Liday SG (2003) Bargaining by children. Working paper
Hare TA, Camerer CF, Knoepfle DT, Rangel A (2010) Value computations in ventral medial
   prefrontal cortex during charitable decision making incorporate input from regions involved in
   social cognition. J Neurosci 30:583–590
Haruno M, Frith CD (2010) Activity in the amygdala elicited by unfair divisions predicts social
   value orientation. Nat Neurosci 13:160–161
Hoffman E, Mccabe K, Shachat K, Smith V (1994) Preferences, property-rights, and anonymity in
   bargaining games. Game Econ Behav 7:346–380
Hsu M, Anen C, Quartz SR (2008) The right and the good: distributive justice and neural encoding
   of equity and efﬁciency. Science 320:1092–1095
Klapwijk ET, Goddings A-L, Burnett Heyes S, Bird G, Viner RM, Blakemore S-J (2013)
   Increased functional connectivity with puberty in the mentalising network involved in social
   emotion processing. Horm Behav 64:314–322
Knoch D, Pascual-Leone A, Meyer K, Treyer V, Fehr E (2006) Diminishing reciprocal fairness by
   disrupting the right prefrontal cortex. Science 314:829–832
Leman PJ, Keller M, Takezawa M, Gummerum M (2009) Children’s and adolescents’ decisions
   about sharing money with others. Soc Dev 18:711–727
Liszkowski U, Carpenter M, Tomasello M (2008) Twelve-month-olds communicate helpfully and
   appropriately for knowledgeable and ignorant partners. Cognition 108:732–739
Malhotra D (2004) Trust and reciprocity decisions: the differing perspectives of trustors and trusted
   parties. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 94:61–73
McCabe K, Houser D, Ryan L, Smith V, Trouard T (2001) A functional imaging study of
   cooperation in two-person reciprocal exchange. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:11832–11835
Mills KL, Lalonde F, Clasen LS, Giedd JN, Blakemore SJ (2012) Developmental changes in the
   structure of the social brain in late childhood and adolescence. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci
Moriguchi Y, Ohnishi T, Mori T, Matsuda H, Komaki G (2007) Changes of brain activity in the
   neural substrates for theory of mind during childhood and adolescence. Psychiatry Clin
   Neurosci 61:355–363
308                                                                     G.-J. Will and B. Güroğlu

Nelson E, Leibenluft E, McClure E, Pine D (2005) The social re-orientation of adolescence: a
    neuroscience perspective on the process and its relation to psychopathology. Psychol Med
    35:163–174
Pillutla MM, Malhotra D, Murnighan JK (2003) Attributions of trust and the calculus of
    reciprocity. J Exp Soc Psychol 39:448–455
Rilling J, Sanfey A (2011) The neuroscience of decision-making. Annu Rev Psychol 62
Rilling J, Gutman D, Zeh T, Pagnoni G, Berns G, Kilts C (2002) A neural basis for social
    cooperation. Neuron 35:395–405
Rilling JK, Sanfey AG, Aronson JA, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD (2004a) The neural correlates of
    theory of mind within interpersonal interactions. Neuroimage 22:1694–1703
Rilling JK, Sanfey AG, Aronson JA, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD (2004b) Opposing BOLD responses
    to reciprocated and unreciprocated altruism in putative reward pathways. NeuroReport
    15:2539–2543
Rilling JK, Goldsmith DR, Glenn AL, Jairam MR, Elfenbein HA, Dagenais JE, Murdock CD,
    Pagnoni G (2008) The neural correlates of the affective response to unreciprocated cooperation.
    Neuropsychologia 46:1256–1266
Rueda MR, Rothbart MK, McCandliss BD, Saccomanno L, Posner MI (2005) Training,
    maturation, and genetic influences on the development of executive attention. Proc Natl Acad
    Sci USA 102:14931–14936
Sally D, Hill E (2006) The development of interpersonal strategy: autism, theory-of-mind,
    cooperation and fairness. J Econ Psychol 27:73–97
Sanfey AG, Rilling JK, Aronson JA, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD (2003) The neural basis of economic
    decision-making in the ultimatum game. Science 300:1755–1758
Saxe R, Kanwisher N (2003) People thinking about thinking people. The role of the
    temporo-parietal junction in “theory of mind”. Neuroimage 19:1835–1842
Saxe R, Carey S, Kanwisher N (2004) Understanding other minds: linking developmental
    psychology and functional neuroimaging. Annu Rev Psychol 55:87–124
Saxe RR, Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli S, Scholz J, Pelphrey KA (2009) Brain regions for perceiving and
    reasoning about other people in school-aged children. Child Dev 80:1197–1209
Schmidt MF, Sommerville JA (2011) Fairness expectations and altruistic sharing in 15-month-old
    human infants. PLoS ONE 6:e23223
Selman R (1980) The growth of interpersonal understanding. Academic Press, New York
Shaw A, Olson KR (2012) Children discard a resource to avoid inequity. J Exp Psychol Gen
    141:382–395
Shaw P, Kabani NJ, Lerch JP, Eckstrand K, Lenroot R, Gogtay N, Greenstein D, Clasen L,
    Evans A, Rapoport JL, Giedd JN, Wise SP (2008) Neurodevelopmental trajectories of the
    human cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 28:3586–3594
Shaw A, Montinari N, Piovesan M, Olson KR, Gino F, Norton MI (2013) Children develop a veil
    of fairness. J Exp Psychol Gen
Singer T (2006) The neuronal basis and ontogeny of empathy and mind reading: review of
    literature and implications for future research. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 30:855–863
Singer T, Fehr E (2005) The neuroeconomics of mind reading and empathy. Am Econ Rev
    95:340–345
Slaughter V, Dennis MJ, Pritchard M (2002) Theory of mind and peer acceptance in preschool
    children. Br J Dev Psychol 20:545–564
Sloane S, Baillargeon R, Premack D (2012) Do infants have a sense of fairness? Psychol Sci
    23:196–204
Smith CE, Blake PR, Harris PL (2013) I should but I won’t: why young children endorse norms of
    fair sharing but do not follow them. PLoS ONE 8:e59510
Sowell ER, Peterson BS, Thompson PM, Welcome SE, Henkenius AL, Toga AW (2003) Mapping
    cortical change across the human life span. Nat Neurosci 6:309–315
Spitzer M, Fischbacher U, Herrnberger B, Grön G, Fehr E (2007) The neural signature of social
    norm compliance. Neuron 56:185–196
15   A Neurocognitive Perspective on the Development …                                            309

Steinbeis N, Bernhardt BC, Singer T (2012) Impulse control and underlying functions of the left
    DLPFC mediate age-related and age-independent individual differences in strategic social
    behavior. Neuron 73:1040–1051
Sutter M (2007) Outcomes versus intentions: on the nature of fair behavior and its development
    with age. J Econ Psychol 28:69–78
Sutter M, Kocher MG (2007) Trust and trustworthiness across different age groups. Game Econ
    Behav 59:364–382
Svetlova M, Nichols SR, Brownell CA (2010) Toddlers’ prosocial behavior: from instrumental to
    empathic to altruistic helping. Child Dev 81:1814–1827
Tabibnia G, Satpute AB, Lieberman MD (2008) The sunny side of fairness: preference for fairness
    activates reward circuitry (and disregarding unfairness activates self-control circuitry). Psychol
    Sci 19:339–347
Takagishi H, Kameshima S, Schug J, Koizumi M, Yamagishi T (2010) Theory of mind enhances
    preference for fairness. J Exp Child Psychol 105:130–137
Talwar V, Murphy SM, Lee K (2007) White lie-telling in children for politeness purposes. Int J
    Behav Dev 31:1–11
Tomasello M, Vaish A (2013) Origins of human cooperation and morality. Annu Rev Psychol
    64:231–255
van den Bos W, van Dijk E, Westenberg M, Rombouts SARB, Crone EA (2009) What motivates
    repayment? Neural correlates of reciprocity in the Trust Game. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci
    4:294–304
van den Bos W, Westenberg M, Van Dijk E, Crone E (2010) Development of trust and reciprocity
    in adolescence. Cogn Dev 25:90–102
van den Bos W, van Dijk E, Westenberg M, Rombouts SARB, Crone EA (2011) Changing brains,
    changing perspectives: the neurocognitive development of reciprocity. Psychol Sci 22:60–70
Warneken F, Tomasello M (2006) Altruistic helping in human infants and young chimpanzees.
    Science 311:1301–1303
Wellman HM, Cross D, Watson J (2001) Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: the truth
    about false belief. Child Dev 72:655–684
Zahn-Waxler C, Radke-Yarrow M, Wagner E, Chapman M (1992) Development of concern for
    others. Dev Psychol 28:126–136
