Chapter 16
Neuroeconomic Approaches
in Mental Disorders

S. Lis and P. Kirsch




Abstract Approaches from neuroeconomy have recently received increased
attention in the investigation of mental disorders. In this chapter, we will give an
overview of concepts and paradigms from neuroeconomics that have been applied
in different mental disorders and summarize ﬁrst results in this emerging ﬁeld. We
focus, thereby, on ‘social decision-making’ which constitutes one of the main
concepts of neuroeconomy. First ﬁndings suggest that these approaches may prove
to be promising research tools in the investigation of social functioning, which is a
prominent symptom domain in many mental disorders. In contrast to self- and
observer-based questionnaires that have provided information on how interaction
behaviour is subjectively perceived by the patients themselves or their social
environment, the variety of exchange games from behavioural economy allow for a
direct and, thus, unbiased assessment of interaction behaviour. So far, ﬁndings
suggest that neuroeconomic tools are suited to uncover alterations in social inter-
action behaviour in mental disorders, such as anxiety disorders, depression, bor-
derline personality disorder, attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder, but also
schizophrenia and autism. However, the investigation of social interaction beha-
viour in mental disorders poses particular challenges. Deﬁcits in basal or complex
cognitive functions, such as working memory, deﬁcits in basal social cognitive
processes, such as the recognition of emotional facial expressions and a lower
socioeconomic status due to long periods of illness and unemployment can be
assumed to affect interaction behaviour. These have to be disentangled for the
purpose of characterizing social decision-making in mental disorders and under-
standing the causes underlying its alterations. The combination of neuroeconomic


S. Lis (&)
Institute of Psychiatric and Psychosomatic Psychotherapy,
Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim,
University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany
e-mail: stefanie.lis@zi-mannheim.de
P. Kirsch
Department of Clinical Psychology, Central Institute of Mental Health,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany
e-mail: Peter.Kirsch@zi-mannheim.de

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                         311
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_16
312                                                                S. Lis and P. Kirsch

approaches and their elaborated quantitative models with methods from experi-
mental psychology und cognitive neurosciences seems a promising avenue to
achieve this goal.



16.1    Introduction

Neuroeconomics has been deﬁned as a discipline originated by merging economics,
psychology and neuroscience (Glimcher and Rustichini 2004), combining their
theoretical and methodological approaches. From behavioural economics, this new
discipline inherited the demand to deﬁne a uniﬁed theory of human
decision-making or even human behaviour. However, when taking mental disorders
and the related altered behaviours into account, it becomes obvious that this
demand is almost unapproachable within this context. Clinical sciences are far away
from deﬁning single theories which account for all behavioural alterations, even
when only focusing on one particular mental disorder. Therefore, it is obvious that
neuroeconomic approaches to mental disorders cannot provide theories explaining
their whole etiology. However, with the emergence of neuroeconomics, a number
of central concepts, mainly adopted from economics, came into the focus of neu-
roscience. These may provide a theoretical and methodological framework and,
therefore, be of great value when describing impaired behaviours in patients suf-
fering from mental disorders and searching for their neurobiological underpinnings.
    A variety of avenues by which neuroeconomic approaches can foster the
investigation of alterations in decision-making and its cerebral correlates in mental
disorders are discussed in a recent series of commentaries addressing disorders,
such as depression (Ernst 2012), anxiety disorders (Hartley and Phelps 2012),
addiction (Monterosso et al. 2012) and attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
(Sonuga-Barke and Fairchild 2012). A comprehensive review on the usability of
neuroeconomics for psychiatric research (Hasler 2012) characterized these central
concepts, such as utility, expectation, uncertainty and gain-loss-asymmetry in
relation to mental disorders. Hasler (2012) outlined the link between speciﬁc
neuroeconomic parameters and behavioural correlates which bear a special
importance within the context of different mental disorders. These parameters, such
as speciﬁc coefﬁcients of value function, time discounting function or utility
function, rely on a broad database of studies in healthy subjects. They constitute not
only speciﬁc quantitative measurements of behaviour, but also allow for linking
them to certain neurobiological systems, such as speciﬁc cerebral structures or
neurotransmitter systems.
    Three different main domains can be distinguished in neuroeconomics: ‘social
decision-making’, ‘decision-making under risk and uncertainty’ and ‘intertemporal
choice’ (Loewenstein et al. 2008). From these domains, social decision-making has
attracted most attention in the context of psychiatric research. However, the
methodology to investigate this domain of functioning still needs to be developed. It
can be assumed that neuroeconomic approaches will be able to ﬁll the gap by
16   Neuroeconomic Approaches in Mental Disorders                                   313

providing ecologically valid paradigms that allow the probe of those functions
regarded as crucial for most mental disorders (Sharp et al. 2012): Alterations in
social interaction constitute a signiﬁcant symptom domain, e.g. in social phobia or
borderline personality disorder (BPD), they modulate the extent of symptoms
within other domains of psychopathology, or affect recovery and long-term out-
comes (see King-Casas and Chiu 2012). This chapter will, therefore, focus on the
application of neuroeconomic approaches to social functioning in mental disorders.
    The importance of alterations in social cognition for the psychopathology, and
especially for the often pronounced impairments of everyday functioning in the
context of mental disorders, has been noticed with growing interest during the last
years. Recently, it has been emphasized that the study of social cognition should be
extended to a second person perspective (Schilbach et al. 2013): it allows to take
into account that particular social cognitive deﬁcits in mental disorders might only
be observable in real interpersonal interactions as they are used in neuroeconomic
games. However, the possible usefulness of neuroeconomic approaches, particu-
larly using the approach of social exchange games, to study social decision-making
received attention only very recently. Due to this, the number of available studies
that apply such games in the investigation of mental disorders remains sparse. This
particularly holds true when compared to the boom of these approaches in the social
neurosciences in general. However, the interest in these approaches is momentarily
drastically increasing which becomes evident in the growing number of both
empirical studies and theoretical papers that emphasize the usefulness of these
approaches for the understanding of mental disorders in the context of cognitive,
affective and social neuroscience (Kishida et al. 2010; Hasler 2012; Kishida and
Montague 2012; Sharp et al. 2012).
    Beyond the availability of well-founded computational models of social
exchanges, these approaches may constitute ecologically valid and well-deﬁned test
settings to study single social cognitive processes and their importance for social
interactions. Social exchanges require a multitude of different cognitive, affective
and social processes. Thus, Carter (2012) emphasized that social ‘choice behaviour
relies on the integration in the brain of a diverse array of specialized processes that
vary according to changing context’ (see also Loewenstein et al. 2008). With that,
neuroeconomic approaches allow the study of single speciﬁc social cognitive
functions, such as emotion recognition processes or mentalizing that are assumed to
be altered in mental disorders. However, alterations of these processes are here
investigated in a complex interplay with other processes during social interactions.
This is in contrast to analyzing them in isolation in a highly artiﬁcial manner as it is
done, e.g. in traditional multiple choice emotion recognition tasks. Beyond the
consideration of speciﬁc social cognitive processes being part of a complex func-
tional network, this approach extends the study of social cognition by taking the
goal, i.e. the ‘why’, of processing into account in that it investigates overt or covert
behaviour within a speciﬁc social interaction context (Willems 2011).
    Interestingly, while there are a number of recent behavioural studies using social
exchange games in clinical research, only a small number of them have applied
neuroscientiﬁc methodology. In the next section, we will summarize the ﬁndings
314                                                                 S. Lis and P. Kirsch

separately for a number of mental disorders. Finally, we will discuss their appli-
cability for clinical social neuroscience.



16.2    Exchange Games in Speciﬁc Mental Disorders

From the variety of paradigms available, the majority of studies have applied
approaches that focus on the assessment of trust and fairness and the perception of
social norms.
    The most often applied exchange games are the ultimatum game (UG), and the
trust game (TG) (for a detailed description of economic games please see Chap. 2
of this book). These approaches were applied in the investigation of alterations of
social interaction behaviour in schizophrenia, depressive disorders, borderline
personality disorder, anxiety disorders, social phobias, psychopathy,
attention-deﬁcit-hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder. The majority
of studies focus on virtual interaction situations within dyads, in which the beha-
viour of an alleged social interaction partner is simulated by computer algorithms.
Studies that actually measure the behaviour of real partners constitute a minority
(e.g. Agay et al. 2008; Chiu et al. 2008; King-Casas et al. 2008; Zhang et al. 2012).
    Studies differ in regard to whether exchanges are investigated as a single
exchange with several partners or as multi-round games, i.e. as repeated exchanges
with the same partner, shifting the emphasis from certain cognitive processes (e.g.
trust) to others (e.g. the maintaining of interpersonal relations involving the
building of reputation). In most exchange games, the roles of the partners differ in
regard to the cognitive processes involved, e.g. taking the role of the investor or the
trustee during the TG, or of the proposer or the responder in the UG. Studies differ
in regard to whether the patient’s behaviour is studied in ﬁxed or varying roles
within the single exchange games, e.g. BPD patients always represent the trustees
in a multi-round trust game (e.g. King-Casas et al. 2008), or schizophrenic patients
act as proposers as well as responders in an UG (e.g. Agay et al. 2008). Several
studies suggest that the occurrence of alterations in social behaviour depends on the
speciﬁc role during the exchange game, as e.g. patients show behavioural alter-
ations as responders but not as proposers (e.g. Agay et al. 2008). Thus, it is
important to take the details of the realization of neuroeconomic approaches into
account when assessing heterogeneity and homogeneity in the still limited number
of neuroeconomic studies in mental disorders.



16.2.1 Schizophrenia

Agay et al. (2008) conducted the ﬁrst study with schizophrenic patients applying
the UG as a neuroeconomic exchange game. They found a comparable exchange
behaviour in patients and healthy subjects in the role of the responder, but
16   Neuroeconomic Approaches in Mental Disorders                                  315

alterations of behaviour in the patients’ group in the role of the proposer. After
rejection of an offer, both groups increased their offer in the second round.
However, in case of an accepted offer, healthy subjects reduced their offer in the
subsequent trial, while the schizophrenic patients did not adjust their behaviour.
Approximately 20 % of the patients exhibited nonstrategic behaviour, in that they
further reduced their offer after a rejection or increased their offer after acceptance
in the previous trial. Such behaviour was observed in none of the healthy subjects.
A study by Billeke et al. (2015) supported this ﬁnding of altered strategic behaviour
in schizophrenic patients when taking the role of the proposer during an UG. In
general, the patients made more often hyperfair offers and showed a higher varia-
tion of behaviour towards the alleged human co-players, but also when playing with
a computer. During the course of the interaction, the pattern of adaptation to risk
was opposite in healthy subjects and patients when taking the social and nonsocial
condition into account. Moreover, the authors were able to link these differences to
alterations in neural processing during the anticipation of the responder’s choice,
i.e. to brain oscillatory activity in frontal and temporoparietal brain regions.
    Other studies suggest that schizophrenic patients differ also as responder during
UG exchanges: patients accepted more unfair offers than healthy subjects (Csukly
et al. 2011; Wischniewski and Brune 2011). Such a behaviour was also observed in
subjects with a high level of interpersonal schizotypal symptoms (van’t Wout and
Sanfey 2011). These results have been interpreted as an indication of a reduced
sensitivity towards unfairness to their own disadvantage in schizophrenic patients
(Wischniewski and Brune 2011), and a blunted emotional response (van’t Wout and
Sanfey 2011). However, it seems worth pointing out that the socioeconomic status
of patients that suffer from chronic mental disorders is quite often reduced com-
pared to healthy controls. Thereby, the value of the gain at risk may differ between
groups and thus, differentially influence the exchange behaviour of these groups.
Until now, the majority of studies do not take this presumably important factor into
account.
    Wischniewski and Brune (2011) suggest that in general, the exchange behaviour
of schizophrenic patients seems to be determined by the same rules as that of
healthy subjects (see also de la Asuncion et al. 2015). In both groups, rejection rates
increased with the unfairness of offers. Similarly, both groups equalled in regard to
the likelihood of punishing unfairness of a proposer when they watched two
individuals during the dictator game (DG). Based on their ﬁnding, they conclude
that moral value appreciation is not affected in schizophrenia.
    In contrast, Csukly et al. (2011) found higher acceptance rates of unfair pro-
posals and lower acceptance rates with fair proposals in the schizophrenic patients
during an UG. This contradicts an overall increased tendency to accept offers
independent of their height due to a higher need caused by a lower socioeconomic
status. In contrast, these data agree with a general lack in differential reactions
during social interactions. A reduced influence of the partner’s fairness has been
conﬁrmed by subsequent studies: investment were not influenced by the trustee’s
fairness during an UG (de la Asuncion et al. 2015) or during a trust game (Lis et al.
2011; see also Fett et al. (2012) for similar ﬁndings in a mixed group of patients
316                                                                 S. Lis and P. Kirsch

with different psychotic disorders). Beyond the partners’ fairness, emotional facial
expressions may provide socially relevant context information and may serve as
cues towards the partners’ future behaviour. Studies that investigated the influence
of emotional expressions on the adaptation of behaviour, consistently suggest
impairments in schizophrenia (Csukly et al. 2011; Lis et al. 2011; de la Asuncion
et al. 2015). All studies revealed that the interaction behaviour is modulated by the
facial expression of the social partner in healthy subjects, but not in schizophrenic
patients. This holds true for the responder behaviour in the UG and the investor
behaviour in the TG. The behavioural alteration towards facial expressions seems to
be particularly relevant to the case in which they serve to guide behaviour during
social interactions, since no deﬁcits were observed in a simple emotion evaluation
task (Lis et al. 2011). However, caution is necessary when interpreting these
ﬁndings as deﬁcits speciﬁc for using emotional cues to adapt social behaviour.
None of the studies applied a control condition to exclude, as an underlying
mechanism, more general cognitive impairments in the adaptation of behaviour to
complex cues, i.e. to context information without a social and emotional content.



16.2.2 Depressive Disorders

During the last few years, the interest in neuroeconomic tasks has tremendously
increased in the investigation of social dysfunctioning in depressive disorders (see
for a recent review Wang et al. 2015). In contrast to studies in schizophrenia,
studies focused more often on the affective responses to fair and unfair reactions.
    As it was reported for patients suffering from schizophrenia, alterations in the
behaviour of patients with major depressive disorder depend on the role taken
during an UG (Destoop et al. 2012). While no alterations were observed when the
patients acted as the responder, they offered a higher percentage of their account
when in the role of the proposer compared to healthy subjects (see similar ﬁndings
Scheele et al. 2013). Destoop et al. (2012) interpreted this behaviour as a strategy to
avoid rejection which agrees with an enhanced rejection sensitivity in individuals
with depressive disorders (Rosenbach and Renneberg 2011).
    However, ﬁndings are not consistent regarding the behaviour when in the role of
the responder during UG. In line with ﬁndings from Radke et al. (2013b), Wang
et al. (2014) reported, in general, a lower rate of acceptance in patients with major
depressive disorders (MDD). Moreover, in the case of unfair offers, there was no
differential response towards an alleged human co-player in contrast to a computer
control condition in MDD, suggesting that this behavioural alteration is not char-
acteristic for social interactions: while healthy participants particularly rejected
more often the very unfair offers from a human partner, MDD patients rejected very
unfair offers from both the human partner and the computer (Wang et al. 2014). In
contrast, Scheele et al. (2013) found more rejections only in the case of slightly
unfair offers. When studying student populations with depressive symptoms, no
behavioural alterations were found (Gradin et al. 2015; see also Pulcu et al. 2015) or
16   Neuroeconomic Approaches in Mental Disorders                                 317

even increased acceptance rates (Harle et al. 2010). This suggests that altered
interaction behaviour in clinical samples is not solely attributable to the effects of
depressive symptoms.
    Alterations of exchange behaviour seem to not be caused by impaired judge-
ments of fairness in general. Data from Scheele et al. (2013) found no evidence
towards altered perception of fairness, although data of Wang et al. (2014) suggest
that patients may tend to be more sensitive in the case of very unfair offers when
fairness is evaluated independently of an interaction.
    Several studies consistently revealed altered emotional responses during inter-
actions in depressive disorders. Unfair offers during an UG elicited stronger neg-
ative emotions (Harle et al. 2010) and higher guilt (Pulcu et al. 2015) and defection
during a PD evoked stronger feelings of betrayal (Gradin et al. 2016). Moreover,
depressive participants reported lower satisfaction in the case of cooperative
behaviour of both the participant and the partner during a PD (Gradin et al. 2016)
and reduced levels of happiness to fair offers during an UG (Gradin et al. 2015).
These alterations were accompanied by alterations in brain activation during
interactions suggesting altered processing of fairness and reward as well as linked
emotional responses. Depressive participants showed a reduced activation in the left
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, which was correlated with the experience of
increased guilt when the participant defected and the partner cooperated during PD
(Gradin et al. 2016). Increasing engagement of the nucleus accumbens and the
dorsal caudate with increasing fairness of an offer during UG was attenuated in
depressive participants resulting in a lower activation in these brain area compared
to healthy subjects (Gradin et al. 2015). In contrast, increasing unfairness of offers
was linked to increasing activation of the dorsal anterior cingulate and the insula in
both groups (Gradin et al. 2015).
    Zhang et al. (2012) used a modiﬁed trust game to investigate the effects of
altruism and risk-taking on social interaction behaviour in depressive subjects. All
subjects played as trustees. They were informed that during each exchange they
would play with a different real co-player, while actually, the investments were
determined by the experimental setting. In this modiﬁcation of the trust game, the
investor asked the trustee to repay a speciﬁc ratio of the amount at his/her disposal
(“beneﬁcial” with 20 %, “equal” with 50 % and “unfair” with 80 %). Participants
could choose to repay exactly the amount requested, more than requested (“altru-
istic” behaviour) or less than requested (“deceptive” behaviour). Additionally, the
probability (25 or 75 %) with which the investor would detect whether this
investment differed from the requested amount was given. If deception was
detected, the monetary units earned in the single trial were conﬁscated as punish-
ment. Subjects with a depressive disorder differed qualitatively in their preference
of choice options, in that they chose altruistic repayments in the case of beneﬁcial
and equal requests less often, and also deceptive repayments in the case of unfair
requests less often. Thus, effects of previous exchanges seem to be weaker in
depressive patients who were less generous in the case of benevolent partners, as
well as less punishing in the case of malevolent partners. Beyond that, risk of
deception affected the patients’ behaviour as well: they chose deceptive responses
318                                                                S. Lis and P. Kirsch

less frequently than healthy subjects when the risk for detection was low. This
ﬁnding was interpreted as indicating enhanced risk avoidance in depressive
disorders, but also suggests that these patients might have problems with integrating
information from different domains, such as risk-taking, inferring the intentions of
others and decision-making. When looking on deceptive behaviours of the partic-
ipants themselves, Shao et al. (2015) identiﬁed a reduced efﬁciency in the inte-
gration of lateral prefrontal-striatal/limbic networks in MDD patients, although
during this modiﬁed trust game behavioural alterations in MDD could not
unequivocally be conﬁrmed.
    Besides studies that point to alterations in speciﬁc aspects of interaction beha-
viour during economic tasks in depressive disorders, others suggest that
decision-making in social interactions is determined by mechanism similar to those
in healthy subjects. Examples are the effects of emotional expressions and the
influence of offer alternatives (Radke et al. 2013b; see also for an attenuated effect
of smiling faces as cues for fair behaviour of a trustee in case of a comorbid
depressive disorder in BPD, Franzen et al. 2011).
    Data suggest that alterations in social interaction behaviour in depressive dis-
orders can be quantiﬁed by exchange games. However, future studies have to
address the underlying causes of these alterations, such as an increased rejection
sensitivity as suggested by Destoop et al. (2012), or an inability to convert anger
into a social action like a ‘ﬁght back’ towards a partner linked to neuroanatomical
alterations in nucleus caudatus or the anterior insula activations as suggested by
Zhang et al. (2012). Moreover, interaction behaviour may be differentially affected
by the participants’ gender, possibly modulated by speciﬁc symptoms, such as
suicidal ideations (Caceda et al. 2014). It seems obvious that exchange games have
to be combined with approaches from experimental psychology that stress different
cognitive and social cognitive processes during an exchange situation to understand
the mechanisms responsible for altered interaction behaviour and altered emotional
responses.



16.2.3 Anxiety Disorders

Applying an UG, Grecucci et al. (2012) found altered behaviour of subjects with
anxiety disorder in the responder’s, but not the proposer’s, role. Patients accepted
more unfair offers than healthy subjects. This effect depended on the clinical sub-
type, being observable in those patients with generalized anxiety disorder, but not
with panic disorder. Additionally, the pharmacological treatment modulated inter-
action behaviour: treatment with serotonin reuptake inhibitors normalized these
behavioural alterations. The authors discuss the relevance of interpersonal factors
and assertiveness in decision-making of patients with anxiety disorders.
   As an alternative approach, a TG was used to investigate social interaction
behaviour of patients with social anxiety disorders in the role of the investor
(Sripada et al. 2009). Interaction during a multi-round trust game played with a
16   Neuroeconomic Approaches in Mental Disorders                                 319

human partner was associated to an attenuated activation in medial prefrontal cortex
in patients with an anxiety disorder compared to healthy subjects (Sripada et al.
2009). The authors linked this result to deﬁcits in mentalizing, since no comparable
pattern of altered cerebral activation was observed when playing with a computer.
However, during the computer game, subjects knew they had a 50 % chance to
receive a fair repay, while there were three virtual ‘human’ partners that differed in
regard to their probability of splitting the investment (with a repayment of 75, 50 or
25 %). Thus, the alleged human interaction was linked to a higher uncertainty of
exchange behaviour, a factor well known to influence decision-making during
exchange games.
   A study by McClure et al. (2007) addressed social interaction behaviour in
adolescents with anxiety and mood disorders (A/D) who were free of psychotropic
medication during the time of testing. The authors applied the Prisoners’ Dilemma
(PD) to directly measure pro-social, submissive and hostile or competitive beha-
viours together with self-reports on anger and the experience of cooperativeness.
Alterations in play behaviour suggest a priority on maintaining positive interper-
sonal interactions by choosing pro-social behaviour, but not conflict avoidance:
A/D patients more often cooperated compared to their healthy controls when the
co-player had cooperated in the preceding round. However, there were no differ-
ences between groups in regard to reactions to noncooperative behaviour of the
co-players. In contrast, a PD study by Rodebaugh et al. (2013) reported that patients
with generalized social anxiety give less during a PD interaction and tended to show
less reaction to defection. Interestingly, female patients reported a higher extent of
anger after defection by the partner (Sripada et al. 2009). Yet, this self-report was
not accompanied by an increased probability for choosing a defecting strategy in
the following round. As the authors note, at ﬁrst glance, such an altered interaction
pattern does not appear to be the reason for interpersonal dysfunction. However,
social interactions are complex feedback-oriented systems. Within these systems,
comparable behavioural patterns might be perceived by social partners in different
manners depending on modulating factors, such as expectations and expectation
violations intertwined with speciﬁc personality traits. Until now, there has been a
lack of studies that address the mechanisms of the interpretation of social actions,
such as the interpretation of self-protective behaviour as limited self-disclosure or
an enhanced vulnerability by reduced self-assertiveness, especially in the context of
a mental disorder in one of the interaction partners.



16.2.4 Personality Disorders

16.2.4.1   Borderline Personality Disorder

Deﬁcits in social interactions constitute one of the central psychopathological
features of BPD. The diagnostic criteria of the DSM-IV-TR describe the impair-
ments in social relationships as ‘frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined
320                                                                  S. Lis and P. Kirsch

abandonment’, ‘pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships charac-
terized by alternating between extremes of idealization and devaluation’ and
‘inappropriate, intense anger or difﬁculty controlling anger’. A multitude of studies
conﬁrm the existence of alterations in social relationships in BPD (for review see
Lis and Bohus 2013).
    The most prominent neuroeconomic study in BPD was done by King-Casas
et al. (2008). They applied a 10-round trust game with real interactions, while
measuring the BOLD response. While the investor was always a healthy subject,
the trustees’ role was taken by a BPD patient or a healthy subject. Dyads including
a BPD trustee showed less cooperation over the course of the game. This was due to
those exchange rounds in which the investor transferred a very low amount of
monetary units. In these rounds, healthy trustees often repaid a high sum. Such
behaviour might aim at encouraging the investor to be more cooperative and
transfer greater investments in subsequent trials. In contrast, BPD trustees reacted
with a low repayment, i.e. they showed a less generous behaviour and, thereby, an
inability to “repair” the cooperation. These ﬁndings are in line with those applying a
PD: BPD patients showed a lower proportion of cooperative responses than healthy
controls and patients with a bipolar disorder when playing with an alleged partner
(Saunders et al. 2015). Since the partner’s behaviour was preprogrammed to follow
a tit-for-tat strategy, a break of cooperation by the BPD patient was followed by a
defection by the partner. This choice may result in a permanent break of cooper-
ation as described by King-Casas et al. (2008) if the patients did not initiate a repair
of the relation themselves by switching to a cooperative behaviour after defection of
the partner. This implies that particularly reconciliation after problems in social
relations may represent a core deﬁcit in this mental disorder. However, further
studies must test whether this interpretation for the emergence of uncooperative
behaviour in speciﬁc social constellations holds true.
    The study by King-Casas et al. (2008) linked alteration in overt interaction
behaviour in BPD to alterations in cerebral activation, especially a lack in the
modulation of the activation in the anterior insula by the height of the received
investment in the BPD group. The authors interpreted this ﬁnding as a lack in the
perception of the violation of social norms in the behaviour of social partners, and
speculated that this might be linked to negative expectations during social inter-
actions. However, a subsequent study by Franzen et al. (2011) suggests that the
perception of social norms does not differ between BPD patients and controls.
When asked to assess the fairness of a trustee’s behaviour during a trust game, the
BPD patients’ ratings differentiated the degrees of fair and unfair behaviour in the
same manner as healthy subjects. This suggests that the ability of recognizing
unfairness is uncompromised in BPD. Further studies are necessary to clarify
whether the ﬁndings of King-Casas et al. (2008) can indeed be explained by an
altered expectancy on the fairness of social partners in BPD.
    It can be assumed that context information is essential for the formation and
adaptation of expectancies in social encounters. Findings of Franzen et al. (2011)
suggest that BPD patients use context information to guide social interaction
behaviour differently from healthy subjects. Social context might be given by a
16   Neuroeconomic Approaches in Mental Disorders                                  321

potential break-down of a cooperation (see Meyer-Lindenberg 2008), but equally
by social cues, such as the emotional facial expressions of interaction partners. In
healthy subjects, the presence of emotional facial cues strongly affects interaction
behaviour: they ignore the overall fairness of an interaction partner and transfer
equal investments to fair and unfair partners with varying emotional expressions
(Franzen et al. 2011; Lis et al. 2011, 2013). In contrast, BPD patients adapt their
investment behaviour not only to the emotional facial cues signalling the expected
repayment in the single round, but also simultaneously integrate the preceding
experiences with the fairness of a trustee, i.e. they transferred less money to unfair
than to fair partners, while simultaneously taking the speciﬁc provided social cues
in a single round into account. An altered influence of emotional facial expression
on exchange behaviour was also found by Polgar et al. (2014): while healthy
subjects accepted more offers during an UG when the partner displayed a happy
facial expression, this held true for the BPD patients only in the case of fair offers.
Thereby, BPD patients accepted more offers overall than healthy controls.
    The only study with a nonsocial control task applied a trust game (Unoka et al.
2009). Over the course of ﬁve rounds, healthy investors increased the amount of
transferred monetary units, while BPD patients did not change their investment
behaviour. This ﬁnding suggests that BPD patients failed to develop trust.
However, this study did not provide any feedback on the interaction partner’s
behaviour during the game. Thus, one may argue that it does not measure inter-
action behaviour, deﬁned as a two-way encounter during which the behaviour of
one individual influences that of the other and that uncertainty about the behaviour
of the partner may contribute to this ﬁnding. Nevertheless, Unoka et al. (2009)
conﬁrmed that the behavioural alteration seen in BPD is speciﬁc for a social
encounter, since no comparable behaviour was observed in a control task that asked
subjects to play with a computer.
    The ﬁndings of the various studies using the trust game in BPD all suggest
altered interaction behaviour. Thus, further studies seem promising to gain further
knowledge on the underlying mechanisms and modulating variables. A recent study
by Lonnqvist et al. (2012) points to the importance of personality traits for the
behavioural pattern seen by King-Casas et al. (2008): the inability to repair ruptured
cooperation seems to be linked to a combination of high neuroticism and low
agreeableness, i.e. the interplay of two personality dimensions identiﬁed by the
ﬁve-factor model (see also Thielmann et al. 2014).
    Although these ﬁndings suggest a high importance of personality traits for the
exchange behaviour in BPD, other ﬁndings suggest a different link between per-
sonality traits and exchange behaviour in healthy individuals and BPD subjects.
Wischniewski and Brune (2012) applied the dictator game and found a diverging
effect of personality traits in BPD compared to healthy subjects. In the healthy
group, selﬁsh behaviour was linked to high Machiavellianism and low agreeable-
ness. An opposite pattern was observed in the BPD group. Additionally, high
extraversion and high openness went along with less costly punishment and higher
neuroticism was linked with higher punishment in the BPD group, but not in
healthy subjects. The authors interpreted these results in BPD as—as they state
322                                                                 S. Lis and P. Kirsch

—‘angry retaliation’ which is motivated by identiﬁcation with the victim’s per-
spective, suggesting different motivations for the observed behaviour in BPD
patients and healthy subjects.
    In an alternative approach, Bartz et al. (2011) investigated the effects of the
‘pro-social’ peptide oxytocin on interaction behaviour in BPD. They applied a
three-round “assurance game” to investigate cooperation and trust. In this social
dilemma paradigm, the virtual partner was programmed to behave cooperatively.
Comparably to the PD, the subject can decide whether to cooperate or defect, and
the gain is determined by the interplay of cooperation and defection of both players.
BPD patients cooperated more often than healthy individuals. This is in accordance
with the ﬁndings of Franzen et al. (2011) that point to overall higher investments in
BPD. Surprisingly, oxytocin did not modulate the exchange behaviour. However, it
affected whether the participant expected the co-player to be trustworthy. Again,
surprisingly, oxytocin did not increase trustfulness, but led to less trusting expec-
tations in BPD patients. Although this ﬁnding suggests that the oxytocin system
might be affected in BPD, the data of Bartz et al. (2011) do not suggest a simple
lack in trust explained by a lower oxytocin level. Instead, the authors propose that
oxytocin may affect the salience of social cues, and, thereby, trigger positive or
negative social emotions based on the social repertoire of the individual and/or the
social context. It has to be emphasized that oxytocin modulates the self-reported
expectations towards a social partner, but not the actual exchange behaviour. This
discrepancy in the self-report of emotional experiences and motivations and actual
interaction behaviour underlines the importance of applying interaction paradigms
to extend our understanding of social dysfunction in mental disorders. It agrees with
other studies, e.g. McClure et al. (2007), that similarly depicts a gap between
self-perceived behaviour and the actually chosen social actions. Considering the
often discussed bias in perceiving oneself and others that is assumed to exist in
BPD, but also in other mental disorders, such as depression, this discrepancy seems
to be expectable and should be taken into account in investigating alteration in
social functioning, as well as in the development of psychotherapeutic interventions
and cognitive training programs (see also Lis and Bohus 2013).


16.2.4.2   Psychopathy

Although psychopathic behaviour is characterized by the violation of moral standards
and many studies have aimed at identifying deﬁcits in moral reasoning, the number of
studies that try to capture alterations of moral behaviours with neuroeconomic tasks is
sparse. Koenigs et al. (2010) investigated quite a small sample of six primary and six
secondary psychopaths compared to 22 non-psychopaths with a DG and an UG. Only
primary psychopaths offered lower amounts during the DG than during the UG.
Beyond that, they accepted fewer unfair offers in the role of the responder in the UG.
Since the authors found a comparable behavioural pattern in subjects with lesions in
the vmPFC, they argued in favour of an involvement of this cerebral structure in
primary psychopathy and hypothesized that deﬁcits in regulating anger and
16   Neuroeconomic Approaches in Mental Disorders                                   323

frustration may underlie these alterations. However, a subsequent study of the
behaviour in the role of the responder during an UG did not replicate altered behaviour
in criminal offenders with psychopathy (Radke et al. 2013a). Further studies are
necessary that disentangle cognitive and affective processing during exchange
behaviour together with its psychophysiological and neuronal correlates.


16.2.5 Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder

Although high levels in interpersonal dysfunction are well known to characterize
adults with Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), up to date, only a
few studies have addressed alterations in social cognitive processes and used
exchange games to study interpersonal functioning in this clinical group. Lis et al.
(2013) used a trust-game to explore behavioural alteration during social interactions
in adults with ADHD. They manipulated the overall fairness together with the
availability of social cues that signalled the likely fairness of the repayment during a
single exchange in four virtual trustees. ADHD patients were equally generous
toward all social interaction partners independent of their partners’ fairness. This
behaviour was beneﬁcial in respect to maximizing a gain when playing with a fair
partner, but resulted in a disadvantage when playing with unfair partners.
Alterations were not caused by deﬁcits in more basal cognitive or social cognitive
processes, since these abilities were controlled for in the study. Thus, a general
inattentiveness as a cause of interaction problems in ADHD, as it has been dis-
cussed in the past, has been excluded in this study. One line of interpretation of
these ﬁndings is that of altered reward sensitivity in ADHD, which results in
overemphasizing value, but ignoring the probability of reward. Thereby, it agrees
with other approaches applying paradigms from behavioural economics that do not
focus on social exchanges, but on decision-making under risk and uncertainty or
intertemporal choice (Sonuga-Barke and Fairchild 2012).
    A recent study identiﬁed the relevance of a comorbid conduct disorder for
alterations in adolescents with ADHD (Northover et al. 2015). This subgroup
rejected moderately unfair offers in the role of the responder during an UG more
often than ADHD patients without this comorbid disorder or healthy controls.
Thereby, the rejection rate was closely linked to the severity of the comorbid
conduct disorder. The authors propose deﬁcits in emotion regulation as underlying
mechanism in this subgroup of ADHD patients.


16.2.6 Autism Spectrum Disorder

As in psychopathy or ADHD, the number of studies applying an exchange game in
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is sparse. In contrast to the large number of studies
in schizophrenia, depression or BPD, this seems surprising since alterations in
social cognition and social interaction behaviour form a core symptom domain of
324                                                                  S. Lis and P. Kirsch

ASD. Thus, the DSM-IV deﬁnes qualitative impairments in social interaction as
one of the diagnostic criteria which may manifest itself in a lack of social or
emotional reciprocity.
    The study by Chiu et al. (2008) is one of the few actual neuroeconomic studies
investigating social exchange behaviour in mental disorders. The authors measured
BOLD responses during a 10-round iterative TG. Adolescents or young adults with
high-functioning ASD and healthy subjects took the role of the trustee while
playing with a healthy subject as investor. The ASD patients’ behavioural pattern
during the exchange equalled that of the healthy controls, but differed from healthy
subjects regarding hemodynamic response patterns along the anterior-posterior axis
of the cingulate cortex. The authors postulate that a TG trial can be divided into two
phases. They separate a decision of the partner, in this case the decision of the
investor, from the decision of the player his/herself, in this case the decision to
repay a speciﬁc ratio of the monetary units as trustee. Neural activity revealed
robust “self’’ and ‘‘other’’ response patterns along cingulate cortex for these distinct
phases in healthy subjects. In contrast, the ASD patients’ “self” response pattern,
i.e. a relatively greater activation in middle cingulate domains and less activation in
the anterior and posterior ends of the cingulate cortex, was absent. The observed
activation during the “self” decision phase in ASD equalled that of healthy subjects
during a non-social control condition, i.e. playing with a computer. Thereby, the
attenuation of the neural “self”-pattern was stronger with the extent of symptom
severity in the ASD patients. The alterations of brain activation were conﬁned to the
“self”-related decisions since the brain patterns during the investor’s decision were
comparable in both groups.
    In the past, autism has been primarily linked to impairments in Theory-of-Mind
tasks and the inability to infer other’s emotions and intentions. However, the
authors proposed that their data might be interpreted as an impairment in the ability
to represent their own intentions, but an intact ability to represent the intentions of
social partners. This shifts the locus of dysfunction to introspection and
self-referential processes in ASD. Nevertheless, it seems worth considering that an
alternative interpretation might be that the self-phase is also determined by inferring
the intentions of others, in that the own repay might influence the future investment
behaviour of the partner. Comparably, the processing during the investors’ decision
phase might be affected more strongly by an evaluation of the actual observable
investment behaviour and less by the inference of future intentions of the partner.
    Altered social interaction behaviour in high-functioning autism (HFA) seems to
not be caused by deﬁcits in moral reasoning (Li et al. 2014): HFA children dif-
ferentiated between hypothetical characters described in stories and even assessed
individuals harming others as worse than healthy control children. Nevertheless,
these judgements did not affect the patients’ cooperation in a subsequent PD. In
contrast, healthy children were more cooperative towards partners to whom they
had previously attributed more positive moral features. These ﬁndings suggest that
autism might be linked to a lack in taking context information into account.
Whether this may also hold true for the use of other cues, such as emotional facial
expressions, has to be investigated in future studies.
16   Neuroeconomic Approaches in Mental Disorders                                  325

    The relevance of studies using neuroeconomic tasks for the explanation of
everyday functioning in autism has been shown by Edmiston et al. (2015). They
linked altered engagement of neural structures during a PD to playground behaviour
of autistic children. Both ASD and healthy subjects did not differ in the ratios of
cooperative and defective responses when they played the PD with a child they had
previously met during a naturalistic peer interaction playground paradigm.
However, the engagement of a social salience network including brain regions such
as the insula, the temporoparietal junction and the caudate was attenuated in ASD
children, particularly during defection of a human partner. Beyond these alterations
speciﬁc for social interaction, altered neural activations, particularly in the insula,
were observed during defection in the PD when subjects interacted with both a
human partner and a computer during a nonsocial control condition. Across groups,
both the engagement of the insula as well as the temporoparietal junction during
defection by a human partner was linked to behaviour and stress responsivity
during the playground paradigm. These ﬁndings suggest that the identiﬁcation of
altered neural activations during standardized economic tasks actually contributes
to a deeper understanding of dysfunctional behaviour in naturalistic social
interactions.



16.3     Summary

As Carter (2012) stated, ‘it is unlikely that there will be neuroeconomic disorders’.
Nevertheless, the limited number of studies that applied economic exchange games
in clinical research to date paints a promising picture of these approaches as a
toolbox for the investigation of alterations in social functioning in mental disorders.
So far, ﬁndings can be summarized in that exchange games are suited to uncover
alterations in social interaction behaviour together with its neuronal correlates.
Beyond that, these approaches enable the investigation of speciﬁc social cognitive
functions as emotion recognition or Theory of Mind embedded in an ecologically
valid context: single processes are analyzed as components within a broader
functional network of diverse cognitive and social cognitive processes that influ-
ence each other with the ﬁnal goal to successfully cope with social relationships.
These processes have to be continuously adjusted during the interaction depending
on the partner’s action and reaction. This becomes particularly important if eco-
nomic tasks are not realized as one-shot games, but require a repeated interaction
with the same partner over multiple rounds. Further, studies have to address the
involved cognitive and social cognitive processes in more detail. Thereby,
exchange games with virtual partners and a controlled variation of single modu-
lating factors within a carefully chosen experimental design might provide a useful
tool to get further insight into the underlying mechanisms and the identiﬁcation of
the impairment linked to a speciﬁc function and its relevance for a speciﬁc mental
disorder. However, due to the still very small number of empirical studies, it is too
early to assess whether the theoretical frameworks and experimental approaches
326                                                                       S. Lis and P. Kirsch

will contribute to the understanding of the causes underlying mental disorders. This
holds true especially since—from a methodological point of view—the existing
studies are rather heterogeneous in regard to, e.g. sample sizes, concomitant psy-
chopharmacological treatments, different comorbidities and the control of poten-
tially modulating factors, such as socioeconomic status and cognitive impairments.
All these factors may be of particular relevance when investigating impairments of
social interactions in mental disorders (see Fig. 16.1) and add to heterogeneity of
ﬁndings that goes beyond that of the speciﬁc realization of exchange games with its
consequences for the related cognitive functions.
    It seems worth summarizing some aspects that might improve future research
with economic exchange games in mental disorders. First of all, one of the main
advantages of this scientiﬁc approach is that it provides testable quantitative
models. None of the studies in clinical research so far have made the attempt to use
this strength to prove theoretical assumptions about dysfunctions in speciﬁc
domains of interaction behaviour. Closely connected to this is the lack of studies
that use quantitative parameters of these models to actually link them to altered
behavioural correlates and neurobiological systems. In general, the majority of
studies strongly relied on the measurement of overt behaviour and did not apply
neuroscientiﬁc methods. Thus, studies that aim to characterize the alterations in




Fig. 16.1 Factors contributing to heterogeneity in investigations of social decision-making in
clinical samples
16   Neuroeconomic Approaches in Mental Disorders                                 327

mental disorders by using these strengths of neuroeconomic approaches are
strongly needed.
    Beyond that, exchange games aim towards measuring interaction behaviour.
However, social interaction is deﬁned as a dynamic sequence of social actions
between individuals or groups. These actions are continuously adjusted according
to the perceived past and anticipated future behaviour of the interaction partner.
This implies that an analysis of interaction behaviour requires the analysis of
interdependencies of social actions between partners. Yet, not all of the studies that
claim to apply exchange games actually take these interdependencies into account,
in that they do not provide feedback about the partner’s behaviour or focus more on
general performance than on the adaptation to the partner’s behaviour. This might
affect ﬁndings of alterations in mental disorders since taking the second person’s
perspective into account seems to be essential for the detection of alterations in
social cognitive processes. Furthermore, only few studies measured interactions
between real partners. One might argue that virtual partners allow for an experi-
mental control of the partner’s behaviour and are, thereby, the basis to gain insight
into the relevance of speciﬁc social cues or behavioural pattern for the development
of an interaction. We fully agree with this argumentation, since—particularly in
clinical samples—the patients’ behaviour might lead to speciﬁc interactional pat-
terns that prevent the analysis of factors that modulate interactions and might
constitute promising target behaviours for therapeutic interventions. Nevertheless,
the programming of virtual partners requires a precise knowledge in regard to
realistic interaction behaviours to allow for plausible modelling and experimental
manipulation of behaviour of virtual partners. To achieve this goal, we need a close
orchestration between the different sub-disciplines combined in the ﬁeld of neu-
roeconomy to improve approaches in clinical research based upon the knowledge of
healthy interaction behaviour.
    Finally, it has to be mentioned that clinical samples are often characterized by
dysfunctions in quite basal cognitive processes that might affect basal processes of
perception and action, but also more complex functions such as working memory or
attention. The separation of alterations genuinely linked to social cognition from
those in other domains of cognitive functioning constitutes a particular challenge in
the use of approaches from neuroeconomy in clinical research. So far, studies that
apply appropriate nonsocial control condition constitute the minority.
    Although we have to deal with a variety of problems in the use of neuroeconomic
approaches in clinical research, a growing number of studies add to our under-
standing of the important domain of social functioning in mental disorders. In the
past, the main sources of information about social interaction behaviour in clinical
samples have been self- and observer-based questionnaires that provide information
on how interaction behaviours are subjectively perceived. Neuroeconomic approa-
ches add objective behavioural and neurobiological descriptions of the interaction
behaviour itself and thus allow a new perspective in the investigation of interaction
problems in mental disorders.
328                                                                           S. Lis and P. Kirsch


References

Agay N, Kron S et al (2008) Ultimatum bargaining behavior of people affected by schizophrenia.
    Psychiatry Res 157(1–3):39–46
Bartz J, Simeon D et al (2011) Oxytocin can hinder trust and cooperation in borderline personality
    disorder. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 6(5):556–563
Billeke P, Armijo A et al (2015) Paradoxical expectation: oscillatory brain activity reveals social
    interaction impairment in schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry 78(6):421–431
Caceda R, Moskovciak T et al (2014) Gender-speciﬁc effects of depression and suicidal ideation in
    prosocial behaviors. PLoS One 9(9):e108733
Carter CS (2012) Neuroeconomics: sharpened tools of value for clinical cognitive and affective
    neuroscience. Biol Psychiatry 72(2):82–83
Chiu PH, Kayali MA et al (2008) Self responses along cingulate cortex reveal quantitative neural
    phenotype for high-functioning autism. Neuron 57(3):463–473
Csukly G, Polgar P et al (2011) Are patients with schizophrenia rational maximizers? Evidence
    from an ultimatum game study. Psychiatry Res 187(1–2):11–17
de la Asuncion J, Docx L et al (2015) Abnormal emotion processing, but intact fairness and
    intentionality considerations during social decision-making in schizophrenia. Front Psychol
    6:1058
Destoop M, Schrijvers D et al (2012) Better to give than to take? Interactive social
    decision-making in severe major depressive disorder. J Affect Disord 137(1–3):98–105
Edmiston EK, Merkle K et al (2015) Neural and cortisol responses during play with human and
    computer partners in children with autism. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 10(8):1074–1083
Ernst M (2012) The usefulness of neuroeconomics for the study of depression across adolescence
    into adulthood. Biol Psychiatry 72(2):84–86
Fett AK, Shergill SS et al (2012) To trust or not to trust: the dynamics of social interaction in
    psychosis. Brain 135(Pt 3):976–984
Franzen N, Hagenhoff M et al (2011) Superior ‘theory of mind’ in borderline personality disorder:
    an analysis of interaction behavior in a virtual trust game. Psychiatry Res 187(1–2):224–233
Glimcher PW, Rustichini A (2004) Neuroeconomics: the consilience of brain and decision.
    Science 306(5695):447–452
Gradin VB, Perez A et al (2015) Abnormal brain responses to social fairness in depression: an
    fMRI study using the ultimatum game. Psychol Med 45(6):1241–1251
Gradin VB, Perez A et al (2016) Neural correlates of social exchanges during the Prisoner’s
    Dilemma game in depression. Psychol Med 46(6):1289–1300
Grecucci A, Giorgetta C et al (2012) Anxious ultimatums: how anxiety disorders affect
    socioeconomic behaviour. Cogn Emot 27:230–244
Harle KM, Allen JJ et al (2010) The impact of depression on social economic decision making.
    J Abnorm Psychol 119(2):440–446
Hartley CA, Phelps EA (2012) Anxiety and decision-making. Biol Psychiatry 72(2):113–118
Hasler G (2012) Can the neuroeconomics revolution revolutionize psychiatry? Neurosci Biobehav
    Rev 36(1):64–78
King-Casas B, Chiu PH (2012) Understanding interpersonal function in psychiatric illness through
    multiplayer economic games. Biol Psychiatry 72(2):119–125
King-Casas B, Sharp C et al (2008) The rupture and repair of cooperation in borderline personality
    disorder. Science 321(5890):806–810
Kishida KT, Montague PR (2012) Imaging models of valuation during social interaction in
    humans. Biol Psychiatry 72(2):93–100
Kishida KT, King-Casas B et al (2010) Neuroeconomic approaches to mental disorders. Neuron 67
    (4):543–554
Koenigs M, Kruepke M et al (2010) Economic decision-making in psychopathy: a comparison
    with ventromedial prefrontal lesion patients. Neuropsychologia 48(7):2198–2204
16   Neuroeconomic Approaches in Mental Disorders                                               329

Li J, Zhu L et al (2014) The relationship between moral judgment and cooperation in children with
    high-functioning autism. Sci Rep 4:1–6
Lis S, Bohus M (2013) Social interaction in borderline personality disorder. Curr Psychiatry Rep
    15(2):338
Lis S, Schönwetter T et al (2011) Impaired integration of social-emotional information in
    schizophrenia during a simulated social interaction. Nervenheilkunde 30:385–393
Lis S, Baer N et al (2013) Social interaction behavior in ADHD in adults in a virtual trust game.
    J Atten Disord 20:335–345
Loewenstein G, Rick S et al (2008) Neuroeconomics. Annu Rev Psychol 59:647–672
Lonnqvist JE, Verkasalo M et al (2012) Personality disorder categories as combinations of
    dimensions: Translating cooperative behavior in borderline personality disorder into the
    ﬁve-factor framework. J Pers Disord 26(2):298–304
McClure EB, Parrish JM et al (2007) Responses to conflict and cooperation in adolescents with
    anxiety and mood disorders. J Abnorm Child Psychol 35(4):567–577
Meyer-Lindenberg A (2008) Trust me on this. Science 321(5890):778–780
Monterosso J, Piray P et al (2012) Neuroeconomics and the study of addiction. Biol Psychiatry 72
    (2):107–112
Northover C, Thapar A et al (2015) Emotion regulation in adolescent males with attention-deﬁcit
    hyperactivity disorder: testing the effects of comorbid conduct disorder. Brain Sci 5(3):369–
    386
Polgar P, Fogd D et al (2014) Altered social decision making in borderline personality disorder: an
    ultimatum game study. J Pers Disord 28(6):841–852
Pulcu E, Thomas EJ et al (2015) Social-economical decision making in current and remitted major
    depression. Psychol Med 45(6):1301–1313
Radke S, Brazil IA et al (2013a) Unfair offers, unfair offenders? Fairness considerations in
    incarcerated individuals with and without psychopathy. Front Hum Neurosci 7:406
Radke S, Schafer IC et al (2013b) Do different fairness contexts and facial emotions motivate
    ‘irrational’ social decision-making in major depression? An exploratory patient study.
    Psychiatry Res 210(2):438–443
Rodebaugh TL, Shumaker EA et al (2013) Interpersonal constraint conferred by generalized social
    anxiety disorder is evident on a behavioral economics task. J Abnorm Psychol 122(1):39–44
Rosenbach C, Renneberg B (2011) Rejected, excluded, ignored: the perception of social rejection
    and mental disorders—a review. Verhaltenstherapie 21:87–98
Saunders KE, Goodwin GM et al (2015) Borderline personality disorder, but not euthymic bipolar
    disorder, is associated with a failure to sustain reciprocal cooperative behaviour: implications
    for spectrum models of mood disorders. Psychol Med 45(8):1591–1600
Scheele D, Mihov Y et al (2013) A negative emotional and economic judgment bias in major
    depression. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 263(8):675–683
Schilbach L, Timmermans B et al (2013) Toward a second-person neuroscience. Behav Brain Sci
    36(4):393–414
Shao R, Zhang HJ et al (2015) The neural basis of social risky decision making in females with
    major depressive disorder. Neuropsychologia 67:100–110
Sharp C, Monterosso J et al (2012) Neuroeconomics: a bridge for translational research. Biol
    Psychiatry 72(2):87–92
Sonuga-Barke EJ, Fairchild G (2012) Neuroeconomics of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder:
    differential influences of medial, dorsal, and ventral prefrontal brain networks on suboptimal
    decision making? Biol Psychiatry 72(2):126–133
Sripada CS, Angstadt M et al (2009) Functional neuroimaging of mentalizing during the trust
    game in social anxiety disorder. NeuroReport 20(11):984–989
Thielmann I, Hilbig BE et al (2014) Willing to give but not to forgive: Borderline personality
    features and cooperative behavior. J Pers Disord 28(6):778–795
Unoka Z, Seres I et al (2009) Trust game reveals restricted interpersonal transactions in patients
    with borderline personality disorder. J Pers Disord 23(4):399–409
330                                                                       S. Lis and P. Kirsch

van’t Wout M, Sanfey AG (2011) Interactive decision-making in people with schizotypal traits: a
   game theory approach. Psychiatry Res 185(1–2):92–96
Wang Y, Zhou Y et al (2014) Impaired social decision making in patients with major depressive
   disorder. BMC Psychiatry 14:18
Wang Y, Yang LQ et al (2015) Game theory paradigm: a new tool for Investigating social
   dysfunction in major depressive disorders. Front Psychiatry 6:128
Willems RM (2011) Re-appreciating the why of cognition: 35 years after Marr and Poggio. Front
   Psychol 2:1–5
Wischniewski J, Brune M (2011) Moral reasoning in schizophrenia: An explorative study into
   economic decision making. Cogn Neuropsychiatry 25:1–16
Wischniewski J, Brune M (2012) How do people with borderline personality disorder respond to
   norm violations? Impact of personality factors on economic decision-making. J Pers Disord
   27:531–546
Zhang HJ, Sun D et al (2012) Impaired social decision making in patients with major depressive
   disorder. Brain Behav 2(4):415–423
               Part VI
Applied Neuroeconomics
