Chapter 17
Consumer Neuroscience
and Neuromarketing

Bernd Weber




Abstract Consumer choices represent one of the most abundant decisions people
make. Within the ﬁeld of neuroeconomics a focus has developed investigating the
behaviour of consumers at the interface of psychology, marketing and neuro-
science. While in the earlier years mostly the underlying computational neurobio-
logical processes of simple, value-based consumer choices have been increasingly
understood, more recently applied questions have received increased attention. Is it
possible to derive additional information on consumers’ preferences by integrating
neurophysiological data in addition to classical market research to increase its
predictive value for real market behaviour? What are the most promising neuro-
physiological tools enabling new insights in consumer behaviour and choices? This
chapter tries to illustrate this broad spectrum of consumer neuroscience, from
understanding to prediction of behaviour.



17.1     Introduction

The investigation of human decision processes as a multidisciplinary approach
between ﬁelds like economics, psychology and neuroscience has over recent years
extended its agenda to the study of consumer decisions. The focus on this important
domain of individual decisions has gained a lot of attention by media and com-
mercial companies, being it justiﬁed or certainly in many ways also hyped. Mainly
driven by the scientiﬁc community, the ﬁeld has somewhat parted into a com-
mercial focus with speciﬁc market research questions, which is usually termed



B. Weber (&)
Department of Epileptology, University Hospital Bonn,
Sigmund-Freud Str. 25, 53127 Bonn, Germany
e-mail: bernd.weber@ukb.uni-bonn.de
B. Weber
Center for Economics and Neuroscience (CENs), University of Bonn,
Nachtigallenweg 86, 53127 Bonn, Germany

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                        333
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_17
334                                                                         B. Weber

neuromarketing, and a more research-driven agenda, consumer neuroscience
(Hubert 2010; Plassmann et al. 2010).
    Many different motives are involved when investigating consumer decisions.
The motivation of marketers is mainly driven by the hopes to have a new tool at
their hands which will provide new—and hopefully more cost-effective—insights
into the needs and preferences of consumers. More classical tools of market
research, e.g. focus groups, questionnaires or simulated choices and market tests all
have their disadvantages (and advantages), which explains the need of marketers to
look for new methods and insights (Ariely and Berns 2010).
    On the other hand also policy makers show a growing interest into the mecha-
nisms driving human (consumer) decisions, incorporating models and theories from
different disciplines. Initiatives like Mindspace (http://www.instituteforgovernment.
org.uk) try to inform policy makers based on the understanding of individual decision
processes about possible effects and effectiveness of interventions and regulations.
    One of the strongest motivations of academic consumer researchers to get
involved in neuroscience is the understanding that models based on biology-free
assumptions may not be as useful as previously thought. Most models in social
sciences, i.e. also in economics and marketing, are ignoring insights about the
black-box brain or biology per se. While it may seem intuitive to assume that
knowledge about biological processes is useful to inform behavioural researchers,
there are strong notions against this assumption (Gul and Pesendorfer 2008), but
also strong support with even special issues in renowned marketing journals (Shiv
and Yoon 2012).
    Within this chapter I want to highlight three major topics for which the appli-
cation of neuroscientiﬁc tools and insights may be useful for investigating con-
sumer behaviour. The ﬁrst topic is the growing understanding of valuation
processes in the brain. How does the brain assign values to speciﬁc choice options
and how are they integrated into actual choices. Second, it is of utmost importance
to understand individual differences, i.e. heterogeneity in choices between (and
within) consumers to be able to better model and predict their behaviour and
reactions to interventions. This leads to the third issue I want to tackle in this
chapter, i.e. the use of neuroscientiﬁc tools for the prediction of choices and
behavioural changes.
    I want to conclude with an outlook of how the two ﬁelds, i.e. neuroscience and
behavioural consumer research may establish an even stronger cooperations in the
future.



17.2    Neuroscience of Valuation and Decision Biases

To perform a consumption decision, values to each choice option of the menu have
to be assigned and compared. Over recent years our knowledge about how the brain
performs these processes has grown tremendously (Rangel et al. 2008; Rangel and
Hare 2010; Bartra et al. 2013).
17   Consumer Neuroscience and Neuromarketing                                      335

   In one of the earliest studies in the ﬁeld of consumer neuroscience, Brian
Knutson and colleagues had subjects perform simple purchase decisions of items in
a functional MRI environment (Knutson et al. 2007). They observed that during the
time of viewing the product, activity in the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) was posi-
tively correlated with the product preference. Activation in the medial prefrontal
cortex (mPFC) was positively correlated with the price-differential, i.e. the net value
of the product during price presentation. During the actual choice, bilateral anterior
insula activity was negatively correlated with choice, while ventromedial prefrontal
activity (vmPFC) was positively correlated with the decision to buy the product.
   A variety of follow-up studies have used this framework to better understand
valuation processes in the brain. It is a very consistent ﬁnding that the choice value
of an option is coded in the vMPFC (Plassmann et al. 2007; Chib et al. 2009;
Rangel and Hare 2010; Fehr and Rangel 2011).
   Very interesting studies building on valuation processes have shown how
willpower or self-control can modulate the choice value presented in the vmPFC.
Todd Hare and colleagues had dieters perform choices between healthy and
unhealthy food items in an MRI scanner. Subjects with high as well as low
self-control abilities were investigated. The authors again observed a goal-value
signal of the respective products in the vmPFC which was down regulated if
subjects were able to successfully exert self-control by activity in the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (dlPFC). Similar results have been observed in a more recent study
by Hutcherson et al. (2012) showing the effect of cognitive regulation strategies on
value signals in the vmPFC and dlPFC during food choice.
   A fascinating phenomenon in consumer behaviour is the effect of external cues
on consumption experience and behaviour, nicely termed marketing placebo effects
by Shiv and colleagues (Shiv et al. 2005). The beliefs of consumers about aspects of
a product like quality, prices, brands or packaging can influence the perception of
the product itself, even above and beyond the pure physical consumption (Ariely
and Norton 2009). Expectancies in the consumers mind about the consumption of
products may even influence the efﬁcacy of medical products (Waber et al. 2008).
In this study, Waber and colleagues presented subjects with differently priced
placebo analgesic pills and could show that the placebo which was given at a higher
price had a stronger effect on pain reduction than lower priced placebos. The
application of neuroscientiﬁc methods now allows not only to describe this effect
but to actually show the neural mechanisms underlying these placebo effects and to
discern which processes in the brain are actually influenced by these different
placebos (Atlas and Wager 2012; Geuter et al. 2012; Wager and Atlas 2013).
   In a study performing wine-tasting in an fMRI environment, Plassmann and
colleagues showed that price information can influence the hedonic experience of
wines (Plassmann et al. 2008). The authors presented the same wines at different
prices via a pumping system to the subjects in the scanner. The identical wine led to
higher activation in the orbitofrontal cortex and increased taste-pleasantness ratings
when presented at a higher price. The high price, probably perceived as a quality
signal, actually changed the perception of the same physical properties during taste.
336                                                                             B. Weber

   Other kinds of external cues have also been shown to influence neural processes
underlying valuations of products. Linder and colleagues performed a study on
organic food labelling and could show that organic labelling, in comparison to
conventional food, led to an increase in willingness to pay for food items accom-
panied by increased activity in valuation regions, i.e. the NAcc and the dlPFC
(Linder et al. 2010).
   All of these studies show that the understanding of human valuation processes
leads to an increased knowledge about consumer behaviour. Beyond the effects on
choices and ratings, neuroscience methods allow to observe the processes which are
actually influenced during marketing actions. This may lead to different models and
predictions about consumer behaviour.
   One nice example is a study by Wadhwa et al. (2008). They investigated the
effect of food sampling on subsequent consumer behaviour. They hypothesized that
increasing reward-related activity (and therefore motivation-related dopamine
activity) by having subjects sample high-valued food items should increase the
consumption of other products. This was actually the case. Subjects who received
samples with high incentive value (like a flavoured beverage) not only consumed
more of other drinks (like Pepsi) but even unrelated but rewarding activities, like a
massage or chocolate.



17.3    Understanding Heterogeneity of Subjects

Consumers differ in their needs and preferences. They do not only differ between
individuals but also between different time points within themselves. Understanding
the sources of these inter- as well as intraindividual differences is highly relevant for
consumer researchers. Marketers have traditionally tried to address these issues by
population segmentation based on classic demographic data, such as income,
education, geographic location, sex, etc. (Keller 1993). More recent approaches
include attitudes of consumers towards brands or products (Churchill Jr and
Iacobucci 2009). What these models are missing are the individual heterogeneity in
the decision process itself or the underlying biology, variables that today are in the
focus of neuroscience (Hariri 2009) and which might help to improve consumer
segmentation (Yoon et al. 2012).
    People differ with respect to their underlying biology which influences their
personality and behaviour (Benjamin et al. 2008). In the domain of decision-making
it has for example been shown that variations in the dopamine-related gene COMT
influence the ability of subjects to adapt to changing environments in a
reward-learning task or their susceptibility to conﬁrmation biases (Krugel et al.
2009; Doll et al. 2011). It is especially important but beyond the scope of this
chapter to note that these genetic variations do not deterministically lead to dif-
ferences in behaviour, but that the environment has a strong impact on the effects of
the genetic variations (Caspi and Mofﬁtt 2006).
17   Consumer Neuroscience and Neuromarketing                                        337

    Recent developments in statistical analyses of functional MRI data have also
shown that the way in which people differ when performing cognitive tasks can be
visualized and used to classify people into distinct groups (Poldrack et al. 2009).
    Venkatraman et al. (2012) have applied this idea to the domain of brand man-
agement. They propose a framework for a neural market segmentation which goes
beyond classical market research approaches and which accounts for additional
heterogeneity of consumers, invisible to classical measures. The authors propose to
increase the differentiation of consumers not only based on their behaviour or
questionnaire data but to integrate neural data. They assume that consumers
showing identical observable behaviour might show differences in underlying
neural processes. This heterogeneity could be used to further sub segment
consumers.
    Intraindividual differences, e.g. related to stress, hormonal or vigilance levels are
also of interest to consumer research. In a classical study, Ariely and Loewenstein
(2006) investigated the effect of sexual arousal on different decision-making and
judgment tasks. When being sexually aroused the male college students exhibited
higher willingness to engage in risky or morally questionable behaviour as com-
pared to a non-aroused state. Stress effects on decision-making have also gained a
lot of focus in recent years (Starcke and Brand 2012). Porcelli and Delgado (2009)
showed for example that people under stress showed a stronger reflection effect, i.e.
an increase of risk taking for ﬁnancial decisions in the loss domain and a decrease in
the gain domain.
    Hunger also strongly influences our decision-making. Mehta and colleagues
examined neural responses to food stimuli in a satiated and hungry state. They
observed that reactions in valuation regions of the brain to food stimuli in a satiated
state were signiﬁcantly reduced and that the amount of reduction predicted food
choice in a buffet after the experiment (Mehta et al. 2012). The effect of hunger
does not only hold for acute choices. Read and van Leeuwen showed that hungry
people preferred unhealthy over healthy food products signiﬁcantly even when
making advance choices, i.e. choices that would be implemented in a week from the
decision itself (Read and Van Leeuwen 1998).
    Taken together, inter- as well as intraindividual heterogeneity and its biological
foundations are very important to understand consumer decision-making. The
combination of different approaches and methods, i.e. hormonal measures, genetics
and neuroimaging, will help to further clarify our understanding of this
heterogeneity.



17.4     Prediction of Choice and Behavioural Change

Beyond the improvement of understanding consumer behaviour, the prediction of
choices and changes in behaviour are important goals in consumer research. In the
above mentioned study of Knutson and colleagues, the authors tried to examine the
additional value of neural measures to predict actual choices of the subjects
338                                                                            B. Weber

(Knutson et al. 2007). In this ﬁrst attempt they showed that adding neural measures
to a logistic regression including self-reported preferences and net values of
products did actually increase the predictive power of the model beyond the
self-report measures. Although the improvement of the model by adding functional
MRI data was only marginal it did show that there may be an application of fMRI in
predicting choices of consumers [and later reanalysis of the data did actually
improve its predictive value (Grosenick et al. 2008)]. Tusche and colleagues used a
multivariate classiﬁer approach on fMRI data to show that preferences even for
unattended stimuli could be detected in brain activation signiﬁcantly above chance
(Tusche et al. 2010). Functional MRI classiﬁers are algorithms which are trained to
distinguish different patterns of neural activity related to different cognitive states.
These classiﬁers can then be used to analyse unknown fMRI data and “read-out”
the cognitive states the participants are in. They presented pictures of cars to
subjects in the scanner and tried to predict later (hypothetical) choices on prefer-
ences for the cars based, on neural activity during the picture presentation. The
regions which provided information for the classiﬁer were again the mPFC and the
insular cortex, consistent with previous ﬁndings. Levy and colleagues used func-
tional MRI activity in the NAcc and mPFC during the presentation of products
without the need to perform any choice to predict later binary choices between the
products (Levy et al. 2011).
    One study by Berns and Moore took this approach even one step further and
tried to predict real market data based on activation levels in a sample of subjects. In
a ﬁrst study Berns and colleagues showed that activity in the NAcc and OFC while
subjects listened to songs in an MRI scanner, correlated with individual preferences
for the songs (Berns et al. 2010). In a follow-up study, the authors presented data
showing that activity in these regions actually correlated to the number of albums
sold in the US market through 2010 (Berns and Moore 2012). These results very
strongly suggest the possible use of fMRI data even in smaller samples for pre-
diction of real market data. But certainly replications also in other domains are
necessary.
    Besides the ability to predict consumer choices, the effects of market campaigns
on the behaviour of consumers are another very important topic. A line of research
using health campaigns investigated the use of functional MRI data to predict the
individual effectiveness of the advertisements on the actual behavioural change of
subjects. In a ﬁrst study using ads from a health campaign on sunscreen use, Falk
and colleagues presented ads for sunblocker use to subjects (Falk et al. 2010). The
authors observed that activity in the mPFC while watching the ads explained 23 %
of the variance in actual sunscreen use over the next week beyond the variance
explained by self-reported attitudes and intentions. In a similar study, using
smoking ads, the authors showed that again activity in the mPFC while viewing
smoking-cessation ads doubled the explained variance in levels of carbon monoxide
as a measure for recent smoking compared to self-stated attitudes and intentions
(Falk et al. 2011).
17   Consumer Neuroscience and Neuromarketing                                                339


17.5     Outlook

In the present chapter I wanted to show that there is growing evidence suggesting
the additional value of functional MRI data (or other neuroscience methods) in
understanding and predicting consumer behaviour. While certainly more studies are
needed, especially relating to real market data, there is little doubt that the com-
bination of neuroscience, psychology and economics in consumer research has
already proven its usefulness and will become more established in the ﬁeld of
consumer science. One has to be aware that the knowledge created in this research
should not only be used by market researchers and companies but to inform policy
makers to build an environment that helps consumers to perform the choices that
best ﬁt to their needs and preferences.



References

Ariely D, Berns GS (2010) Neuromarketing: the hope and hype of neuroimaging in business. Nat
   Rev Neurosci 11:284–292
Ariely D, Loewenstein G (2006) The heat of the moment: the effect of sexual arousal on sexual
   decision making. J Behav Decis Making 19:87–98
Ariely D, Norton MI (2009) Conceptual consumption. Annu Rev Psychol 60:25p
Atlas LY, Wager TD (2012) How expectations shape pain. Neurosci Lett 520:140–148
Bartra O, McGuire JT, Kable JW (2013) The valuation system: a coordinate-based meta-analysis
   of BOLD fMRI experiments examining neural correlates of subjective value. Neuroimage
   76:412–427
Benjamin J, Ebstein RP, Belmaker RH (2008) Molecular genetics and the human personality.
   American Psychiatric Pub
Berns GS, Moore SE (2012) A neural predictor of cultural popularity. J Consum Psychol 22:
   154–160
Berns GS, Capra CM, Moore S, Noussair C (2010) Neural mechanisms of the influence of
   popularity on adolescent ratings of music. Neuroimage 49:2687–2696
Caspi A, Mofﬁtt TE (2006) Gene–environment interactions in psychiatry: joining forces with
   neuroscience. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:583–590
Chib VS, Rangel A, Shimojo S, O’Doherty JP (2009) Evidence for a common representation of
   decision values for dissimilar goods in human ventromedial prefrontal cortex. J Neurosci
   29:12315–12320
Churchill GA Jr, Iacobucci D (2009) Marketing research: methodological foundations. Cengage
   Learning
Doll BB, Hutchison KE, Frank MJ (2011) Dopaminergic genes predict individual differences in
   susceptibility to conﬁrmation bias. J Neurosci 31:6188–6198
Falk EB, Berkman ET, Mann T, Harrison B, Lieberman MD (2010) Predicting persuasion-induced
   behavior change from the brain. J Neurosci 30:8421–8424
Falk EB, Berkman ET, Whalen D, Lieberman MD (2011) Neural activity during health messaging
   predicts reductions in smoking above and beyond self-report. Health Psychol Off J Div Health
   Psychol Am Psycholog Assoc 30:177–185
Fehr E, Rangel A (2011) Neuroeconomic foundations of economic choice recent advances. The
   Journal of Economic Perspectives 25:3–30
Geuter S, Eippert F, Attar CH, Büchel C (2012) Cortical and subcortical responses to high and low
   effective placebo treatments. NeuroImage
340                                                                                    B. Weber

Grosenick L, Greer S, Knutson B (2008) Interpretable classiﬁers for FMRI improve prediction of
   purchases. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 16:539–548
Gul F, Pesendorfer W (2008) The case for mindless economics. In: The foundations of positive
   and normative economics, pp 3–39
Hariri AR (2009) The neurobiology of individual differences in complex behavioral traits. Annu
   Rev Neurosci 32:225
Hubert M (2010) Does neuroeconomics give new impetus to economic and consumer research? J
   Econ Psychol 31:812–817
Hutcherson CA, Plassmann H, Gross JJ, Rangel A (2012) Cognitive regulation during decision
   making shifts behavioral control between ventromedial and dorsolateral prefrontal value
   systems. The Journal of Neuroscience 32:13543–13554
Keller KL (1993) Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand equity.
   J Mark 1–22
Knutson B, Rick S, Wimmer GE, Prelec D, Loewenstein G (2007) Neural predictors of purchases.
   Neuron 53:147–156
Krugel LK, Biele G, Mohr PN, Li SC, Heekeren HR (2009) Genetic variation in dopaminergic
   neuromodulation influences the ability to rapidly and flexibly adapt decisions. Proc Natl Acad
   Sci USA 106:17951–17956
Levy I, Lazzaro SC, Rutledge RB, Glimcher PW (2011) Choice from non-choice: predicting
   consumer preferences from blood oxygenation level-dependent signals obtained during passive
   viewing. J Neurosci 31:118–125
Linder NS, Uhl G, Fliessbach K, Trautner P, Elger CE, Weber B (2010) Organic labeling
   influences food valuation and choice. Neuroimage 53:215–220
Mehta S, Melhorn SJ, Smeraglio A, Tyagi V, Grabowski T, Schwartz MW, Schur EA (2012)
   Regional brain response to visual food cues is a marker of satiety that predicts food choice.
   Am J Clin Nutr 96:989–999
Plassmann H, O’Doherty J, Rangel A (2007) Orbitofrontal cortex encodes willingness to pay in
   everyday economic transactions. J Neurosci 27:9984–9988
Plassmann H, O’Doherty J, Shiv B, Rangel A (2008) Marketing actions can modulate neural
   representations of experienced pleasantness. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:1050–1054
Plassmann H, Yoon C, Feinberg FM, Shiv B (2010) Consumer neuroscience. In: Wiley
   international encyclopedia of marketing. Wiley
Poldrack RA, Halchenko YO, Hanson SJ (2009) Decoding the large-scale structure of brain
   function by classifying mental states across individuals. Psychol Sci 20:1364–1372
Porcelli AJ, Delgado MR (2009) Acute stress modulates risk taking in ﬁnancial decision making.
   Psychol Sci 20:278–283
Rangel A, Hare T (2010) Neural computations associated with goal-directed choice. Curr Opin
   Neurobiol
Rangel A, Camerer C, Montague PR (2008) A framework for studying the neurobiology of
   value-based decision making. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:545–556
Read D, Van Leeuwen B (1998) Time and desire: The effects of anticipated and experienced
   hunger and delay to consumption on the choice between healthy and unhealthy snack food.
   Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 76:189–205
Shiv B, Yoon C (2012) Integrating neurophysiological and psychological approaches: towards an
   advancement of brand insights. Journal of Consumer Psychology 22:3–6
Shiv B, Carmon Z, Ariely D (2005) Placebo effects of marketing actions: consumers may get what
   they pay for. J Market Res (JMR) 42:11p
Starcke K, Brand M (2012) Decision making under stress: a selective review. Neurosci Biobehav
   Rev 36:1228–1248
Tusche A, Bode S, Haynes JD (2010) Neural responses to unattended products predict later
   consumer choices. J Neurosci 30:8024–8031
Venkatraman V, Clithero JA, Fitzsimons GJ, Huettel SA (2012) New scanner data for brand
   marketers: How neuroscience can help better understand differences in brand preferences.
   J Consum Psychol 22:143–153
17   Consumer Neuroscience and Neuromarketing                                         341

Waber RL, Shiv B, Carmon Z, Ariely D (2008) Commercial features of placebo and therapeutic
  efﬁcacy. JAMA J Am Med Assoc 299:1016–1017
Wadhwa M, Shiv B, Nowlis SM (2008) A bite to whet the reward appetite: the influence of
  sampling on reward-seeking behaviors. J Marketing Res 45:403–413
Wager TD, Atlas LY (2013) How is pain influenced by cognition? Neuroimaging weighs in.
  Perspect Psychol Sci 8:91–97
Yoon C, Gonzalez R, Bechara A, Berns G, Dagher A, Dubé L, Huettel S, Kable J, Liberzon I,
  Plassmann H, Smidts A, Spence C (2012) Decision neuroscience and consumer decision
  making. Mark Lett 23:473–485
                               Part VII
Neuroscience Methods in Neuroeconomics
