Chapter 19
Electroencephalography: Current Trends
and Future Directions

Stefan Debener, Cornelia Kranczioch and Maarten De Vos




Abstract Since Hans Berger, a German psychiatrist, discovered in 1929 at Jena
that brain activity can be recorded from the human scalp noninvasively, the elec-
troencephalogram (EEG) has fascinated generations of neuroscientists. How com-
plex mental functions such as attention, memory, language, or decision-making are
implemented in the brain are fundamental questions in cognitive neuroscience, and
the EEG technology provides information, which may be crucial in answering those
questions. Indeed, understanding the neural underpinnings of cognitive functions
would help developing effective treatments for patients suffering from various brain
dysfunctions. We argue here that, among maybe a dozen or so technologies, the
scalp-recorded EEG among the most informative ones when it comes to under-
standing the mind–brain relationship. Moreover, next generation EEG technology is
unobtrusive, smartphone operated, and useable outside of the laboratory environ-
ment. This helps to advance applied ﬁelds such as brain–computer interfaces,
neuroergonomics, and neurorehabilitation.




S. Debener (&)  C. Kranczioch  M. De Vos
Neuropsychology Lab, Department of Psychology, Faculty of Medicine
and Health Sciences, University of Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany
e-mail: Stefan.debener@uni-oldenburg.de
S. Debener  C. Kranczioch  M. De Vos
Center for Neurosensory Science and Systems, University of Oldenburg,
26111 Oldenburg, Germany
S. Debener  M. De Vos
Cluster of Excellence Hearing4all, University of Oldenburg,
26111 Oldenburg, Germany
M. De Vos
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                        359
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_19
360                                                                    S. Debener et al.


19.1    Introduction

Modern EEG technology has unique advantages and, for many applications, these
advantages put EEG into the driver’s seat when compared to all other brain activity
monitoring technologies. EEG signals measure brain activity with millisecond
resolution, and EEG technology is potentially mobile. We speculate that, in the near
future, these advantages will make it possible to develop truly intelligent assistive
technologies. Future EEG technology will make it possible to make use of implicit
information derived from brain activity monitoring in various work and clinical
settings. Moreover, based on EEG it will also be possible to modify ones’ brain
activity patterns and aim for better cognitive performance and emotion regulation,
either to compensate for existing dysfunctions, or to further enhance normal cog-
nitive skills.
    This chapter provides an introductory overview of acquiring EEG signals. This
will be followed by an introduction to event-related potentials (ERP), which has
been the gold standard for the study of cognitive functions via EEG. However,
scientists also discovered that event-related brain oscillations provide information
that is neglected by the ERP approach. Access to this type of information requires a
different analysis approaches. How brain oscillations may serve human cognition is
currently an important ﬁeld of neuroscience research. We will illustrate the rele-
vance of considering both types of information, ERPs and oscillations, by dis-
cussing the attentional blink (AB) phenomenon, a short moment of visual
inattention. A person is usually not aware of those brief moments of inattention, but
lapses of attention can have dramatic, life-changing consequences, for instance
while driving a car. Following this example, future developments and applications
of the EEG technology will be presented. Speciﬁcally we argue that further
miniaturization, combined with a real-time EEG analysis approach, may enable us
to monitor brain activity, and thus the neural correlates of mental processes, outside
of the lab and in real-life situations. This development will lead to new assistive
technologies, for instance for achieving vigilance and cognitive performance
monitoring. Our own ﬁrst steps toward those mobile EEG applications will be
summarized, and the requirements toward achieving those goals will be deﬁned.



19.2    EEG Acquisition and Recording Environment

EEG signals are typically recorded with electrodes attached to the scalp. These
electrodes are connected to a shoebox-sized biopotential ampliﬁer controlled by a
computer, which also stores the data for subsequent analysis. The recorded signals
reflect voltage fluctuations over time, with amplitudes in the microvolt range, and
frequencies in the range of near DC to approximately 80 Hz. It is important to
understand that the recorded signal consists of a mixture of an unknown number of
brain and non-brain sources. The non-brain source contributions are called artifact
19   Electroencephalography: Current Trends and Future Directions                            361

and could be of technical origin (e.g., line noise interference, electrode motion, etc.)
or reflect non-brain electrical activity (e.g., electrical heart beat activity; eye blinks,
etc.). A typical recording consists of the (linear) summation of all instantaneously
active artifact and non-artifact sources. Figure 19.1 shows a typical raw EEG
recording. In addition to artifacts, oscillatory brain activity is evident.
Approximately 10/s posterior alpha oscillations have been related to visual per-
ception, vigilance, and attention (Klimesch 2012) but are difﬁcult to quantify during
the occurrence of artifacts. The simultaneous recording from various scalp sites
(typically ranging between 32 and 128) enables a careful spatial examination of the
data and helps to tease apart the signal of interest (e.g., brain oscillations) from
other contributions. EEG alpha activity is prominent in eyes closed, awake resting
conditions. Alpha activity has a direct relationship to several cognitive processes
(Klimesch 2012), and shows an abnormal spatial pattern in for instance depression
(Debener et al. 2000), to name only one condition that has been linked to this
prominent brain oscillation.
   Figure 19.1 inset also shows a typical recording cap, which is needed to hold
electrodes at predeﬁned locations on the scalp. In most lab conditions, a separate
ampliﬁer and several computers are needed for data acquisition and the control of
experimental events (e.g., presentation of sounds or visual events) and the collec-
tion of subject behavior (e.g., button presses to target events). As illustrated, usually
two or more experimental stimulations are presented and the brain activity in
response to those events is analyzed (color-coded time windows). Most
research-EEG recordings are conducted with this type of setup and in a highly
controlled laboratory environment, to allow for constant light, temperature, and
noise conditions. Importantly, subjects are usually required to minimize movement
during recording, as movement of electrodes and/or electrode cables causes massive




Fig. 19.1 Ongoing EEG recording (64 electrodes, 10 s). Large-amplitude deflections refer to eye
blink artifact. Approximately 10/s oscillatory activity is spatially and temporally focused and
reflects brain activity in the EEG alpha (8–13 Hz) frequency range. Colored shaded areas indicate
epochs of interest for event-related analysis, such as ERPs
362                                                                    S. Debener et al.

interference artifacts and usually renders analysis of the underlying brain activity
next to impossible. All body movements underlying overt behavior are controlled
by muscle activity. The corresponding electrical muscle activity can be measured as
electromyogram (EMG) and propagates to the EEG electrodes, thus posing another
strong source of artifact. For these reasons, most behavioral observations that have
been linked to EEG-recorded brain activity are based on heavily constrained
behaviors such as button presses, not on real-life behavior. As we will show later,
more recent advances in EEG ampliﬁer technology have made it possible to
overcome this important drawback. This is a fundamental development, since all
other currently available noninvasive brain activity and neuroimaging technologies
suffer from the very same limitation—they do not tolerate movement, and thus it is
poorly understood how natural mental processes and behavior relate to brain
activity.
    Another practical drawback of the EEG technology is that the application of
electrodes takes time, as gel is applied and skin needs to be prepared to ensure a
stable contact between electrodes surface and skin. Since the upper layer of the skin
is poorly conductive, EEG signal quality can be improved by careful abrasion of the
upper skin layer (by using a cotton web and abrasive paste with a peeling effect).
This lowers electrode impedance and thereby attenuates the influence of electro-
magnetic environmental noise on the resulting EEG recordings. Depending on the
number of electrodes used, this process can easily take between 20 and 90 min.
However, recent developments in ampliﬁer and electrodes design aim at over-
coming the limitations of gel use and skin preparation.



19.3    Event-Related Potentials

Ongoing, or spontaneous brain activity is based on contributions from many brain
areas, and the resulting amplitudes can easily exceed the range of ±100 μV. The
processing of a particular event on the other hand, say an auditory or visual stimulus
as illustrated in Fig. 19.1, contributes much smaller signals to the EEG, which
typically range between 1 and 15 μV. Thus there is a signal-to-noise problem in
analyzing event-related brain activity, and improving the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) is the primary aim of most signal processing steps that need to be applied to
recorded EEG data. One way of improving the SNR is by averaging across trials.
By presenting the same event repeatedly (as illustrated in Fig. 19.1), and recording
the exact point in time each event was presented, it is possible to average all EEG
traces or trials (sometimes also called epochs, or segments). The resulting average is
the event-related potential (ERP), a systematic wave consisting of positive and
negative going deflections reflecting neurocognitive processing steps in the brain
time-locked to the stimulus presentation. Figure 19.2 illustrates the averaging
process and the underlying concept, the additive ERP model. As illustrated, the
averaging process on the one hand reveals time-locked brain responses, which are
assumed to take place of every single-trial level. On the other hand, the averaging
19   Electroencephalography: Current Trends and Future Directions                             363




Fig. 19.2 The additive ERP model assumes that the event-related response is independent from
ongoing brain activity, and that the evoked response is invariant across trials, that is, across
repeated presentation of the same event. Averaging across trials therefore improves the
signal-to-noise ratio, as ongoing activity sums up to near zero (i.e., is “averaged out”), whereas
the evoked response (i.e., the ERP) is preserved, hence across trials it “comes out of noise”


process suppresses all non time-locked activities like the ongoing EEG, and thereby
increases the SNR. In effect, this averaging is necessary to make the ERP visible, or
make it “come out” of the noise.
    Trial-averaged ERPs are easy to calculate and very reliable. They provide a rich
set of information about mental processes related to perception, cognition, and
emotion. Indeed, experimental task manipulations often come with speciﬁc and
reliable changes in ERP deflections, and the underlying ERP components are very
informative with regard to the processing (and processing stage) differences between
the experimental conditions applied. With this approach it is often possible to tell
whether the difference in performance between two task conditions is due to an early
perceptual processing, subsequent object processing, later decision-making or a
motor output preparation level of processing. Drawing similar inferences from
behavioral observations alone, or from other noninvasive measures of human brain
functions (such as functional magnetic resonance imaging) is typically not possible.
As an example, in Hewig et al. (2011) it was investigated why humans often deviate
from rational choices when making decisions. In this experiment the Ultimatum and
Dictator games were used to examine the role of affect on decision-making. It was
found that the feedback-related negativity, an ERP component related to reinforce-
ment learning, predicts the decision to reject unfair offers in the ultimatum game.
These and further ﬁndings led to objective evidence that decision-making is guided
by subjective affective markers (Hewig et al. 2011). It is easy to see the practical
potential of this result: by feeding back brain signals such as the feedback-related
negativity, individuals could be trained to follow rational rather than affective signals
and learn to gain control over implicit decision-making processes.
364                                                                      S. Debener et al.

    The downside of the ERP approach however is that it does not capture all
event-related brain activity but rather a glimpse of it. Indeed, the approach has
difﬁculties disentangling spatiotemporally overlapping processes and thus biases
interpretations toward a simpliﬁed view of the brain as a serial information pro-
cessing machinery. ERPs may be inadequate in capturing parallel information
processing, and it is well known from invasive electrophysiological studies that
parallel (and feedback) processing is the rule rather than the exception (for a review
with regard to emotion processing, see for instance Pessoa 2008). All higher order
cognitive processes seem to depend on the temporally ﬁne-tuned, dynamic interplay
of several regionally distinct brain areas. How these areas communicate to each
other to implement cognitive acts is a fundamental question. Complementary to
ERPs, event-related brain oscillations seem better suited in addressing this issue.
    One example that illustrates the gain of information that can be achieved by
going beyond the classical ERP approach is a study by Kranczioch et al. (2007) that
investigated neurophysiological correlates of the attentional blink (AB). The AB is
a temporary deﬁcit in visual awareness that can arise when chunks of important
information have to be picked out of a continuous stream of irrelevant information.
In the lab such a situation is created by presenting a stream of pictures at a rate of
about 10 per second. A volunteer is asked to detect or identify two of the pictures.
For example, the stream may consist of black capital letters, and the participant is
asked to identify a single green capital letter presented within the stream and to
detect whether a black X follows the green letter. Typically volunteers easily
identify the green letter, denoted as the ﬁrst target or T1, while they frequently miss
the subsequently presented black X, denoted as T2. This deﬁcit can be observed in
particular if T2 follows T1 by about 200–500 ms, but it is often absent or greatly
reduced if T2 follows T1 by about 100 ms (cf. Fig. 19.3a).
    One interesting aspect of the AB is that it does not occur invariantly. That is, even
if in two runs of the laboratory task the stimulus stream and the two targets are
virtually identical, in the ﬁrst run a volunteer might detect T2 while in the second she
might miss it. Kranczioch et al. (2007) where interested in whether this difference is
reflected in the P3 ERP component, which is related to attentional resource alloca-
tion. They observed that when T2 was detected it was associated with a larger P3 then
when it was missed. Importantly, the P3 evoked by T1 showed the opposite pattern in
that it was smaller when T2 was missed as compared to when it was detected. This
pattern of results is illustrated in Fig. 19.3b. This ﬁnding indicates that the distri-
bution of attentional resources between T1 and T2 relates to whether T2 falls victim
to the AB or not. But what might cause the different distribution of resources?
    In their study Kranczioch et al. also investigated studied event-related brain
oscillations, both before and during the appearance and processing of T1 and T2,
asking why in some trials participants detect T2 while in others they miss it. The
most striking difference between trials in which T2 was detected and in which T2
was missed was found in the dynamics of connectivity patterns between electrodes.
Already before the appearance of T1, EEG activity before T2 would be missed was
characterized by a connectivity pattern suggesting a strong focus on processing the
stream of nontargets. In contrast, runs in which T2 would be detected where
19   Electroencephalography: Current Trends and Future Directions                                365




Fig. 19.3 a Behavioral pattern in a typical attentional blink (AB) task as compared to a control
task. In the AB task T1 and T2 are task relevant. T2 detection rate is reduced as compared to a
control task in which only T2 is task relevant while T1 can be ignored. When in the AB task T2 is
presented at around 100 ms after T1, T2 detection is frequently found to be less impaired then at
longer intervals. Figure adapted with permission from Kranczioch et al. (2007). b Amplitudes of
the P3 ERPs evoked by T1 and T2 in trials in which T2 was detected (green) and in trials in which
T2 was missed (red). Figure adapted with permission from Kranczioch et al. (2007).
c Spatiotemporal connectivity pattern observed for trials in which T2 was detected (green) and
in which T2 was missed (red). The measure of connectivity is the phase-locking value (PLV).
Trials in which T2 was missed where characterized by a relatively higher PLV at a frequency of
around 10 Hz that started well before the presentation of T1. Trials in which T2 were detected
were characterized by an increase in PLV at a frequency of around 20 Hz, in particular at and
around target presentation. The head plots illustrate the corresponding spatial connectivity patterns
at exemplary time points. Figure adapted with permission from Kranczioch et al. (2007)


associated with a connectivity pattern compatible with a stronger focus on the task,
that is, inhibiting the nontargets and searching for and processing of the targets
(Fig. 19.3b). These and related ﬁndings (e.g., Gross et al. 2004) provide clear
experimental evidence for the idea that whether an AB occurs is related to the state
of the brain an incoming target meets, which in turn depends on the dynamic
interplay of distinct processes and brain areas. This insight was made possible
solely by complementing the classical ERP approach by the idea of event-related
brain dynamics, a concept that will be in the focus of the next section.
366                                                                             S. Debener et al.


19.4     Event-Related Brain Dynamics

In 2004 Makeig et al. presented the event-related brain dynamics (ERBD) model,
aiming to relate the different measures of event-related EEG analysis to each other
(Makeig et al. 2004). The ERBD model comprises a 3-D signal space (Fig. 19.4).
   One axis refers to the change in EEG amplitude an event may cause. It is known
that in some conditions oscillations in response to an event increase in amplitude,
whereas in other conditions they decrease in amplitude. This is usually the case in a
small frequency band. Note that frequency refers to another axis in the ERBD
model. Since changes in EEG amplitude may primarily reflect a change in the
degree of synchrony between neurons, those amplitude changes are known as
event-related synchronization (ERS) and event-related desynchronization (ERD).
Both axes, amplitude change and frequency, ignore the temporal consistency of
these processes across trials. In the frequency domain this is called phase-locking
and can be quantiﬁed with a measure called inter-trial coherence (ITC). In the time
domain, this would be called latency consistency (or latency jitter), but the




Fig. 19.4 Event-related brain dynamics model. Event-related brain responses can take any
position within this 3-D volume. The additive ERP, as illustrated in Fig. 19.2, captures the upper
right-hand corner, as it adds power (x-axis) in a very small frequency range (z-axis), and this
is consistent across trials (y-axis). ITC = inter-trial coherence; ERSP = event-related spectral
perturbation; ERS/ERD = event-related synchronization/desynchronization; PPR = partial phase
resetting. Figure adapted from Makeig et al. (2004) with permission from the publisher
19   Electroencephalography: Current Trends and Future Directions                  367

frequency-domain procedure offers the advantage of looking at this measure for
different frequencies independently. ITC spans the third dimension in the ERBD.
To the extend that the additive ERP model as illustrated in Fig. 19.2 applies, the
ERP takes the upper right-hand corner of the ERBD: it adds power to the ongoing
brain activity, is usually limited to the low frequency range, and happens with very
high consistency across trials. It is however also known that the reorganization of
phase in the absence of power changes can contribute to the trial-averaged ERP
(Makeig et al. 2004), which is called partial phase resetting (PPR). While difﬁcult to
prove, PPR has been implicated as a crucial cortical operation for several cognitive
functions. For instance, recent neurocognitive theories of speech processing assume
that PPR of ongoing oscillations in auditory cortex is required to process connected
speech signals.
    Another important aspect of the ERBD model is that, in order to detect and study
regionally circumscribed or local brain dynamics with scalp-recorded EEG, it is
necessary to ﬁrst unmix, or linearly decompose the measured data into its under-
lying source signals. This effort can only by a good guess, or a modeling effort, as
the true source conﬁguration of the measured data is generally unknown.
The ERBD suggested the use of independent component analysis (ICA) to unmix
brain signals from artifacts. ICA also promises to tease apart different brain signals
from each other (Makeig et al. 2004). While all unmixing approaches including
ICA come with theoretical pitfalls and practical difﬁculties and are far from perfect,
the ICA approach has been found to be particularly helpful in SNR improvement in
the absence of trial averaging (De Vos et al. 2012). That is, the ICA decomposition
is achieved on the continuous, or single-trial data, and thereby enables to study
single-trial brain responses. Single-trial analysis of EEG data is fascinating for at
least two reasons. First, it allows us to relate physiology to mental processes on a
trial-to-trial basis. Since physiological and behavioral measures fluctuate across
trials, as illustrated in the AB above, the trial-by-trial approach provides a means to
study how closely they are coupled to each other. Second, the single-trial analysis
approach enables a (near) real-time access to the brain response. This is a funda-
mental requirement for brain–computer interface and neuro-feedback procedures,
where users get access to their online brain signals to operate a technical device or
learn to modulate their brain signals by means of studying its online feedback.



19.5     Brain–Computer Interfaces

The brain–computer interface (BCI) technology offers a direct communication
pathway between brain activity and a technical device (for an overview, see
REF BOOK Springer). BCIs could be used to restore the loss of voluntary control
over muscles, as in locked-in patients, which can learn to communicate with a BCI.
Probably the most popular BCI application is the EEG P3 matrix speller. The P3 or
P300 signal is a positive going centroparietal deflection typically lasting several
hundred milliseconds and peaking at approximately 300 ms post stimulus onset.
368                                                                       S. Debener et al.

The P3 can be detected on a single-trial level and is partly under user control.
Task-relevant events (i.e., those events an individual considers important, or those
that have some importance in a particular context) drive the P3 amplitude and
different attentional processes give rise to different subcomponents of the P3
(Debener et al. 2005). A common view is that the P3 reflects the voluntary
deployment of attentional resources (see Polich 2007, for review). Accordingly, in
the BCI framework, this EEG signal can be used to control a device. In the
P3-speller rows and columns of a 6 × 6 matrix of letters are randomly flashed, and
users selectively focus their attention on a particular letter that is to be selected, for
instance by silently counting the number of occurrences this letter is flashed. Using
a machine learning approach it can be decoded from the brain signals which letter a
subject attended to, albeit with less than 100 % accuracy on a single-trial level.
    Bringing BCI paradigms to practical application is challenging, however, for a
number of reasons. Among others, further challenges are caused by the practical
limitations inherent in the EEG technology. For instance, dedicated hardware is
required, electrode caps have to be positioned, gel has to be applied and skin
prepared. Another, maybe even more serious challenge is that the SNR is usually
not good enough to operate the P3 speller without averaging over a few trials. That
is, it takes in practice several seconds to spell a single letter with the P3-speller,
making it rather cumbersome to write for instance a full sentence by thought alone.
A further challenge is the paradigm itself and the mental process required to gen-
erate a brain signal that can be detected. In the P3-speller paradigm it is not the
thought of the user, but rather the selective attention to a single letter, that evokes a
detectable brain response. BCI paradigms relying on brain signals evoked by some
events are called reactive BCI (Zander and Kothe 2011). In contrast, active BCIs do
not require a particular external stimulus. Motor imagery BCIs are an example of an
active BCI. Here brain signals related to the imagery of a particular motor act can be
detected and the signal generated used to operate a BCI or a neuro-feedback system.
The corresponding sensorimotor ERD signal can be implemented in the absence of
an external stimulus, hence the name active BCI. Both active and reactive BCIs
however rely on the user to voluntarily generate a brain signal, and this is a
demanding, effortful task. A more practical, highly innovative complementary
approach would be to use brain signals that are generated without explicit user
control to operate a BCI. To name a few, those signals could be evoked by an
automatic orienting response (thereby revealing information about automatic
attention processes), an emotional response (reflecting the emotional involvement
of a user), or an error-related signal (informing about whether a user became aware
of an incorrect behavior). Note that these signals are generated without explicit user
awareness or voluntary contribution, hence the name passive BCI.
    It is beyond the scope of this chapter to cover the achievements made in the ﬁeld
of BCI research and outline the practical limitations of this approach. However, one
important limitation refers to virtually all EEG applications, including BCI. The
recordings have to be done in the absence of gross movements. In other words,
EEG recordings are conﬁned to the laboratory, or rather artiﬁcial setups outside of a
laboratory, and participants cannot behave naturally during recording. In the next
19   Electroencephalography: Current Trends and Future Directions                              369

chapter, we summarize our ﬁrst efforts toward a fully mobile EEG system aiming to
overcome this limitation. With miniaturized hardware a mobile EEG can be build
that is largely tolerant to participant movement. At present only prototypes of such
systems are available, but they already demonstrate that it is possible to develop a
fully mobile BCI system. For the near future this promises cognitive enhancement
assistive technology, achieved by means of a mobile, passive BCI approach.



19.6     Toward a Fully Mobile EEG System

Several years ago, we discovered that the modiﬁcation and combination of con-
sumer EEG hardware with standard laboratory EEG electrodes and caps enable
creating a very small, lightweight EEG system (Debener et al. 2012). The resulting
ampliﬁer is shown in Fig. 19.5. It has less than half of the size and weight of a
modern smartphone and can be mounted onto an electrode cap. Moreover, because
of the ampliﬁer technology used, electrode preparation is minimal and it thus takes
only very few minutes to set up a 14 channel recording session with our system.
   Signal transmission to a nearby computer or smartphone is possible by means of
a wireless protocol. Because of the very low weight and wireless transmission users




Fig. 19.5 A new wireless, fully head-mounted EEG system developed at Oldenburg University,
Germany (Debener et al. 2012). The system allows for truly mobile EEG recordings, data can be
recorded with a smartphone. Note that the cable is used for sound stimulus delivery, not for signal
acquisition
370                                                                   S. Debener et al.

can freely move around nearly unconstrained during recording. Importantly, the
distance between recording electrodes and ampliﬁer is very short, and all cables are
tightly ﬁxed onto the cap, avoiding movement of cables relative to each other. In
our experience these two measures taken together dramatically reduce the amount
of interference artifact that otherwise heavily corrupts conventional, wired EEG
recordings.
    In a ﬁrst validation study (Debener et al. 2012), we recorded EEG data from 16
participants performing a selective auditory attention task. In one condition data
were recorded indoors, in a seated ofﬁce scenario. In the other condition, subject
went for a walk outdoors on Oldenburg university campus. Each recording session
lasted approximately 11 min and order was balanced out across subjects. In this
auditory oddball task subjects had to silently count the occurrence of a rare target
tone, which generates a P3 ERP response (e.g., Debener et al. 2005). We asked two
questions: First, is it possible to measure the trial-averaged P3 response while
subjects walk outdoors. Second, is it possible to reliably identify the P3 even on a
single-trial level? Our results revealed clear and reliable P3 ERPs for both indoor
seated and outdoor walking conditions. Interestingly, the outdoor walking P3 ERP
was approximately 30 % smaller in amplitude. Further analyses led us to conclude
that this was mainly due to a larger degree of cognitive distraction in the outdoor
condition. This strongly suggests that we can monitor brain activity meaningfully,
as the degree of cognitive distraction on the primary task (auditory selective
attention) could be quantiﬁed. Moreover, using a single-trial analysis approach with
ICA as preprocessing and linear discriminant analysis for the statistical evaluation,
we also found that the P3 response to auditory target events can be reliably iden-
tiﬁed above chance level, both in indoor and outdoor conditions. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study demonstrating a single-trial EEG analysis of
cognitive potentials during a freely moving outdoor recording condition. In our
most recent protocols, we made use of more advanced wireless ampliﬁer technol-
ogy (www.braintrain.com) and developed screen-printed electrodes, which can be
worn around the ear (Fig. 19.6). We found that unobtrusive, printed electrodes can
give rise to good EEG signal quality (Debener et al. 2015).
    The P3 response to single trials is at present probably the most popular brain
signal for steering a BCI. Thus we believe that our mobile EEG studies and the new
sensor technology represent a step forward toward truly mobile BCI systems.
Current technology features smartphone operates signal acquisition (Stopczynski
et al. 2013) and stimulus presentation already (Mathôt et al. 2012). The next steps
will be to close the BCI loop, which requires adding real-time signal processing on
smartphone and the delivery of meaningful feedback signals to the user (imagine an
alertness monitoring device analyzing brain signals for patterns of sleepiness and
sending warning signals when necessary). In any case, the combination of a
miniaturized, wireless head-mounted EEG ampliﬁer with printed electrodes and
smartphone-based signal recording may be a substantial step forward toward a fully
mobile BCI system. Future generations of EEG ampliﬁers could be made even
smaller and ﬁt behind the ear, like current hearing aids. The remaining challenge
19   Electroencephalography: Current Trends and Future Directions                             371




Fig. 19.6 The cEEGrid, a flex-printed array of miniature EEG electrodes placed with an adhesive
around the ear. This approach enables, unobtrusive, near invisible EEG acquisition (Debener et al.
2015)


then is to close the BCI loop by showing that (passive) BCI applications are feasible
in daily-life situations.



19.7     Conclusion

Cognitive neuroscience research relies heavily on noninvasive procedures for the
study of the neural correlates of human cognition and behavior. Unfortunately all
currently established procedures require that human volunteers remain still during
recording and minimize (head and body) movement. Accordingly, the risk of a
cognitive neuroscience relying on “ﬁnger movements” (Baumeister et al. 2007) as
representing natural behavior is substantial. How well laboratory results can be
generalized to real-life scenarios should therefore be questioned. We propose here
that recent advances in technology, such as the advent of powerful smartphones,
will allow us to overcome this limitation and explicitly test for the ecological
validity of neurocognitive and neuroeconomic theories. We argue that laboratory
cognitive neuroscience needs to be complemented with a new era, ﬁeld cognitive
neuroscience. We envision that this exciting new possibility will also help bridging
the gap between fundamental and applied cognitive neuroscience approaches.
372                                                                             S. Debener et al.

    The most promising candidate for achieving this goal is the EEG technology. It
is beyond doubt that EEG signals provide rich information about cognitive func-
tions, from temporal fluctuations of attention to implicit influences on
decision-making processes and prediction of future behavior. Well-established
procedures such as cognitive ERPs can now be detected on a single-trial level
thanks to advanced signal processing (Blankertz et al. 2011), enabling the near
real-time access to brain correlates of cognition. EEG technology is well estab-
lished, noninvasive and relatively low priced. As our work shows that next gen-
eration EEG systems offer the unique potential of being near invisible (Debener
et al. 2015) and tolerating daily-life actions (Debener et al. 2012). Future EEG
technology could be made very small and user friendly. We envision transparent
EEG systems. Note that the concept of transparency is bidirectional. It refers to a
user forgetting about wearing the technology (like many forgetting they wear
glasses) and individuals in the environment not noticing someone to use EEG
technology. In addition to these practical requirements, a key to success will be
advanced signal processing. Spatial ﬁlter procedures such as ICA help de-noising
the data to some extent, but more powerful, robust and adaptive procedures are
needed to reliably decode brain signals, achieve high information transfer, and
quickly adapt to different recording situations. We believe that the small, wireless
and smartphone-based BCI technology holds great potential for basic research in
cognitive neuroscience, clinical applications and may constitute the basis for future
applied assistive technologies.



References

Baumeister RF, Vohs KD, Funder DC (2007) Psychology as the science of self-reports and ﬁnger
   movements. Whatever happened to actual behavior? Perspect Psychol Sci 2(4):397–403
Blankertz B, Lemm S, Treder M, Haufe S, Müller KR (2011) Single-trial analysis and
   classiﬁcation of ERP components–a tutorial. Neuroimage 56(2):814–825
De Vos M, Thorne JD, Yovel G, Debener S (2012) Let’s face it, from trial to trial: comparing
   procedures for N170 single-trial estimation. Neuroimage 63(3):1196–1202
Debener S, Beauducel A, Nessler D, Brocke B, Heilemann H, Kayser J (2000) Is resting anterior
   EEG alpha asymmetry a trait marker for depression? Findings for healthy adults and clinically
   depressed patients. Neuropsychobiology 41(1):31–37
Debener S, Makeig S, Delorme A, Engel AK (2005) What is novel in the novelty oddball
   paradigm? Functional signiﬁcance of the novelty P3 event-related potential as revealed by
   independent component analysis. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 22(3):309–321
Debener S, Minow F, Emkes R, Gandras K, de Vos M (2012) How about taking a low-cost, small,
   and wireless EEG for a walk? Psychophysiology 49(11):1449–1453
Debener S, Emkes R, De Vos M, Bleichner M (2015) Unobtrusive ambulatory EEG using a
   smartphone and flexible printed electrodes around the ear. Sci Rep 5:16743. doi:10.1038/
   srep16743
Gross J, Schmitz F, Schnitzler I, Kessler K, Shapiro K, Hommel B, Schnitzler A (2004)
   Modulation of long-range neural synchrony reflects temporal limitations of visual attention in
   humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101(35):13050–13055
19   Electroencephalography: Current Trends and Future Directions                        373

Hewig J, Kretschmer N, Trippe RH, Hecht H, Coles MG, Holroyd CB, Miltner WH (2011) Why
   humans deviate from rational choice. Psychophysiology 48(4):507–514
Klimesch W (2012) Alpha-band oscillations, attention, and controlled access to stored
   information. Trends Cogn Sci 16(12):606–617
Kranczioch C, Debener S, Maye A, Engel AK (2007) Temporal dynamics of access to
   consciousness in the attentional blink. Neuroimage 37(3):947–955
Makeig S, Debener S, Onton J, Delorme A (2004) Mining event-related brain dynamics. Trends
   Cogn Sci 8(5):204–210
Mathôt S, Schreij D, Theeuwes J (2012) OpenSesame: an open-source, graphical experiment
   builder for the social sciences. Behav Res Methods 44(2):314–324. doi:10.3758/s13428-011-
   0168-7
Pessoa L (2008) On the relationship between emotion and cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:148–158
Polich J (2007) Updating P300: an integrative theory of P3a and P3b. Clin Neurophysiol 118
   (10):2128–2148
Stopczynski A, Stahlhut C, Larsen JE, Petersen MK, Hansen LK (2013) The Smartphone Brain
   Scanner: A Mobile Real-time Neuroimaging System arXiv e-print 2013:
   2013arXiv1304.0357S
Zander T, Kothe C (2011) Towards passive brain–computer interfaces: applying brain–computer
   interface technology to human–machine systems in general. J Neural Eng 8 025005 (5 pp)
