Chapter 2
Game Theory in Neuroeconomics

Claudia Civai and Daniel R. Hawes

                               (Spade): If you kill me, how are you going to get the bird? If I
                               know you can’t afford to kill me till you have it, how are you
                               going to scare me into giving it to you?
                               (Gutman): “Well, sir, there are other means of persuasion
                               besides killing and threatening to kill.”
                               (Spade): “Sure, but they’re not much good unless the threat of
                               death is behind them to hold the victim down. See what I mean?
                               If you try something I don’t like I won’t stand for it. I’ll make it
                               a matter of your having to call it off or kill me, knowing you
                               can’t afford to kill me.”
                               (Gutman): “I see what you mean. That is an attitude, sir, that
                               calls for the most delicate judgment on both sides, because, as
                               you know, sir, men are likely to forget in the heat of action where
                               their best interests lie and let their emotions carry them away.”
                                                                            —The Maltese Falcon


Abstract Game theory and contemporary decision theory provide the mathemat-
ical foundation of economics. Neuroeconomics, which principally concerns itself
with the integrative study of brain, mind and behavior, builds on this mathematical
foundation while also drawing heavily from the repository of experimental para-
digms that have grown out of economic game theory and behavioral economics.
Game theory is central to neuroeconomics primarily because it constitutes a formal
mathematical framework with which to bridge insights occurring at different levels
of neuroeconomic analysis. In particular, game theoretic principles can be used to
express neuroscientiﬁc ideas about the brain, psychological concepts regarding the
human mind, and economic predictions of human behavior, thereby making these
different ideas more rigorously relatable to each other. In this chapter we provide a
nontechnical introduction to game theory and its relation to neuroeconomics. It has
been written as an overview of the basic concepts most likely to be encountered in
neuroeconomic research. The ﬁrst part of the chapter introduces the reader to the


C. Civai (&)
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University,
Nijmegen, Netherlands
e-mail: c.civai@donders.ru.nl
D.R. Hawes
Institute of Food and Resource Economics, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Deutschland
e-mail: daniel.hawes@uni-bonn.de

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                                         13
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_2
14                                                             C. Civai and D.R. Hawes

basic concepts and philosophical underpinnings of game theory in relation to
neuroeconomics. The second part is an introduction and discussion of common
games, including the games featured in the other chapters of this book.



2.1    Introduction

In the well-known movie “The Maltese Falcon” (Wallis and Huston 1941)
Humphrey Bogart’s character (Spade) attempts to ‘call bluff’ on his adversaries’
threats. He does so by what amounts to game theoretic reasoning—namely by
putting into relation each man’s objectives, their individual beliefs, and their shared
knowledge of the situation—and deduces that the adversary, Gutman, cannot
possibly afford to kill him for risk of never learning the Maletese Falcon’s
whereabouts. Gutman of course concludes with the cautioning appeal to keep in
mind the potential for internal conflict between reason and emotion, and how
rational objectives may become lost in its wake.
    Neuroeconomics relates to this scene as an extension of economic analysis,
traditionally preoccupied with the prediction of behavior, into the realm of the brain
and the mind (the internal processes that give rise to behavior). Neuroeconomics is
inherently interdisciplinary, but draws most heavily from economic decision theory,
psychology, and neuroscience. Game theory, as the mathematical foundation of
economic decision theory, is central to neuroeconomics, because of the relatively
new disciplines’ intellectual history (i.e., because neuroeconomics lends from
economics, and economics uses game theory), but also because it has the potential
to function as the mathematical foundation upon which neuroeconomic theory
might be developed further into a discipline of its own right (i.e., the properties of
game theory make it an attractive candidate for trying to develop an integrative
theory of brain, mind, and behavior).
    The purpose of this chapter is to introduce researchers coming to neuroeco-
nomics from ﬁelds other than economics to the basic principles and ideas that
feature in game theory. While outlining the basic tenets of game theory, we also
attempt to draw philosophical and historical connections that link game theory to
the goals and of neuroeconomics.
    Game theory, generally speaking, is the study of mathematical objects whose
states and properties interact. At the level of neuroscience, game theory could be
used to describe the interactive or competitive ﬁring of neuron populations. At the
level of psychology, game theory could be used to describe the emergence of
mental states in relation to interacting cognitive processes, or the emergence of
behavior from competing mental states. Traditionally, in economic analysis, game
theory has been used to predict the behavior of multiple, interacting, intelligent
decision-makers. Hence, game theory can be viewed as a general tool for the logical
consideration of strategic and nonstrategic relationships at multiple levels of
analysis, as long as the concepts being used have representation as numbers and the
relationships are closed or bounded correspondences. Economic examples, which
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                   15

represent the mathematical objects of game theory as the behaviors of intelligent
decision-makers, are generally intuitive, instructive, and easy to develop, wherefore
this consideration forms the common approach in most textbooks, and also in this
chapter. However, we hope to draw the reader’s attention to the fact that game
theory itself, being a mathematical language and logic system, has far wider
application and that fundamental issues regarding measurement of utility through
games, and how this relates to theory development in physics, remains outside of
the scope of this chapter. The classic book Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior (in particular chapter 1) remains invaluable on this account
(von Neumann and morgenstern 1944).
    As neuroeconomics becomes more consolidated as a stand-alone discipline, we
expect the importance of game theory for neuroeconomics to increase, and have
reasoned hope for the potential of game theory to function as a bridge across
different levels of brain–mind behavior analysis. This latter part, concerning the
future of game theory in neuroeconomics, remains personal conjecture and is only
hinted at or mentioned in passing throughout this chapter; however, it informs much
of our thinking in choosing which elements of game theory to focus on for this
introduction, and how to present the basic principles. It makes sense, therefore, to
provide a quick note on our deﬁnition of neuroeconomics.
    Neuroeconomics as an interdisciplinary scientiﬁc approach aimed at discovering/
creating a uniﬁed theory of human behavior and cognition, via integrative study of
mind, brain, and behavior relationships.
    Practically, the neuroeconomic enterprise combines concepts, methods, and
technological tools from neuroscience (see Chap. 8) with formal analysis of
decision-making, typically drawing heavily from economic decision theory as well
as psychology.
    As a procedure, neuroeconomics aims to experimentally link the neurophysio-
logical and behavioral constituents of the decision process to each other, and then
conceptually relate these links to psychological concepts of mental activity via
formal models, typically in the tradition of economics and decision theory.
    With this deﬁnition of neuroeconomics in place, the formal models developed
within game theory enable mathematically precise descriptions of the decision
process, which in turn allow prediction, speciﬁcation, and comparison of neural
activity presumed to underlie decision-making. Additionally, experimental para-
digms developed within experimental game theory (i.e., games) are prominently
featured in neuroeconomics research, where the goal is often to differentiate
between competing economic models of the decision process (Glimcher and
Rustichini 2004; Rustichini 2005; Camerer et al. 2005), or to investigate competing
descriptions of mental processes thought to underlie a particular kind of decision or
behavioral phenomenon.
    Because it is a common source of confusion, the ﬁnal note of this introduction
points to game theories’ conceptual birth in expected utility theory and connection
to the economic idea of rational decision-making (Mongin 1997): As will be
discussed later, strict economic rationality is not necessary for game theoretic
inquiry, and many game theoretic applications in neuroeconomics are explicitly
16                                                                C. Civai and D.R. Hawes

geared toward understanding decision processes for which individuals systemati-
cally violate the predictions of rational choice theory and expected utility maxi-
mization in one way or another. Furthermore, the interested reader is encouraged to
consider differences in the economic meaning of rationality compared to the
noneconomic colloquial meaning of rationality, for example, by consulting
Anthony Downs’ book “An economic theory of democracy.” (1957).
   The remainder of this chapter elaborates on the basic elements described in the
above introduction. It concludes with a compendium of games most commonly
encountered in the neuroeconomics literature, including a digest of each of the
games featured in this book.



2.1.1     Basic Terms and Deﬁnitions

This chapter is a nontechnical introduction to game theory1; however, the main
strengths of game theory derive precisely from its mathematical exactness and
rigorous deﬁnitions, wherefore some minimal recourse to formal terminology
appears unavoidable. We therefore begin by introducing some basic terms and
deﬁnitions that will appear throughout this chapter, ﬁrst among which are those that
describe an economic Game.
    A formal game consists of three basic objects:
1. Players are independent decision-makers, mathematically represented in terms
   of their utility functions; i.e., by a function that assigns ordinal preference rank
   to all possible outcomes of the game.
2. Actions are full descriptions of the actions each player may take during the
   game. These action descriptions may differentiate between different points of
   time, situational circumstances or—more generally—stages of the game.
3. Payoffs are full descriptions of the outcome (and consequently utility) experi-
   enced by each player for each possible combination of actions that may occur
   during the game.
     Additional objects used to describe games may include
(a) Information Sets are full descriptions of the information available to each
    player in each stage of the game. Information pertains to the actions available
    to the players, their utility functions, as well as the current history and possible
    trajectory of stages in the game.
(b) Environments are nonstrategic mechanisms capable of influencing any of the
    above elements of the game, typically in a probabilistic manner. For example,
    the environment may impose random restrictions on what type of actions are



1
 Comprehensive, technical treatments can be found for example in Myerson (2013) and Osborne
and Rubinstein (1994).
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                                 17

    available at a given stage of the game, or may influence the payoff distribution
    for game outcomes.
(c) Strategies are probability distributions over all actions for each stage of the
    game. Strategies are full descriptions of what action should be chosen for each
    possible stage of the game. A strategy can describe a speciﬁc action for each
    stage, in which case it is referred to as a pure strategy. Alternatively, a strategy
    may assign probabilities to multiple actions for any given stage, in which case
    it is referred to as a mixed strategy. Importantly, a strategy speciﬁes an action
    or mixture of actions for every possible contingency of the game.
   In nondegenerate2 games, the actions taken by all of the players collectively
interact to determine the payoffs and consequent utilities experienced by each
player individually. This gives rise to the strategic considerations, which lie at the
heart of game theory.
   The major objectives of game theoretic inquiry may therefore be described as the
aim to:
1. Formulate applicable game descriptions for real-world decision problems;
2. Develop and apply solution concepts to positively describe or normatively
   prescribe the strategic reasoning processes that are used by players in game
   situations;
3. Develop, reﬁne, and apply equilibrium concepts that describe stable patterns of
   strategic reasoning and behavior between the players.
4. Identify the existence and properties of such equilibriums.
   The above elements of a game are described and presented in either a so-called
Extensive Form, or as a so-called Normal Form representation.
   Extensive Form representations are depictions of games by the way of math-
ematical graphs. In these graphs the nodes represent the different stages of the
game, and the edges (the lines connecting the nodes) represent the actions that lead
to each stage. Extensive Form games specify exactly the possible sequence of
actions and their resulting outcomes for a game, and are therefore particularly useful
when the order in which players choose during the game is relevant to its outcome.
An annotated example is given in Fig. 2.1a.
   Normal Form representations of games are more commonly used for games in
which the order of moves is irrelevant, as is the case in so-called one-shot,
simultaneous move games, i.e., games in which the resulting outcome is determined
by considering all chosen actions simultaneously.3 Normal Form games are pre-
sented as matrices, with each cell of the game matrix containing a vector of ﬁnal




2
 That is, games that can not be reduced to sets of mere one-player decision problems in which the
actions of other players are irrelevant to each players utility.
3
 Think for example of a secret ballot election, in which each player enters a vote into a computer,
and the computer then decides the election outcome by considering all such submitted votes.
18                                                                         C. Civai and D.R. Hawes




Fig. 2.1 a Generic Prisoner’s Dilemma (normal form). Rows indicate actions available to Player 1
({C, D}) and columns indicate actions of Player 2 ({c, d}). Cells list the utility of each
combination of actions. Utility to player 1 is listed ﬁrst in black font. Utility to player 2 is listed
second and using red font. We have highlighted the Nash equilibrium outcome in the bottom right
cell, corresponding to choice of D, and d by the two players. b Generic Prisoner’s Dilemma
(extensive form). For illustration we also show a strategic form version of the PD. Nodes indicate
players’ “turns” in the game. Player 1 moves ﬁrst at the initial node of the game (open circle).
Edges indicate actions available at each node ({C, D} for player 1, {c, d} for player 2). Dotted
lines connecting nodes indicate information sets. Two nodes belonging to the same information set
cannot be distinguished by the player. Hence, player 2—at the time of her move—does not know
whether player one has chosen C or D. Final nodes contain the utility to each player. We have
again highlighted the Nash equilibrium for this game. Although the extensive form and strategic
form of the prisoner’s dilemma are equivalent, not all extensive form games can be transformed
into an equivalent normal form game

payoffs for each possible combination of actions (for all players) that may occur in
the game.4 An annotated example is given in Fig. 2.1b.
   The well-known Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD) provides a useful example for
demonstrating the concepts introduced thus far, and both Fig. 2.1a, b are depictions
of this game. The PD is a one-shot, simultaneous move game between two players.
Each player in the game has two actions available to him or her. We call these


4
 Note that all extensive form games can be transformed into normal form, but not all normal form
games may have an equivalent extensive form; hence there also exists a qualitative difference.
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                             19

actions {C} and {D} for player 1, and {c, d} for player 2. The intuition behind the
PD was originally suggested by Flood and Dreshner in the 1950s, later formalized
by Albert Tucker (Poundstone 1992), and goes as follows: two criminals are being
questioned by the police; both are facing the choice of whether to defect ({D} or
{d}) on their partner in crime by providing incriminating evidence to the police, or
to remain cooperative ({C}, or {c}) by not revealing any information during
interrogation. The possible actions to each player are therefore to cooperate or to
defect ({C, D}) for player one, as well as for player two ({c, d}). In the case that
both prisoners remain cooperative ({C, c}) the police lacks evidence for a full
conviction and both criminals go to jail for only a short period of time; in the case
that both prisoners defect on each other ({D, d}), they both land in jail. The
interesting scenario that creates the dilemma results from what happens when one
player defects while the other remains cooperative ({C, d} or {D, c}): in this case
the defector goes free entirely, while the defected upon goes to jail for an extended
period of time. The possible outcomes to the game are therefore ({C, c},{C, d},{D,
c}, and {D, d}), and the payoffs are given by the utility experienced for the differing
amounts of jail time (in the example we let these utilities be 0, 2, 4, and 6).
Assuming that both players prefer less time in jail to more time in jail (i.e., they
prefer higher utility values among the outcomes in Fig. 2.1b), each player in this
game fares best when he or she is the only one to defect, and worst if he or she is the
only one to cooperate. Additionally, each player also prefers the outcome of mutual
cooperation to the outcome of mutual defection.
    Standard game theoretic reasoning predicts an equilibrium outcome for the
Prisoner’s Dilemma in which both players defect. This is because the outcome from
meeting cooperation by the other player with defection (i.e., the best outcome) is
preferred to the outcome from mutual cooperation; at the same time meeting
defection by the other player with defection also is preferred to being the only
cooperator in the game (i.e., the worst outcome). Hence defecting is a best response
to whatever the other player does, and thus mutual defection becomes an equilib-
rium response in the game.
    The terms best response and equilibrium deserve special note in this context, as
they relate to a very particular solution concept in game theory, known as Nash
Equilibrium, Nash Solution Concept, or Best Response Equilibrium. This concept
deﬁnes equilibriums for ﬁnite noncooperative5 games as instances in which each
player is playing a best response given the strategies being played by all other
players in the game. A strategy, in turn, is deﬁned as a best response if and only if
its expected utility is at least as large as that obtained from any other possible
strategy the player may play.6 Hence, in Nash equilibrium no player has any


5
 Game theory divides games into cooperative and noncooperative types. All of the games in this
chapter are noncooperative games, and we therefore do not spend a lot of time discussing the
difference between the two classes of games, which can be found elsewhere (e.g., Myerson 2013).
6
 The concept is named after John Nash, among other contributions, for his work on such equi-
librium points in n-person games (Nash 1950).
20                                                                      C. Civai and D.R. Hawes

incentive to unilaterally change his or her chosen response in the game, since it is a
best response to what all other players are choosing at the time.
    Returning to the PD, it is also worth noting that defection is a so-called dominant
strategy for both players. This means that defecting is optimal regardless of what
other players choose. Not all games have dominant strategies, however, and they
are not necessary for Nash equilibrium. We will see examples of such games later in
this chapter.



2.1.2     Rationality and Expected Utility Maximization

Standard game theoretic solutions to decision situations such as the Prisoner’s
Dilemma prescribe the optimal behavior of a rational decision-maker with unlim-
ited analytical resources under the goal of utility maximization. However, human
analytical resources are necessarily limited, introspection may be noisy, preferences
may be uncertain, and any host of context-dependent affective responses may
contribute to the decision process. Furthermore, decision-makers may rely on
heuristics and intuitions (i.e., emotions or gut feelings) in order to reduce cognitive
costs (Simon 1972, 1990; Tversky and Kahneman 1974; Damasio et al. 1991;
Gigerenzer 2004; Glöckner and Betsch 2008; Glöckner and Hochman 2011). Such
psychological features and behavioral strategies may be behaviorally indistin-
guishable from rational choice behavior in some contexts, but lead to systematic
biases and inconsistencies in others. Investigation of such behavior has a long
history in economics (e.g., Allais 1979; Ellsberg 1961; Loomes and Sugden 1982),
and has given rise to extensions (e.g. Friedman and Savage 1948; Aumann 1997),
and modiﬁcations such as bounded rationality (Selten 1990) and Prospect Theory
(Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Consequently, economic theory has produced a
wealth of models and theory reﬁnements that individually address instances in
which standard economic model possess poor predictive validity.7 To the extent
that none of these competing models and reﬁnements approaches the economic
ideal of a uniﬁed theory of human behavior, neuroeconomics is seen as a disci-
plined approach to answering unresolved questions in economics: for example by
juxtaposing competing models [e.g., by investigating whether a uniﬁed system, or
separate systems compute the value for present versus future rewards (McClure
et al. 2004)]; by investigating the rules that govern for whom, when and under
which circumstances one model, or model speciﬁcation, is more applicable than
another [e.g., by generating insights into the neurobiology underlying different
types of decision-makers (Coricelli and Nagel 2009; Bhatt et al. 2010), and learned
strategic behaviors (Hawes et al. 2012)]; or by helping to establish the precise role


7
 Note that Economic Theory is primarily concerned with generalizable predictive validity, and that
content validity regarding the process via which a decision is actually made, is at best secondary,
but probably irrelevant, to as-if modeling in economics.
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                                 21

of affect and social sensitivity during decision-making (Van’t Wout et al. 2006;
Civai et al. 2010).
    Despite being strongly linked to expected utility theory as formulated by Von
Neuman and Morgenstern, game theory features prominently in the neuroeconomic
endeavors described above, as game theory itself allows for any number of pos-
tulatory models of players behaviors, and the details of the behavioral models used
to describe the decision-maker may differ across studies. For example, players may
be thought to be entirely rational8 and self-interested, while updating their beliefs in
complete accordance to Bayes rule, eventually converging on Nash equilibrium
behavior (Kalai and Lehrer 1993). Alternatively, players may be modeled as pos-
sessing bounded rationality, may be compassionate to others, or may update beliefs
with respect to subjective probability representations (Rabin 1993; Camerer et al.
2011). Similarly, different deﬁnitions for what comprises equilibrium behavior
(i.e., different types of equilibriums) exist in game theory, therefore extending and
generalizing the concept of Nash equilibrium (e.g., Perfect Nash Equilibrium in
dynamic games, Correlated Equilibrium, Trembling Hand Equilibrium, etc.).
    Despite this flexibility of game theory, rational choice and expected utility
theory remain the principal departing points for most neuroeconomic investigations
of behavior, where, at the very least, expected utility theory functions as a
benchmark for comparison for any neuroeconomic investigation of alternative
models. Because of this, and because the games discussed in this book are con-
ceptually founded in the expected utility framework, our concluding compendium
considers each game with respect to expected utility maximization and Nash
equilibrium. Before explaining precisely what these terms mean, we want to add
brief mention of some alternative frameworks that feature prominently in neuroe-
conomics, but are only peripherally considered in the compendium of games that
concludes this chapter.


2.1.3     Alternatives to Expected Utility Theory

Insights developed under the frameworks of Bounded Rationality, Prospect Theory,
and under the research agenda often labeled Behavioral Economics, are particularly
relevant to the research domains we have mentioned above, and have been con-
sequentially influential in neuroeconomics, and neuroeconomic research on games:
Bounded Rationality as introduced originally by Simon (1955) and Gigerenzer and
Selten (2002) takes into account cognitive limitations of the decision-maker. The
theory posits that human beings are limited in their capacity for solving complex
problems and for processing large quantities of information, wherefore useful game


8
 Rationality in the economic sense means that the decision-maker has preferences that are com-
plete and transitive, or acyclical. This means that the decision-maker can rank all alternatives
according to an ordinal metric, and that within this ranking whenever A is preferred to B, and B is
preferred to C, then A will be preferred to C also.
22                                                             C. Civai and D.R. Hawes

theoretic descriptions must include explicit consideration of how players decide
upon which information to consider, which information to ignore, and when to rely
on simpler heuristics for decision-making. Such questions of which types of
information are attended to during the decision process and how integration occurs
for information derived from multiple sources, or pertaining to multiple dimensions
of the decision problem, lay at the core of neuroeconomic research. Additionally,
researchers have recently begun to investigate stable individual differences in how
individuals use information during decision-making (e.g., Burks et al. 2009;
Engelmann and Tamir 2009).
    Prospect Theory, developed by psychologists Kahneman and Tversky (1979) in
the context of risky decision-making is similarly central to neuroeconomics. In a
nutshell, Prospect Theory argues that utilities of losses are computed differently
from utilities derived from gains, and that objective probabilities undergo a sub-
jective weighting during the decision process. The precise nature in which value
and probability are represented in the brain continues to be a core theme of neu-
roeconomic research. Various psychological phenomena have been explained
within Prospect Theory, such as the framing effect, which considers differences in
choice behavior depending on whether the same problem is described in terms of
gains or losses, and the endowment effect, also known as the fact that people ascribe
more value to things that they own. These cognitive biases have also been subject
of neuroeconomics investigation (De Martino et al. 2006; Knutson et al. 2008).
    Finally, a large body of recent work spearheaded by researchers such as Colin
Camerer, George Loewenstein, Matthew Rabin, Ernst Fehr, and Simon Gächter has
tried to go even further than Prospect Theory in its attempt to import insights from
Psychology into economic thinking. This research has drawn strongly from insights
in Personality Psychology and Social Psychology to investigate the way in which
humans respond to incentives and formulate beliefs during complex
decision-making, especially social interactions. Influential work in this ﬁeld has
tried to explain the role of nonreciprocal altruism, perceptions of fairness, inequity
aversion, and competitive motives during the choice process, and has thus provided
novel insights to neuroeconomics regarding the investigation of a person’s utility
(e.g., Rabin 1993; Fehr and Schmidt 1999; Camerer 2003). Work in this ﬁeld also
investigates social phenomena such as the occurrence of economic bubbles in
bidding competitions, or how beliefs about other player’s mental abilities influence
the level of reasoning and information processing that is applied to game situations.
As evidenced by other chapters of this book, economic games, such as multi-person
auctions or the Ultimatum Game (see Sect. 2.2.6 of this chapter), feature promi-
nently in this type of research, and are also used as tools in neuroeconomic
investigations of the role of social context and cognitive skills during
decision-making.
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                    23


2.2     Compendium of Common Games

The main body of this book chapter has introduced game theory as a powerful and
flexible, philosophically rich framework for neuroeconomic research on
decision-making. We have purposefully emphasized the distinction between game
theory and the economic (as-if) notion of rationality, since we have found that
conflation of these two concepts can confuse non-Game Theorists about the
applicability of game theory to the as-is investigation of human behavior. Hoping to
have thus preempted such confusion, we will however continue our discussion of
games with reference to the common framework within which players are thought
to be rational expected utility maximizers in the Von Neumann and Morgenstern
sense. This means, ﬁrst, that players consider a probability distribution of possible
outcomes and their attendant payoffs. Second, the expected utility of an action is
then determined by integrating the utility of the payoffs with respect to these
probabilities. In the discrete case, this means that the utility from each possible
outcome following an action is weighted by the probability assigned to it by the
action. Finally, the sum of these weighted utilities then forms the players expected
utility. Players are expected utility maximizers if they compute expected utilities
in this way and always choose the action that results in the highest expected utility.
Players are considered rational in the economic sense if they have complete, and
transitive, preferences.
    Furthermore, unless stated explicitly, we will consider only Nash equilibrium
solutions to the games we discuss. Nash equilibriums are deﬁned for ﬁnite non-
cooperative games, and constitute instances in which each player is playing a best
response given the strategies being played by all other players. A strategy, in turn,
is a best response if, and only if, its expected utility is at least as large as that
obtained from any other possible strategy.



2.2.1    Matching Pennies

Intuition: The Matching Pennies game features two players with identical choice
between two actions. One player receives a preferred outcome whenever both
players match on their actions, and incurs a less preferred outcome whenever they
mismatch on their actions. The other player incurs the preferred outcome as a result
of the mismatch, but incurs the less preferred outcome from a match. In the notation
of the example (Fig. 2.2), matches occur when player 1 chooses U and player 2
chooses L, or when player 1 chooses D and player 2 chooses R. All other com-
binations produce mismatches.
   In the matching pennies game, the actions that lead to a preferred outcome for
one player, lead to the less preferred outcome for the other. This property is typi-
cally referred to as zero-sum (since the properties of the game remain under payoffs
24                                                                     C. Civai and D.R. Hawes




Fig. 2.2 Generic Matching Pennies. Player 1 chooses between U(p) and D(own), while player 2
chooses between l(eft) and r(ight). Player 1 wins when actions match ({U, l} and {D, r}), player 2
wins under the alternative outcomes


that add up to zero for each outcome), and the Matching Pennies game is often cited
as a quintessential example of such games.
    Equilibrium Solutions: The Matching Pennies game is a two-action version of
popular games such as “Rock, Paper, Scissors”, “Morra”, or “oddsandevens”. Like
with these common games a player’s most promising strategy in Matching Pennies
is to remain unpredictable to the opposing player while also exploiting any pre-
dictability they may observe with their opponent. More concrete, the Matching
Pennies game does not have best response equilibrium in pure strategies. Using the
notation of the normal form example in Fig. 2.2, whenever player 1 plays a strategy
in which U is played with a probability p > 0.5 player 2 may improve his payoffs
by always choosing R. And whenever player 1 chooses U with probability p < 0.5,
player 2 can exploit this by always choosing L. The same is true in likeness for
player 2 choosing either L or R with probability different from p = (1 − q) = 0.5.
Crucially, whenever player 1 randomizes between U and D with equal probability
(p = q = 0.5) player 2 is entirely indifferent between any probability over R and L.
Likewise player 1 has equal expected utility from U and D whenever player 2
chooses L and R with equal probability p = q = 0.5. Consequently, the only Nash
equilibrium exists in mixed strategies for both players randomizing between their
available actions with probability p = q = 0.5.
    Insights: According to Nash equilibrium a player playing multiple games of
Matching Pennies against a single opponent should try to randomize his or her
actions, while also being sensitive to whether the opponent’s choices follow any
sort of predictable pattern. Two types of predictability are of interest here, the ﬁrst
being predictability based on a perceived pattern (e.g., every ﬁfth choice of player 1
is U), the second being predictability based on random processes9 with probabilities
that deviate from p = q = 0.5. Exactly how subjects identify patterns or keep track


9
Independent and identically distributed.
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                      25

of shifting probabilities during repeated decisions remains an active question for
neuroeconomic inquiry. Interestingly, recent research in monkeys has shown that
simple reinforcement learning may be capable of explaining optimal matching
pennies behaviors in equilibrium (Lee et al. 2004). More generally, reinforcement
learning seems to underlie preference learning and decision in various social and
nonsocial contexts, suggesting particular relevance of these models to neuroeco-
nomics (Frank and Claus 2006; Seo and Lee 2012).


2.2.2    Prisoner’s Dilemma

Extensive and normal form descriptions, as well as the intuition and equilibrium
solution to the prisoner’s dilemma have been provided in the main text and in
Fig. 2.1a, b.
   Insights: Few games have been as extensively studied as the Prisoner’s
Dilemma, yet substantial disagreement remains regarding whether or not humans
meaningfully deviate from rational behavior in experimental and real world PD
scenarios. Certain seems that in experiments and in real life, human
decision-makers cooperate (and avoid the Prisoner’s Dilemma outcome) more often
than can be explained by mere noisy decision making10 (Cooper et al. 1996).
   Unclear is what kind of cognitive architecture promotes such cooperative
behavior. Given the relative simplicity of the Prisoner’s Dilemma, explanations that
impose cognitive constraints on the decision-makers’ ability to identify the
expected utility maximizing solution would appear spurious. Instead, human
decision-makers appear to systematically compute larger expected utility from
cooperative behavior given certain parameterizations of the game.
   One interpretation that has been offered for this is that human subjects view even
one-shot prisoner’s dilemma games as potentially repeated interactions. Once the
probability of repeated interaction is increased beyond zero, the space of Nash
equilibrium solutions is capable of sustaining any given rate of cooperative
behavior, and cooperation becomes explainable within the common framework.
This explanation possesses considerable face validity, in the light of experiments
involving actual repeated games and the possibility of building reputations, which
support the basic idea that humans are responsive to the prospect of repeated
interaction and reputation building. The same explanation can be made differently
by recourse to decision-makers placing some positive probability of being observed
by at least one person with whom they may interact in the future. This makes the
idea conceptually very difﬁcult to repudiate (but see Cooper et al. 1996). However,
the important question of whether this kind of behavior is supported by a cognitive
architecture that supports truly altruistic behavior remains of interest to neuroeco-
nomics. Special interest has been given to one particular way in which such an


10
  Economic models exist, which relate such behavior to rational choice under uncertainty
(e.g., Neyman 1985; Kreps et al. 1982).
26                                                                        C. Civai and D.R. Hawes

architecture may be expressed, namely in the form of other regarding preferences,
or social utility. The importance of other regarding preferences lies in the obser-
vation that an ostensible prisoner’s dilemma may not always possess the conceptual
incentive structure of a prisoner’s dilemma to the actual decision-maker. Since one
of the avenues for understanding decision-making rests obviously in understanding
how incentives and feasibility constraints are represented in the mind of the
decision-maker, cooperative behavior (in prisoner’s dilemma games and beyond)
remains an active area of research in this respect (Fehr and Camerer 2007; Sanfey
2007; Houser and McCabe 2009).



2.2.3      Public Goods Game (with and Without Costly
           Punishment)

Intuition: The Public Goods Game is an n-person Prisoner’s Dilemma (with n > 2) in
which each person faces the choice between contributing to a shared community pool,
or free riding on the contributions of others. Contributions to the pool are multiplied
and shared equally among all group members, however, the return to the individual
is always smaller than the contribution, so that contributing adds to the overall welfare
of the group, but subtracts from the welfare of the individual (Fig. 2.3). Like the




Fig. 2.3 Generic Public Goods Game. Solid triangles indicate a player’s choice of a continuous
value x within some interval. Each player moves without knowledge of what value has been
chosen by the other players in game (illustrated by the dotted lines along the intervals). For an
arbitrary number N players, payoffs are determined as a function of some initial endowment E and
a multiplier κ in [1, N). Each player receives exactly their initial endowment less their donation to
the public good, x, as well as their share of the κ-multiplied sum of total contributions by the group
as a whole
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                    27

Prisoner’s Dilemma, the Public Goods Game is a paragon for games that investigate
the emergence of collaboration and altruistic behavior. The game is often played with
an added option of costly punishment. In the Public Goods Game with costly pun-
ishment, players play a second round during which they may incur a small cost in order
to subtract earnings from the ﬁnal payoffs of other group members.
   Equilibrium Solution: In the Public Goods Game, the individual’s payoffs are
increasing in the contributions made by others, and decreasing in the contributions
he or she makes herself. The dominant strategy for the individual is therefore to not
contribute. In equilibrium, nobody contributes, and group payoffs are minimized.
   In the one-shot game with costly punishment, the same equilibrium solution
obtains through backward induction. In the ﬁnal round, the action of punishing
reduces the individual’s payoffs (i.e., it is costly), hence no player should ever
punish. Consequently, the threat of being punished for free riding should not enter
the player’s decision in the ﬁrst round.
   Insights: As in the two-person Prisoner’s Dilemma actual behavior in experi-
ments and real life often violates the equilibrium prediction for the Public Goods
Game. In particular subjects consistently contribute amounts larger than zero to the
public good (Chaudhuri 2011). Additionally, subjects frequently punish free riders,
even in the one-shot game approximations, and (supposedly anticipating this)
humans contribute more in games in which the threat of punishment exists (Fehr
and Gächter 2000; Dreber et al. 2008). Interestingly, punishment has also been
found to be used against contributors in some experiments (so-called antisocial
punishment) (Rand et al. 2011).
   As discussed for the Prisoner’s Dilemma, a neural architecture promoting
cooperative behavior is likely to be sensitive to social outcomes, such as payoff
equity, distributive fairness, and reciprocity in behaviors. The Public Goods Game
with punishment is especially interesting in this regard, as it indicates player’s
willingness to pay for a more even, or fair distribution of outcomes. Chapter 5
discusses such punishment behaviors.
   Interesting insight comes also from a set of carefully designed behavioral
experiments by David Rand and colleagues involving several versions of the
Prisoner’s Dilemma, including the n-person public goods version (Rand et al.
2012). Across these experiments the authors show cooperation to occur sponta-
neously under conditions of low reflection and intuitive decision-making. Inducing
subjects to reflect consciously on their decisions, on the other hand, reduced
cooperative behavior. These data suggest that cooperative behavior may not be
entirely explainable by social preferences that promote socially beneﬁcial out-
comes, but that such behaviors depend on the mode of cognitive engagement with
the decision. To the extent that different networks are involved in these different
types of cognitive engagement, these results present important questions for neu-
roeconomics. Chapter 5 discusses in particular the role of the prefrontal cortex for
behaviors involving reciprocal fairness.
28                                                                         C. Civai and D.R. Hawes




Fig. 2.4 Generic Centipede Game: at each node, the moving player may T(ake) the reward, or
P(ass) the move along. Overall rewards increase with each passing decision. Conceptually, each
choice of passing costs the passing player 1 utility point, but gains the other player 2 utility points
in the depiction shown here


2.2.4      Centipede Game

Intuition: The Centipede Game is a classic example of a group of games that can be
solved using backward induction. At its core it describes a ﬁnitely often repeated,
sequential prisoner’s dilemma. In one popular version of the game one or more
players take turns deciding whether to take a given monetary reward, or to pass the
move on to the next player. Whenever a player decides to take the money, the game
ends that round, the taking player receives a large reward and all other players end
with smaller or even zero rewards. Whenever the move is passed on, the overall size
of the monetary pie grows, and the next player gets to make the decision of taking
the money or passing. Critically, if the moving player in round n of the centipede
game decides to take the money, then the payoff in round n to the player who
passed in round n − 1 is smaller than his or her payoff would have been had he or
she taken the money in round n − 1 instead of passing on the move (Fig. 2.4).
   Equilibrium Solution: The dilemma of the centipede game, and games like it,
arises because the game is played ﬁnitely many rounds, i.e., there will be a ﬁnal
stage in which one player has a strictly dominant choice in taking the money, and
the players know this about the game. Using this information, it can be deduced that
the last player to move will take the money. This implies that the second to last
player may improve his expected utility by not passing on the second to last turn.
By extension the third to last mover should not pass on the third to last turn, and
eventually this iteration implies that the very ﬁrst mover should take the money and
end the game on the very ﬁrst turn. This solution is so-called sub-game perfect,
meaning that it considers each of the sub-game11 components of the centipede game
and identiﬁes a strategy for each player that is an equilibrium strategy for each of
the sub-games.



11
 A sub-game is strictly deﬁned as any subset of a game which has a uniquely identiﬁed initial
node (i.e., the initial node does not share an information set with any other node), and contains all
nodes that follow the initial node in the complete game as well as all successor nodes to these
nodes. An additional condition is that all the nodes included in an information set of the sub-game
must also be included in the sub-game.
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                     29

    Insights: The Centipede Game is signiﬁcant to economic theory, because its
Nash solution implies a notion of rationality that seems counterintuitive, or even
alienating to most human decision-makers (e.g. McKelvey and Palfrey 1992). In
fact, the term “Paradox of Backward Induction” has been used to describe the
intuition that most decision-makers would prefer passing on earlier moves, and
would expect their counterparts to do likewise at earlier positions in the game. In
fact, this intuition has fueled rich intellectual debates on the nature of economic
rationality, and backward induction in games (e.g., Aumann 1992, 1995; Binmore
1996). For example, it may be deemed rational for a player to have beliefs about his
opponents that violate strict economic rationality once this player has been
observed to make a move that would be inconsistent with it. In other words, once
the ﬁrst player passes on the ﬁrst move of the Centipede Game it is not irrational for
the second mover to believe that the ﬁrst mover will pass again on his next move.
Consequently, the second mover may prefer passing on her move, given that she
may now rationally believe that the ﬁrst mover will also pass again. Knowing this,
it may be rational and strategic for the ﬁrst mover to initially pass; thus essentially
sending a signal to the second mover. Experimental games show that human
subjects rarely take the money on the very ﬁrst round of the Centipede Game
(McKelvey and Palfrey 1992).
    Actual behavior in the Centipede Game holds numerous insights for neuroe-
conomists. For one, the backwards induction solution disciplines the way in which
a player must iteratively think about the potential outcomes of his actions. Hence,
behavior in games that require backward induction may be indicative of the extent
of iterated reasoning that a player applies to a decision. Additionally, the notion of
rationality we have described indicates the important role of second order beliefs for
behavior in the game. That is, it is important for the behavior of player 1, what he
thinks that player 2 thinks about the beliefs of player 1. The process of
self-referential belief formation and its neural correlates have been investigated by
Bhatt and Camerer (2005), and experiments investigating a subject’s depth of
reasoning (and the depth of reasoning he or she attributes to others) appear to hold
important insights for understanding multi-person strategic interactions (Coricelli
and Nagel 2010; De Martino et al. 2013).



2.2.5    Stag Hunt Game

Intuition: The Stag Hunt Game is the prototype of the social contract, and a trust
dilemma: In A Discourse on Inequality written in 1754, Jean-Jacques Rousseau
describes a situation in which two individuals go on a hunt, and each of them has to
choose one of two possibilities: hunt a hare, which leads to a small personal gain,
regardless of the behavior of the other player, or hunt a stag, which leads to a large
gain, but will only be successful if both players join forces in doing so. Catching the
stag and obtaining the large payoff for both players therefore requires spontaneous
cooperation and mutual trust (Fig. 2.5).
30                                                                       C. Civai and D.R. Hawes




Fig. 2.5 Generic Stag Hunt. Each player chooses between a hunting a S(tag), or a H(are).
Coordinated stag hunts ({S, s}) generate the highest payoffs for both players. A single stag hunt
({S, h} or {s, H}) does not produce positive utility for the player choosing S(tag). Choosing H(are)
always produces an intermediate utility to the player, irrespective of the other player’s action


    Equilibrium Solution: The game may look similar to the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
in that there are two players that have to choose simultaneously whether to coop-
erate or not. However, this game does not have a strictly dominant strategy, and
possesses two Nash equilibriums in pure strategies (as well as mixed strategy
equilibrium): Strategies in which both players always hunt the stag, or always hunt
the hare, are both equilibrium solutions to the game. Depending on the actual
payoffs used in the game, a mixture can be found, for which the other player will
become indifferent to which action they choose, and when both players mix their
actions in this way, a mixed strategy equilibrium is reached.12 The pure strategy
equilibriums obtain because hunting the stag is a best response when the other
player hunts the stag, and hunting the hare is a best response when the other player
hunts the hare. Hunting the stag, which involves social risk taking, however, also
constitutes the social optimum, as it gives the higher payoff to both players.
    Insights: The Stag Hunt Game allows the investigation of individuals’ attitude
toward social risk taking involved in coordinating on mutual trust in the game. This
feature of the game is comparable to many social and physical environments in
which joint coordination of trusting behavior is required for the attainment of goals.
In repeated games, people additionally gain knowledge of other player’s intentions
to cooperate through repeated interactions, and applying Theory of Mind
(ToM) (Premack and Woodruff 1978) can infer other people’s cognitive states,
make predictions on their moves and act consequently. As for the Trust Game
(Sect. 2.2.8), having some knowledge about the other player helps to shape one’s
strategy: if we know that the other agent is risk-taking, we might predict that he/she


12
 For the values used in the schematic Fig. 2.5, the mixed strategy equilibrium has both players
hunting the stag with probability 1/3 and the hare with probability 2/3.
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                               31




Fig. 2.6 Generic Ultimatum Game (continuous donation). Player 1 is the proposer and chooses
some value x along a continuous interval. After proposing x, player two may accept or reject.
Acceptance leads to player 1 receiving the remainder of his initial endowment (E − x), and player
2 receiving x. If player 2 rejects, both players receive 0


will probably choose to hunt the stag, and we can act consequently. From a neu-
roscientiﬁc perspective, a study from Yoshida et al. (2010) shows that, on one hand,
knowledge acquired by updating the beliefs on the other agent through repeated
interactions requires the activation of medial prefrontal cortex (the higher the
activation the higher the uncertainty of belief inference); on the other hand,
choosing a strategy according to the level of sophistication of thinking, meaning
how many orders of belief we apply for choosing our strategy, involves the dor-
solateral prefrontal cortex, whose activity positively correlates with the level of
sophistication.



2.2.6     Ultimatum Game

Intuition: The Ultimatum Game is the classic “take-it-or-leave-it” scenario in game
theory. It features two players, the proposer and the responder. The proposer is
endowed with an amount of money, e.g., 10 dollars. The proposer moves ﬁrst, and
makes an offer to the responder on how to divide the money; the responder has to
accept or reject the offer knowing that, accepting, the money will be divided as the
proposer has decided, whereas rejecting neither player will receive anything. For
example, if the proposer offers 2 dollars and the responder accepts, the proposer
gets 8 dollars and the responder gets 2 dollars; if the responder rejects, they both
gets 0. The game is one-shot, meaning the interaction between the two players
occurs only once, eliminating the opportunity for reciprocity, and stripping rejec-
tions from their potential power of being negotiating tools (Fig. 2.6).
   Equilibrium Solution: If the total amount available is x, then the proposer must
choose an amount p [0, x] to keep for himself. The responder chooses between two
solutions for determining the outcomes: “accept” is equal to x − p for him and to p
32                                                                   C. Civai and D.R. Hawes

for the proposer; “reject” is equal to 0 for both. A strategy proﬁle where the
responder accepts an offer if and only if it is larger or equal to p − x, and the
proposer offers p − x, is a Nash equilibrium. If one adopts a more restrictive
concept, i.e., the sub-game perfect equilibrium, then equilibrium of this game of
perfect information is found by backward induction and is unique, if a zero offer is
not allowed. In this equilibrium, the responder accepts any offer, given that getting
something is better than getting nothing; the proposer, knowing that, offers the
minimum amount.
    Insights: A large number of experiments, beginning with Güth et al. (1982),
used monetary payments and found behavior substantially different from the offer
of a minimal amount by the proposer and acceptance of any positive amount by the
responder. It has been repeatedly demonstrated that proposers tend to make fair
offers and responders tend to reject offers that are considered to be unfair, such as 1
or 2 dollars out of 10; theories of social preferences have accounted psychological
phenomena such as inequity aversion (e.g., Fehr and Schmidt 1999) or negative
reciprocity (e.g., Rabin 1993) for the rejections.
    The deviation of actual behavior from Rational Choice has opened the discus-
sion on the ultimate psychological and neural mechanism that leads to a rejection.
Negative emotions in response to unfairness have been claimed as responsible for
the behavior (Pillutla and Murnighan 1996), and evidence in support to this theory
has been collected extensively (e.g., Sanfey et al. 2003; Van’t Wout et al. 2006);
however, recent ﬁndings challenge this account, in that emotional arousal seems to
be not necessary in order to trigger rejections (Civai et al. 2010). Moreover, a
crucial role is played by expectations, which interact with the unfairness level to
influence signiﬁcantly the rejection rate, as shown by Chang and Sanfey (2013).
Overall, the UG, together with Dictator Game (DG), Trust Game (TG) and their
manipulations, remains one of the most effective tasks to investigate the cognitive
and neural basis of social norm’s compliance.




Fig. 2.7 Generic Dictator Game (continuous donation). A degenerate game in which player 1
distributes an initial endowment E between herself and player 2. Player 1 receives E − x, while
player 2 receives the donated amount x
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                        33


2.2.7    Dictator Game

Intuition: Forsythe et al. (1994) introduced the Dictator Game (DG), a variant of
the UG, which features two players, the dictator and the recipient. The dictator is
endowed with an amount of money, e.g., 10 dollars. The dictator is asked to divide
his/her endowment with the recipient; the recipient’s role is entirely passive, as
he/she must accept the offer made by the dictator. For example, if the dictator
allocates 2 dollars to the recipient, the dictator gets 8 dollars and the recipient gets 2
dollars. Unlike the UG, in the DG the recipient has no strategic input, and, in this
sense, the DG is a degenerate game. This game is useful to investigate the behavior
of the UG’s proposer when ruling out the strategic thinking, as in the DG the
dictator does not have to worry about potential rejections (Fig. 2.7).
    Equilibrium Solution: The dictator maximizes his payoffs by keeping the
largest amount possible.
    Insights: Rational Choice theory predicts that the dictator will offer 0; however,
as for the UG, this is not the case in experimental settings. Although the amounts
and frequencies of nonzero offers in the DG are less and lower than in the UG,
demonstrating that strategic motivations have an effect in the UG, giving behavior
in the DG is consistently and signiﬁcantly larger than zero, and players are often
observed to give up to the 50 % of their endowment to the recipient (Forsythe et al.
1994). Interestingly, anonymity and social distance play a very important role in
shaping the amount of giving (Hoffman et al. 1994, 1996; Charness and Gneezy
2008): the larger is the degree of anonymity and the social distance, the lower is the
average amount of money given by the dictator.
    As for the UG, the DG is a useful tool to investigate fairness concerns. In
particular, given its peculiar nature of degenerate game, where the recipient has no
active role and cannot decide on anything, this game is useful to disentangle actual
altruistic motivations from the strategic thinking that may characterize the pro-
poser’s offers in the UG. Interestingly, the fact that people still give some money to
the recipient opens the discussion about different types of altruism (for a speciﬁc
discussion, see Chaps. 11 and 12 of this volume).



2.2.8    Trust Game

Intuition: The simple Trust Game (TG) (Berg et al. 1995) features two players, the
investor and the trustee. The investor starts with a certain amount X, e.g. 10 dollars,
and has to decide how much to keep for him/herself, and how much to give to the
trustee. The investor knows that the amount received by the trustee will be tripli-
cated, so that if T is the investment, the trustee receives 3T. At this point, the trustee
must decide how much to return to the investor, from 0 to 3T. The TG is considered
to be an extended DG, as in this case the investment earns a return, and it is widely
employed to investigate the issue of trust/social capital (Fig. 2.8).
34                                                                     C. Civai and D.R. Hawes




Fig. 2.8 Generic Trust Game (continuous donation): Player 1 entrusts some amount x1 between 0
and E to player 2. This amount is multiplied by κ, after which player 2 may return some amount x2
between 0 and κ times x1 to player 1. Player 1 receives the part of the endowment he kept for
himself plus the amount retuned by player 2. Player 2 receives the κ—multiplied amount of player
1s initial trust less the amount returned


    Equilibrium Solution: Both players are better off with full investment, but the
investor has to take the risk in trusting the trustee. In the one-shot version of the
game, the sub-game perfect equilibrium would be for the trustee to keep all,
wherefore the best response of the investor would be to invest nothing.
    Insights: Although Rational Choice predicts the opposite, investors show a
surprisingly high amount of blind trust: the average amount invested is half of
X. The average amount of return is 1/3 of 3T, so that the investor ends up, on
average, with T. Cochard et al. (2004) found that investors invest more and trustees
return a higher percentage in the ﬁnitely repeated trust game with ﬁxed matches
(7 rounds) as compared with the one-shot version; in particular, they found two
different types of trustee, i.e., those returning 2/3 of T and those returning 0.
    The TG has been widely employed to investigate the psychological and neural
underpinnings of trust among strangers; interestingly, it has been possible to show
how trust is modulated both by the characteristics of the trustee and by those of the
investors. For example, studies manipulating the moral character of the trustee
showed that investors were much more likely to make risky investments with
“good” partners (e.g., Delgado et al. 2005); on the other hand, it has been shown
that administering the neuropeptide oxytocin increases trust in the investor, who is
willing to invest more money in the trustee. In particular, Kosfeld et al. (2005)
manipulated the nature of the trustee, having a human trustee in one condition and a
computer in another, and showed that this increase was not due to a general increase
in the willingness to take risks (computer condition), but was speciﬁc to the social
risks involved in interpersonal interaction (human condition).
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                                  35


References

Allais M (1979) The foundations of a positive theory of choice involving risk and a criticism of the
   postulates and axioms of the American school (1952). In: Allais M, Hagen O (eds) Expected
   utility hypotheses and the Allais Paradox 27–145. Springer, Dordrecht
Aumann RJ (1992) Irrationality in game theory. Economic analysis of markets and games. Essays
   in honor of Frank Hahn 214-27
Aumann RJ (1995) Backward induction and common knowledge of rationality. Game Econ Behav
   8(1):6–19
Aumann RJ (1997) Rationality and bounded rationality. Springer, Berlin, pp 219–231
Berg J, Dickhaut J, McCabe K (1995) Trust, reciprocity, and social history. Game Econ Behav 10
   (1):122–142
Bhatt M, Camerer CF (2005) Self-referential thinking and equilibrium as states of mind in games:
   fMRI evidence. Game Econ Behav 52(2):424–459
Bhatt MA, Lohrenz T, Camerer CF et al (2010) Neural signatures of strategic types in a
   two-person bargaining game. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(46):19720–19725
Binmore K (1996) A note on backward induction. Game Econ Behav 17(1):135–137
Burks SV, Carpenter JP, Goette L et al (2009) Cognitive skills affect economic preferences,
   strategic behavior, and job attachment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106(19):7745–7750
Camerer C (2003) Behavioral game theory: experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton
   University Press, Princeton, NJ
Camerer C, Loewenstein G, Prelec D (2005) Neuroeconomics: how neuroscience can inform
   economics. J Econ Lit 9–64
Camerer CF, Loewenstein G, Rabin M (eds) (2011) Advances in behavioral economics. Princeton
   University Press, Princeton, NJ
Chang LJ, Sanfey AG (2013) Great expectations: neural computations underlying the use of social
   norms in decision-making. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 8(3):277–284
Charness G, Gneezy U (2008) What’s in a name? Anonymity and social distance in dictator and
   ultimatum games. J Econ Behav Organ 68(1):29–35
Chaudhuri A (2011) Sustaining cooperation in laboratory public goods experiments: a selective
   survey of the literature. Exp Econ 14(1):47–83
Civai C, Corradi-Dell’Acqua C, Gamer M et al (2010) Are irrational reactions to unfairness truly
   emotionally-driven? Dissociated behavioural and emotional responses in the Ultimatum Game
   task. Cognition 114(1):89–95
Cochard F, Van Nguyen P, Willinger M (2004) Trusting behavior in a repeated investment game.
   J Econ Behav Organ 55(1):31–44
Cooper R, DeJong DV, Forsythe R et al (1996) Cooperation without reputation: experimental
   evidence from prisoner’s dilemma games. Game Econ Behav 12(2):187–218
Coricelli G, Nagel R (2009) Neural correlates of depth of strategic reasoning in medial prefrontal
   cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106(23):9163–9168
Coricelli G, Nagel R (2010) The Neuroeconomics of depth of strategic reasoning. Hist Econ Ideas
   18(1):123–131
Damasio AR, Tranel D, Damasio H (1991) Somatic markers and the guidance of behavior: theory
   and preliminary testing. In: Levin HS, Eisenberg HM, Benton AL (eds) Frontal lobe function
   and dysfunction. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 217–229
De Martino B, Kumaran D, Seymour B et al (2006) Frames, biases, and rational decision-making
   in the human brain. Science 313(5787):684–687
De Martino B, O’Doherty JP, Ray D et al (2013) In the mind of the market: theory of mind biases
   value computation during ﬁnancial bubbles. Neuron 79(6):1222–1231
Delgado MR, Frank RH, Phelps EA (2005) Perceptions of moral character modulate the neural
   systems of reward during the trust game. Nat Neurosci 8(11):1611–1618
Downs A (1957) An economic theory of democracy. Harper, New York
Dreber A, Rand DG, Fudenberg D et al (2008) Winners don’t punish. Nature 452(7185):348–351
36                                                                     C. Civai and D.R. Hawes

Ellsberg D (1961) Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms. Q J Econ 75(4):643–669
Engelmann JB, Tamir D (2009) Individual differences in risk preference predict neural responses
    during ﬁnancial decision-making. Brain Res 1290:28–51
Fehr E, Camerer CF (2007) Social neuroeconomics: the neural circuitry of social preferences.
    Trends Cogn Sci 11(10):419–427
Fehr E, Gächter S (2000) Cooperation and punishment in public goods experiments. Am Econ Rev
    90(4):980–994
Fehr E, Schmidt KM (1999) A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. Q J Econ 114
    (3):817–868
Forsythe R, Horowitz JL, Savin NE et al (1994) Fairness in simple bargaining experiments. Game
    Econ Behav 6(3):347–369
Frank MJ, Claus ED (2006) Anatomy of a decision: striato-orbitofrontal interactions in
    reinforcement learning, decision making, and reversal. Psychol Rev 113(2):300
Friedman M, Savage LJ (1948) The utility analysis of choices involving risk. J Polit Econ 56
    (4):279–304
Gigerenzer G (2004) Fast and frugal heuristics: the tools of bounded rationality. In: Koehler DJ,
    Harvey N (Eds) Blackwell handbook of judgment and decision making. Wiley-Blackwell, New
    York, pp 62–88
Gigerenzer G, Selten R (eds) (2002) Bounded rationality: the adaptative toolbox. Mit Press,
    Cambridge, MA
Glimcher PW, Rustichini A (2004) Neuroeconomics: the consilience of brain and decision.
    Science 306(5695):447–452
Glöckner A, Betsch T (2008) Multiple-reason decision making based on automatic processing.
    J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 34(5):1055
Glöckner A, Hochman G (2011) The interplay of experience-based affective and probabilistic cues
    in decision-making. Exp Psychol 58(2):132–141
Güth W, Schmittberger R, Schwarze B (1982) An experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining.
    J Econ Behav Organ 3(4):367–388
Hawes DR, Vostroknutov A, Rustichini A (2012) Experience and abstract reasoning in learning
    backward induction. Front Neurosci 6
Hoffman E, McCabe K, Shachat K et al (1994) Preferences, property rights, and anonymity in
    bargaining games. Game Econ Behav 7(3):346–380
Hoffman E, McCabe K, Smith VL (1996) Social distance and other-regarding behavior in dictator
    games. Am Econ Rev 86(3):653–660
Houser D, McCabe K (2009) Experimental neuroeconomics and non-cooperative games. In:
    Glimcher PW, Fehr E, Camerer C et al (eds) Neuroeconomics: decision making and the brain.
    Academic Press, London, pp 47–62
Kahneman D, Tversky A (1979) Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica
    47(2):263–291
Kalai E, Lehrer E (1993) Rational learning leads to Nash equilibrium. Econometrica 61(5):1019–
    1045
Knutson B, Wimmer GE, Rick S et al (2008) Neural antecedents of the endowment effect. Neuron
    58(5):814–822
Kosfeld M, Heinrichs M, Zak PJ et al (2005) Oxytocin increases trust in humans. Nature 435
    (7042):673–676
Kreps DM, Milgrom P, Roberts J et al (1982) Rational cooperation in the ﬁnitely repeated
    prisoners’ dilemma. J Econ Theory 27(2):245–252
Lee D, Conroy ML, McGreevy BP et al (2004) Reinforcement learning and decision making in
    monkeys during a competitive game. Cogn Brain Res 22(1):45–58
Loomes G, Sugden R (1982) Regret theory: an alternative theory of rational choice under
    uncertainty. Econ J 92(368):805–824
McClure SM, Laibson DI, Loewenstein G et al (2004) Separate neural systems value immediate
    and delayed monetary rewards. Science 306(5695):503–507
2 Game Theory in Neuroeconomics                                                             37

McKelvey RD, Palfrey TR (1992) An experimental study of the centipede game. Econometrica 60
    (4):803–836
Mongin P (1997) Expected utility theory. In: Davis J, Hands W, Maki U (eds) Handbook of
    economic methodology. Edward Elgar, London, pp 342–350
Myerson RB (2013) Game theory: analysis of conflict. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Nash JF (1950) Equilibrium points in n-person games. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 36(1):48–49
Neyman A (1985) Bounded complexity justiﬁes cooperation in the ﬁnitely repeated prisoners’
    dilemma. Econ Lett 19(3):227–229
Osborne MJ, Rubinstein A (1994) A course in game theory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Pillutla MM, Murnighan JK (1996) Unfairness, anger, and spite: Emotional rejections of
    ultimatum offers. Organ Behav Hum Dec 68(3):208–224
Poundstone W (1992) Prisoner’s Dilemma. Doubleday, New York, NY
Premack D, Woodruff G (1978) Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behav Brain Sci 1
    (04):515–526
Rabin M (1993) Incorporating fairness into game theory and economics. Am Econ Rev 1281–
    1302
Rand DG, Arbesman S, Christakis NA (2011) Dynamic social networks promote cooperation in
    experiments with humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108(48):19193–19198
Rand DG, Greene JD, Nowak MA (2012) Spontaneous giving and calculated greed. Nature 489
    (7416):427–430
Rustichini A (2005) Neuroeconomics: present and future. Game Econ Behav 52(2):201–212
Sanfey AG (2007) Social decision-making: insights from game theory and neuroscience. Science
    318(5850):598–602
Sanfey AG, Rilling JK, Aronson JA et al (2003) The neural basis of economic decision-making in
    the ultimatum game. Science 300(5626):1755–1758
Selten R (1990) Bounded rationality. J Inst Theor Econ 146(4):649–658
Seo H, Lee D (2012) Neural basis of learning and preference during social decision-making. Curr
    Opin Neurobiol 22(6):990–995
Simon HA (1955) A behavioral model of rational choice. Q J Econ 69(1):99–118
Simon HA (1972) Theories of bounded rationality. In: McGuire CB, Radner R (eds) Decision and
    organization. North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, pp 161–176
Simon HA (1990) Bounded rationality. In: Eatwell J, Milgate M, Newmann P (eds) The new
    Palgrave: utility and probability. W. W. Norton & Company, New York, NY, pp 15–18
Tversky A, Kahneman D (1974) Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and biases. Science 185
    (4157):1124–1131
Van’t Wout M, Kahn RS, Sanfey AG et al (2006) Affective state and decision-making in the
    ultimatum game. Exp Brain Res 169(4):564–568
Von Neumann J, Morgenstern O (1944) The theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton
    University Press, Princeton, NJ
Wallis HB, Huston J (1941) The Maltese Falcon [Motion Picture]. Warner Bros, USA
Yoshida W, Seymour B, Friston KJ et al (2010) Neural mechanisms of belief inference during
    cooperative games. J Neurosci 30(32):10744–10751
                           Part II
Molecular Basis of Human Decision
                         Making
