Chapter 22
Diffusion Tensor Imaging
(DTI) and Tractography

Theodor Rüber, Christian Erich Elger and Bernd Weber




Abstract Diffusion Tensor Imaging is a Magnet Resonance Imaging-technique that
allows for the non-invasive in vivo assessment and delineation of white matter tracts.
The Magnet Resonance signal is sensitized to the natural diffusion process of protons and
a tensor model is ﬁtted to the resulting data. By following the direction of the diffusion
maximum across the brain, the process of tractography yields three-dimensional
reconstructions of white matter tracts, which may be microstructurally analyzed by
means of diffusivity parameters. Before the advent of Diffusion Tensor Imaging, studies
of connectional anatomy in humans could only be conducted post-mortem. Diffusion
Tensor Imaging has shifted neuroscientiﬁc attention from single brain regions to the
networks connecting them. This, however, has not only extended our knowledge on
brain networks but also on single loci being part of these networks. Although the
biological substrates of Diffusion Tensor Imaging-derived parameters remain unclear to
a certain extent, Diffusion Tensor Imaging and tractography have successfully informed
many studies in the ﬁeld of age- or training-related neuronal changes. In addition, it has
been found to be applicable in clinical settings. However, Diffusion Tensor Imaging
studies covering the ﬁelds of neuroeconomics and behavioral psychology are sparse.
Two pioneer studies from these ﬁelds have successfully related personality character-
istics of interest to Diffusion Tensor Imaging- and tractography-derived measures. This
chapter tries to give an introduction to the mechanisms of Diffusion Tensor Imaging and
will work to explain its utilization while highlighting limitations of Diffusion Tensor
Imaging as well as examples of its successful applications.



22.1    Introduction

Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) is a modern Magnet Resonance Imaging (MRI)-
method which allows to examine the microstructural status of white matter in vivo
and non-invasively. Tractography is a modeling technique which uses DTI data to

T. Rüber (&)  C.E. Elger  B. Weber
Department of Epileptology, Bonn University Hospital, Bonn, Germany
e-mail: theodor.rueber@ukb.uni-bonn.de

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                              411
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_22
412                                                                     T. Rüber et al.

three-dimensionally reconstruct white matter pathways. The advent of DTI and
tractography has revolutionized neuroscience in the last 25 years by opening an
avenue for the study of white matter connections in living human subjects. Before
that, white matter studies in humans could only be conducted post-mortem. Tracing
neuronal connections in the brain dates back to the work of the nineteenth century
neuroanatomists: Carl Wernicke was among the ﬁrst to relate clinical pathologies to
lesions of neuronal connections (Wernicke 1874). Joseph Jules Dejerine used
myelin stains to study (so-called Wallerian) degeneration in patients which hap-
pened anterograde and retrograde to focal lesions (Dejerine and Dejerine-Klumpke
1895). Modern techniques of tract tracing exploit the active axonal transport
mechanisms of neurons in animals (Dauguet et al. 2007; Johansen-Berg and
Rushworth 2009; Mesulam 2005). Here, a tracer substance including small
fluorescent molecules, neurotoxins, latex microspheres, or viruses is injected into a
region of interest and taken up by the cell. This procedure is followed by a waiting
period of several days in which the tracer is either transported from the cell body to
the axon terminals (anterograde tracing) or from the axon terminals to the cell body
(retrograde tracing). The animal is then sacriﬁced; the brain is ﬁxed, sectioned and
post-processed to allow for visualization of the tracer substance (Johansen-Berg
and Rushworth 2009). The results may be used to localize neurons of origin,
visualize pathways “hidden” in white matter, and to spot terminal ﬁelds. For
obvious reasons, this procedure cannot be applied to humans. Thus, core questions
of human neuroanatomy had to remain unanswered. In their editorial published
1993 in Nature, Francis Crick and Edward Jones concluded that “Human neu-
roanatomy is so backward because we cannot use the common tracer methods on
humans […]” and underlined the need for new techniques to the study of the human
brain (Crick and Jones 1993). DTI has been named as “most concrete response to
their appeal” (Catani 2007). Functional MRI (fMRI) had shifted attention to cortical
areas and their functions leading to what has been termed a “new sort of
phrenology” (Mesulam 2005), and to the consideration of white matter only as
passive infrastucture. DTI and tractography have pushed white matter back in the
focus of neuroscientiﬁc attention after a long time of stagnation. This is voiced in
the common alteration of the colloquialism “gray matters” to “white matters” in the
neuroscience community.
   A detailed introduction to the mechanisms and applications of DTI is beyond the
scope of the current chapter. Rather, this chapter aims to provide a preliminary
understanding of DTI, allowing the reader to value the opportunities but be aware
of the limitations of this recent imaging modality. Emphasis of this chapter will be
analysis approaches to DTI data and applications of DTI and tractography in order
to give it a practical thrust. The principles of DTI will be briefly reviewed before
introducing its most commonly used measures. Tractography will then be discussed
and common approaches of DTI-tractography data analysis will be presented,
including pitfalls and limitations of this method. Furthermore, common DTI
applications for clinical purposes as well as research studies of anatomy and
plasticity will be reviewed. Finally, two DTI-studies related to the ﬁeld of neu-
roeconomics will be discussed and a conclusion from this chapter will be drawn.
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                 413


22.2     Basic Principles

DTI is a speciﬁc modeling technique of diffusion-weighted datasets (Basser et al.
1994b; Pierpaoli and Basser 1996). Diffusion-Weighted Imaging (DWI) is a variant
of conventional MRI (Le Bihan et al. 1986; Taylor and Bushell 1985). DWI/DTI
may be performed with existing MRI technology without the additional use of new
equipment or contrast agents. The advantages related to MRI, thus, also apply to
DTI: It is non-invasive, may be performed in vivo, is harmless to the subject as long
as security guidelines are being followed, is widely available and relatively inex-
pensive. In DWI, the MRI signal is sensitized to the tissue water diffusion rate.
From the atomistic point of view, molecular diffusion is deﬁned as a random walk
of molecules that is driven by thermal energy. Diffusion of particles was ﬁrst
observed by the Scottish botanist Robert Brown in 1827 who interpreted the
movement as “essence of life”; scientiﬁc explanation of molecular diffusion was
given by Albert Einstein almost 80 years later (Einstein 1905). The process of
diffusion may well be pictured by means of a simple experiment: Some drops of ink
are carefully poured into a glass of water. At ﬁrst, the ink will be clearly distin-
guishable in one area of the glass but will then diffuse all over and be uniformly
dissolved. In the middle of the glass, molecules are not hindered by the container.
Their diffusion process is nondirectional, whereas close to the container walls,
diffusion is directional. Directionally unrestricted diffusion is described as isotropic,
whereas directional diffusion is described as anisotropic. It is easy to see how
diffusion will be anisotropic in coherent white matter bundles, such as in the
internal capsule, where connections descend from the cortex to the spine, and how it
will be isotropic in the fluid-ﬁlled ventricles. By means of a magnetic ﬁeld gradient,
the MR signal may be sensitized to diffusion. The most basic form of diffusion
imaging, DWI, relies on a model of a three-dimensional isotropic Gaussian dis-
tribution and only yields a scalar measure of the diffusion rate, the so-called
apparent-diffusion coefﬁcient (ADC), indicated on a grayscale speciﬁcally for every
voxel. A voxel (volumetric pixel) is one of many rectangular volume elements
constituting a regularly segmented three-dimensional space. In brain imaging, one
full measurement of the head consists of many thousands voxels and is termed
volume. In a diffusion-weighted volume, fluid-ﬁlled ventricles appear dark, whereas
regions of restricted diffusivity such as gray matter or white matter ﬁber bundles
look bright. However, diffusion-weighted datasets may also be used to model the
underlying diffusivity characteristics in each voxel. The most common
three-dimensional model mapping of anisotropic diffusion as a function of spatial
location is the diffusion tensor, introduced by Basser et al. (1994a, b). In this model,
the tensor is fully described by a 3 × 3 matrix of variances and covariances.
                                    0                      1
                                     Dxx      Dxy      Dxz
                               D ¼ @ Dyx      Dyy      Dyz A
                                     Dzx      Dzy      Dzz
414                                                                        T. Rüber et al.

    Anisotropic diffusion has six degrees of freedom. This is why at least six dif-
fusion measurements of the whole brain in several different directions (i.e., six
volumes) are needed to derive the diffusion tensor matrix. However, it is intuitive
that diffusion measurements in more than six directions will yield a more accurate
diffusion tensor model and are most commonly applied (Hasan et al. 2001;
Papadakis et al. 2000). In any case, one additional volume without diffusion-
weighting, the b0, has to be acquired in every sequence which serves as a reference
image. Once the tensor model is ﬁtted, one can estimate the diffusivity in any
arbitrary direction. Diagonalization of the tensor matrix results in a set of three
orthogonal eigenvectors ê1, ê2, and ê3 representing the major, medium and minor
principle axes of diffusivity modeled. The corresponding eigenvalues λ1, λ2, and λ3
quantify the apparent diffusivities along these axes. It is the most basic premise
underlying DTI that molecular diffusion happens easier along the axis of coherent
white matter bundles, but will be hindered by axon membranes and other white
matter barriers perpendicular to it (Hagmann et al. 2006; Pierpaoli et al. 1996). The
major principal eigenvector ê1 indicating the direction of the greatest apparent
diffusivity λ1 is thus thought to be parallel to tract orientation (Moseley et al. 1990).
Since the three vectors are orthogonal to each other, the medium and minor prin-
ciple eigenvectors ê2 and ê3 are perpendicular to the tract orientation. The diffusion
tensor is best visualized by an ellipsoid pointing in the direction of maximal dif-
fusivity. In this illustration, the eigenvectors (ê1, ê2, ê3) deﬁne the directions of the
principle axes and the respective radii are deﬁned by the eigenvalues (λ1, λ2, λ3).
The ellipsoid will be orbital if diffusion is isotropic and may be cigar-shaped if
diffusion is anisotropic (Fig. 22.1).
    In this context, it is important to note that the same combination of eigenvalues
(i.e., an ellipsoid with the same shape) may be caused by different neuroanatomical
underpinnings. Anisotropy, as modeled by the diffusion tensor, may be low because
of “truly” isotropic diffusion (such as in the fluid-ﬁlled ventricles) or because of
orthogonal but highly coherent ﬁber bundles crossing within the respective voxel.
From this perspective, it becomes obvious how limits are set to the validity of
tractography by the inadequacy of the tensor model (please see paragraph on
BIOLOGICAL SUBTRATES OF DTI). Another problem concerns the display as
well as the interpretation of a 3 × 3 matrix for every one of several thousand voxels
within a brain volume. It is often tried to simplify things by converting the diffusion
tensor matrix to a scalar measure. The most commonly used scalar DTI measures
include fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), axial and radial diffu-
sivity (AD, RD). Importantly, these measures may inform researchers about the
underlying white matter status since the diffusion tensor from which they are
derived does not only model the orientation of anisotropic diffusion (which these
scalar measures do not contain) but also the magnitude and the degree of diffusion
anisotropy. In neuroscience research, FA is the most commonly used scalar. It is
rotationally invariant, ranges between 0 and 1 and describes the degree of the
anisotropy of the diffusion process.
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                                        415




Fig. 22.1 Illustrations of the diffusion eigenvectors (left), the corresponding tensor ellipsoid
(middle), and a schematic grid of voxels (right). The grid of voxels illustrates a fractional
anisotropy map with additional tensor ellipsoids which are depicted as ellipses. The grayscale
indicates fractional anisotropy ranging from close to zero (black) to almost one (bright gray).
Diffusion in the upper right corner is isotropic and apparent diffusivity is rather low as it would be
expected in gray matter. In the lower left corner diffusion also is isotropic; however, here apparent
diffusivity is rather high as it would be expected in the ventricles. From the upper left corner to the
lower right corner, diffusion is anisotropic and most major principal eigenvectors are oriented
along this diagonal axis. This is how a diffusion tensor image of a ﬁber tract descending this way
may look


                                 qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                         rﬃﬃﬃ
                          1       ðk1  k2 Þ2 þ ðk2  k3 Þ2 þ ðk3  k1 Þ2
                    FA ¼                             qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                          2                               k21 þ k22 þ k23

   Values close to 0 indicate that diffusion is isotropic (λ1 ≈ λ2 ≈ λ3), whereas
values close to 1 mean that it is anisotropic [(λ1 ≫ λ2 Ʌ λ3) V (λ1 Ʌ λ2 ≫ λ3)].
However, these extreme values are not reached in physiological environments. In the
brain, minimal FA values (approx. 0.1) are normally measured in the ventricles and
maximal FA values (approx. 0.85) in the splenium of the corpus callosum (Pierpaoli
and Basser 1996). FA is claimed to sensitively detect white matter alterations such as
degeneration or plastic remodeling (Pierpaoli and Basser 1996; Pierpaoli et al.
1996). A common albeit not always correct notion is that aging and a loss of
cognitive functions is associated with decreased FA values, whereas learning and
rehabilitation is accompanied by increased FA values (Bengtsson et al. 2005; Engvig
et al. 2012; Landi et al. 2011; Lebel et al. 2012; Lindenberg et al. 2010). This FA
decrease/increase is usually explained by increased/decreased diffusivity perpen-
dicular to the principal diffusion direction. It is thought to reflect decreased/increased
ﬁber organization or myelination on a microstructural level. However, as outlined
below one should be wary of inferences on neuroanatomical underpinnings of DTI
measures (please see paragraph on BIOLOGICAL SUBTRATES OF DTI).
416                                                                      T. Rüber et al.

Beside FA, MD is another rotationally invariant scalar. It measures the total diffusion
within a voxel.

                                   1
                               MD ¼ ðk1 þ k2 þ k3 Þ
                                   3

    In many cases, MD is inversely related to FA. It typically ranges between
approximately 2 × 10−3 in the ventricles and 0.7 × 10−3 in white matter. It is not as
commonly used in neuroscience research as FA, however, MD in the clinical
practice has proven useful for the early detection of ischemia (lack of blood supply
leading to stroke) in white matter (Mori and Barker 1999). It is important to note
that even measures of anisotropy, such as FA, cannot represent the tensor shape.
Just as for the diffusion tensor, the same FA value may be caused by different
combinations of eigenvalues. For example, a disc-shaped and a cigar-shaped
ellipsoid are properly described by the same FA value. See Fig. 22.2 for an illus-
tration of the described DTI indices.
    In the search of scalar measures being more tightly connected to the tensor shape
and distribution, the use of AD and RD has been suggested (Song et al. 2002). AD
is equivalent to the major principal eigenvalue and RD is equivalent to the average
of the medium and minor principal eigenvalues.

                                    AD ¼ k1
                                         k2 þ k3
                                    RD ¼
                                            2

   AD and RD are often subjects to a second look at the data which is taken to shed
light on the microstructural correlates of previously observed FA alterations.
However, for reasons given below, their use has been heavily criticized (please see
paragraph on BIOLOGICAL SUBTRATES OF DTI).



22.3    Tractography

Just as diffusion-weighted data becomes a lot more interesting when tensor models
are applied, diffusion tensor data becomes a lot more interesting with the applica-
tion of tractography (Basser et al. 2000; Jones et al. 1999; Mori et al. 1999; Mori
and van Zijl 2002). Tractography is a powerful aid for the interpretation of DTI
data. It has been developed “to clarify the orientational architecture of tissues by
integrating pathways of maximum diffusion coherence” (Hagmann et al. 2006).
Tractography is built on DTI’s most basic premise that the major principal eigen-
vector ê1 is oriented parallel to tract orientation. By following the direction of
the diffusion maximum from voxel to voxel across the brain, the process of trac-
tography yields beautiful three-dimensional models of white matter pathways
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                           417




Fig. 22.2 Different displays of a DTI brain volume of a 25 year old healthy female. In the upper,
middle brain the lines as well as the colors indicate the orientation of the major principal
eigenvectors. The colors do so according to the most basic red-green-blue (RGB) color coded
scheme (Pajevic and Pierpaoli 1999). Voxels in which the principal direction of diffusion is
oriented along the left-right, anterior–posterior, or superior–inferior axes are visualized in red,
green, or blue. Abbreviations: FA fractional anisotropy; L1: λ1; L2: λ2; L3: λ3; MD mean
diffusivity. Please note how coherent and unidirectional ﬁber bundles (such as the corticospinal
tract) appear bright in L1 but rather dark in L2 and L3 (i.e., it shows high axial but low radial
diffusivity values)


(see Fig. 22.3) which show striking correspondence with classical neuroanatomical
descriptions (Catani et al. 2002; Catani and Thiebaut de Schotten 2008).
    Tractography is, however, not only a means of visualization, but may, even more
importantly, be used as delineator for regions of interest (ROI) in the analysis of
DTI measures (see paragraph on ANALYSIS OF DTI DATA). Furthermore,
tractography is not only a method for qualitative analysis (that is, answering the
question whether a certain white matter voxel belongs to a tract or not) but also a
quantitative method: As set out below, tractography yields measures quantifying the
degree of connectivity. The process of tractography may be structured along three
keywords (Soares et al. 2013): seeding, propagation, and termination. Seeding
describes the delineation of one or several voxels as a ROI from which the tracts
will be drawn. ROIs may be delineated manually or derived from brain atlases and
registered to the individual brain (exactly as it is done for quantitative analysis of
diffusivity parameters; see paragraph on ANALYSIS OF DTI DATA). Once
tractography is started, ﬁber pathways, also termed “streamlines,” are initiated in
every voxel included in the seed ROI and gradually propagated through the tensor
418                                                                                 T. Rüber et al.




Fig. 22.3 Two-dimensional (left) and three-dimensional (right) rendering of two corticospinal
ﬁber tracts reconstructed by means of probabilistic tractography. The tracts presented are canonical
tracts: probabilistic tractography had been applied to several subjects and the resulting individual
tracts were normalized, converted to binary images and then summed. Color brightness indicates
the degree of voxel-by-voxel overlap of the individual normalized tracts. The canonical tracts are
superimposed onto a template brain from the Montreal Neurological Institute. FSL’s diffusion
toolbox (FDT) was used for image preprocessing and tractography (Behrens et al. 2003b; Smith
et al. 2004)


ﬁeld. Common tractography algorithms fall in two main categories: deterministic
and probabilistic tractography (Chung et al. 2011; Descoteaux et al. 2009; Mori and
van Zijl 2002). In deterministic tractography, streamlines simply follow the
direction of the major principal eigenvector ê1 in three dimensions. Whenever the
streamline reaches the edge of another voxel, it is reoriented according to ê1 of this
other voxel. However, signal noise, subject movement, and artifacts as well as the
inherent inadequacy of the tensor model (see paragraphs on BASIC PRINCIPLES
above and BIOLOGICAL SUBSTRATES OF DTI below) produce uncertainty,
which is ignored by deterministic algorithms. Probabilistic tractography on the
other hand incorporates the uncertainty of the estimation. Hence, it does not result
in well-deﬁned binary maps (“tract” or “no tract”) but in a probability map rep-
resenting the likelihood of any voxel to be connected with the seed region. These
probability maps are most commonly generated by iterations of the streamline
process. In other words, the local tensor is interpreted as a probability density
distribution and many random samples are drawn from this distribution (Behrens
et al. 2003b; Koch et al. 2002). The more streamlines emanating from the seed
region cross a certain voxel on their way through the tensor ﬁeld, the higher the
so-called structural connectivity between this voxel and the seed region is.
However, it should be kept in mind that these connectivity values are “best possible
guesses” and that they should not be interpreted as anatomical ﬁber count, which is
commonly done (Jones et al. 2013). One valuable feature of probabilistic tractog-
raphy is that it may be applied with multi-ﬁber models (Behrens et al. 2007). These
models have been developed to tackle the problem of ﬁber tracking in a
multi-orientation ﬁeld (e.g., regions where ﬁbers cross). Anatomical regions rep-
resented by voxels with several “major” principal eigenvectors are completely
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                               419

meaningless as a subject to deterministic tractography. It is important to note that in
the majority of cases more than one seed ROI is necessary to single out a speciﬁc
tract of interest. For this purpose, additional ROIs have to be deﬁned and related to
the seed ROI with logical operators such as “AND,” “OR,” and “NOT.” For
example, in FSL’s diffusion toolbox (Behrens et al. 2003b; Smith et al. 2004) one
may deﬁne a “waypoint mask,” “exclusion mask,” or a “termination mask.”
“Waypoint masks” are related with a logical “AND” to the seed ROI. That is, all
tracts have to pass this ROI on their way through the tensor ﬁeld, while all others
are being discarded. If several “waypoint masks” have been deﬁned, the logical
“AND” may be set to a logical (inclusive) “OR,” meaning that all tracts have to
pass at least one of the “waypoint masks” in order to be kept. “Waypoint masks”
and “exclusion masks” are both connected to the seed region with a logical “NOT,”
however, there is one crucial difference: Whereas pathways that have come in touch
with “exclusion masks” will be discarded as a whole, pathways that have contact
with “termination masks” will only be stopped but not discarded. That is, the
pathway from the seed ROI to the “termination mask” will be kept as result but
cannot propagate any further. Obviously, pathways are not only stopped by “ter-
mination masks” but streamlining is also aborted based on criteria inherent to the
respective tractography algorithm used. These criteria have been introduced to
prevent streamlines from propagating through vectorial ﬁelds with great uncertainty
of estimation. Common termination criteria include a minimum FA threshold of 0.2
and a turning angle threshold of roughly 60°.



22.4     Biological Substrates of DTI

It is unquestionable that DTI and tractography yield useful insights into neu-
roanatomy. However, big challenges lie in the veriﬁcation of virtual ﬁber bundles as
well as in the interpretation of diffusivity measures in terms of their underlying
neuronal substrates. Approaches to face these challenges include DTI of objects of
known structure, such as physical phantoms (Perrin et al. 2005) and validation
against anatomical data acquired by the use of other methods (Johansen-Berg and
Rushworth 2009; Lawes et al. 2008). It is easy to see how even the most complex
physical phantom will fail as an adequate model of neuronal tissue. The direct
validation of DTI indices and tractography performance against anatomical
knowledge gained by the application of complementary methods is, thus, indis-
pensable. One elegant study (Dyrby et al. 2007) has validated tractography in post-
mortem brains of three minipigs by comparing the results of probabilistic tractog-
raphy with results obtained from two established tracer methods. When inspecting
virtual ﬁber bundles in the light of ﬁber trajectories identiﬁed by one of the tracers,
overlaps of around 80 % were reported. Disjunct parts were due to false-negative as
well as false-positive tractography results. Tractography had difﬁculties identifying
the termination point of tracts originating from/terminating in subcortical gray
matter, which lead to false-positive results. False-negative, “spurious” ﬁbers were
420                                                                     T. Rüber et al.

observed in anatomical regions of high ﬁber complexity (ﬁbers crossing, kissing,
spreading…). It should be noted that approximately one- to two-thirds of all voxels
within a skull-stripped DTI brain volume has been estimated to cover these
anatomical regions with high ﬁber complexity (Behrens et al. 2007; Jeurissen et al.
2012). This sets limits to tractography’s role as in vivo dissector of white matter
macrostructures. On a microstructural scale, the relation between diffusivity
parameters such as FA, MD, AD, as well as RD and their biological substrates
remains to be elucidated. However, it should be noted that the missing link between
DTI indices and their microstructural underpinnings is not only due to a lack of
research ﬁndings in this ﬁeld; also constraints inherent to DTI and MRI such as its
resolution (with each voxel containing several ten thousand neuronal connections)
restrict the usage of DTI as physiological tool. It is important to keep in mind that
there is no one-to-one relationship between any DTI index and a single white matter
component (Johansen-Berg and Rushworth 2009). Distinct microstructural pro-
cesses may lead to the same DTI observations. Alterations of DTI indices, thus,
have to be interpreted with great caution. A common inference that is made in many
DTI papers is that alterations in diffusivity mirror changes in the degree of
myelination. However, as Jones and colleagues (Jones et al. 2013) correctly point
out “the anisotropy in a region may also be lower because here is a larger axon
diameter (Takahashi et al. 2002), a lower packing density (Takahashi et al. 2002)—
both of which mean fewer barriers to diffusion in a given space—or it could be due
to increased membrane permeability (reducing the effectiveness of a boundary).”
Indeed, it soon became clear that myelination is no requirement for diffusion ani-
sotropy in white matter (Beaulieu and Allen 1994). Rather one may think of several
barriers hindering isotropic diffusion in white matter including microtubules,
myelin, axon membranes and neuroﬁlaments (Beaulieu 2002). On the contrary,
damaged or absent myelin is reliably mirrored in reduced diffusion anisotropy
(Blaschek et al. 2013; Klawiter et al. 2011; Mukherjee et al. 2001; Werring et al.
2000). Gulani and colleagues have compared excised spinal cords from myelin-
deﬁcient rats with spinal cords from age-matched controls (Gulani et al. 2001) and
came to conclude that myelin may modulate FA by up to 20 %. One difﬁculty in
determining the relative contribution of myelin to the measured anisotropy lies in
the fact that any direct comparison between myelinated and non-myelinated nerve
ﬁbers is flawed because tissues differ in their whole structural composition (Assaf
and Pasternak 2008). Axial and radial diffusivities may be helpful when trying to
explain the emergence of observed FA alterations. Decreased axial diffusivity has
been related to the growth of neuroﬁbrils (Kinoshita et al. 1999), whereas several
studies have linked a decrease in radial diffusivity to demyelination (Budde et al.
2007; Klawiter et al. 2011; Song et al. 2002, 2003). However, in their seminal
paper, Wheeler-Kingshott and Cercignani argue that one should be wary of inter-
preting tensor eigenvalues as “axial” or “radial” and of relating these measures to
microstructural properties, such as myelin (Wheeler-Kingshott and Cercignani
2009). The crucial point the authors make is that comparing eigenvalues across
subjects without checking for the alignment of the corresponding eigenvector with
the underlying tissue structures is pointless. In particular, this correspondence may
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                 421

be called into doubt when comparing tracts affected by some pathology with tracts
from healthy controls and in voxels in which more than one principal direction is
present. In the former case, it is well conceivable how a certain pathology may
change the direction of the principal eigenvector from what would be expected in
healthy tissue architecture; in the latter case, represented by an oblate diffusion
ellipsoid, the “principal” eigenvalue may not differ much from the other eigen-
values (i.e., there are more than one principal eigenvectors), thus, making the
analyses of “axial” and “radial” diffusivities completely meaningless. It may be
concluded that DTI and tractography offer a unique way to gain insights into human
neuroanatomy. However, over those “pretty pictures” (Johansen-Berg and Behrens
2006) and their tempting inferences on neuroanatomical underpinnings, one should
not forget that DTI and tractography, like any other recently developed research
method, urgently require validation and a precise deﬁnition of its scope.



