22.5     Analysis of DTI Data

In the following, three common approaches to quantitative analysis of DTI data will
be reviewed: ROI analysis (I), voxel-by-voxel analysis (II) and tract-based spatial
statistics (TBSS; III). The ﬁrst two analyses may be performed with most common
analysis programs; TBSS is part of FSL (Smith et al. 2006). ROI analyses (I) can be
performed in several ways but it is common to all of them that diffusivity param-
eters of every voxel within a two- or three-dimensional ROI are averaged and used
for statistical analysis. ROIs may be deﬁned manually on each individual brain
(I.1), they may be taken from publicly available atlases (I.2) or they may be
delineated by means of tractography (I.3). Manual deﬁnition of ROIs (I.1) is done
directly on FA maps or on anatomical volumes and then transferred to diffusion
space, depending on where the respective anatomical structure is best identiﬁable.
When drawing ROIs on FA maps, it might be helpful to superimpose diffusion
color maps indicating the main diffusion direction. ROI deﬁnition solely on FA
maps, however, is prone to preferably include high FA voxels since they are best
visible and, thus, are taken as landmarks for orientation (i.e., there is an influence of
anisotropy on ROI borders). Squared or orbital ROIs are different in this regard and,
furthermore, less time-consuming to deﬁne but these uniform ROIs also account
less for the individual forms of anatomic structures. Overall, it may be said that its
accountancy for individual anatomy is the most important advantage of manual ROI
deﬁnition, whereas on the other side its operator-dependency as well as the fact that
the manual deﬁnition work is time-killing and nerve-racking are among its disad-
vantages. The usage of atlas ROIs (I.2) is different in this regard. Here, anatomical
template regions from publicly available atlases [Harvard-Oxford cortical and
subcortical structural atlases (Caviness et al. 1996), John Hopkins University
DTI-based white matter atlas (Hua et al. 2008), Freesurfer (Fischl et al. 2002)] are
mapped on the individual brain. This approach is neither operator-dependent nor
422                                                                     T. Rüber et al.

particularly time-consuming; however, it has other difﬁculties: The anatomical
template region is generated from one or (in most cases) more brains and made
available in a three-dimensional standardized, or “stereotaxic,” coordinate space. It
has to be transferred to individual, or “native,” space in order to align with indi-
vidual anatomy using a mapping function. Individual’s brain anatomy, however,
may not correspond to the anatomy of the template brain; moreover, the mapping
function will never work perfectly leading to misalignment. [See paper by Evans
et al. (2012) for a recent review of brain atlases and their problems]. When con-
sidering the pros and cons of manually deﬁned ROIs versus atlas-derived ROIs, in
many cases ROIs delineated by tractography (I.3) will yield the best of both worlds
(Fig. 22.4): This procedure is not as operator-dependent as manual ROI deﬁnition
(making it somewhat more “objective”) and it does consider individual anatomy,
since it is run for every single subject. Tracts resulting from tractography are
thresholded (excluding low probability voxels) before diffusivity parameters of all
voxels within the respective maps are averaged. However, it is obvious that not all
anatomic regions which may be subject to DTI analysis can possibly be recon-
structed using tractography. In general, it shall not be dismissed that ROI analyses
have two systematic problems that may not be overcome: First, depending on the
size of the ROI, variation of diffusivity parameters within it is lost since all voxel
values are averaged, second, it is not feasible to investigate the whole brain
expressing a need for strong a priori hypotheses.

Fig. 22.4 Illustration of
tractography-based Region of
Interest analysis of fractional
anisotropy (FA). Tracts
resulting from tractography
are thresholded (excluding
low probability voxels) before
FA values of all voxels within
the respective tracts are
averaged [yielding “tract
speciﬁc FA”] and used for
statistical analysis
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                423

    Voxel-wise analysis (II) as well as TBSS (III, see below) resolves these issues.
In these analyses, all DTI volumes are normalized. Normalization describes the
process of registering an individual brain to a template brain using a mapping
function. Every voxel is assigned a speciﬁc “address” (Snook et al. 2007). The
crucial premise is that, after normalization a certain “address” corresponds to a
certain anatomical structure. That is, all brains and their parts align well to each
other. The standard method of brain normalization includes two steps (Ashburner
and Friston 2000; Jenkinson and Smith 2001; Snook et al. 2007): The ﬁrst step, a
linear transformation, warps the brain in order to account for global brain differ-
ences (size and position); the second step applies a nonlinear transformation which
estimates internal brain deformations. After normalization, analyses are run inde-
pendently including every voxel with the same “address,” under the assumption that
all voxels with the same “address” represent the same anatomic location across
subjects (Fig. 22.5). This enables comparison of diffusivity parameters between
groups and correlation analysis with variables of interest. The advantages of voxel-
wise analyses are obvious: They are fast, fully automated, operator-independent and
investigate the whole brain without the need for a priori ROI deﬁnition. However,
voxel-wise analyses are also connected with disadvantages. It is not surprising that
the registration of healthy brains will never work perfectly, let alone the registration
of lesioned brains (Jones and Cercignani 2010; Mukherjee et al. 2008). To alleviate
some of the registration problems faced, one normally smoothes the normalized
brains using a low pass ﬁlter. It shall not be dismissed, that smoothing FA maps is
prone to cause problems, since most white matter tracts are thin, might thus be
“washed out” by the smoothing and the selection of the right low pass ﬁlter is rather
arbitrary but influences the results of voxel-wise analyses (Jones et al. 2005).
Additionally, it is obvious that the need for brain normalization of low-resolution,
high-contrast FA maps introduces problems: Smallest shifts between groups may
incorrectly be interpreted as FA differences between groups. Furthermore, effects of
partial volumes may challenge the analysis. Partial volume effects occur when a
single voxel contains two or more tissue types but is presumed to only contain one
that is white matter (Assaf and Pasternak 2008). This is especially likely to occur in
white matter regions near the ventricles where high FA voxels are located just on
the side of low FA voxels. Certain patient groups are particularly vulnerable to
partial volume effects: Schizophrenic patients, for example, exhibit enlarged ven-
tricles as compared to healthy controls (Honea et al. 2005). Another challenge of
voxel-wise analysis concerns the sheer amount of statistical tests being performed.
A skull-stripped FA map of somewhat good resolution contains approximately
250,000 voxels. A whole-brain voxel-wise analysis, thus, comes along with a
gigantic problem of multiple comparisons (Loring et al. 2002). This problem may
be tackled with statistical correction methods. In analysis of MRI data, most
commonly correction for family-wise error (FWE) is applied (Friston et al. 1994;
Worsley 2005). A complementary, though not alternative way, is to apply
voxel-wise analysis only within certain ROIs. One might, for example, reconstruct
white matter tracts by means of tractography in native space; normalize FA maps
and use the resulting transformation matrices to also normalize white matter tracts.
424                                                                                T. Rüber et al.




Fig. 22.5 Illustration of voxel-wise analysis of fractional anisotropy. After normalization of all
volumes, statistical analyses are run independently for every voxel with the same “address” of a
skill-stripped volume. The number of statistical comparisons may be reduced by only running
voxel-wise analysis within a Region of Interest (which may be delineated by tractography as
illustrated here)
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                              425

These normalized tracts are then used to build a canonical tract, which may be
thresholded based on the voxel-by-voxel overlap of the individual normalized tracts
(Rüber et al. 2012). Another way to reduce the number of statistical comparisons, is
to restrict voxel-wise analysis to white matter by using white matter masks. These
masks may be derived from anatomical volumes with FreeSurfer (Dale et al. 1999;
Fischl et al. 1999) or other automated tools for segmentation and then transferred to
diffusion space.
    TBSS (III) has been developed to face two of the biggest challenges of con-
ventional voxel-wise DTI analysis (Smith et al. 2006): multiple comparison and
alignment. Voxel-wise analysis in TBSS is only conﬁned to the FA skeleton, which
represents the centers of all white matter tracts common to the study group. This FA
skeleton is used as an alignment-invariant feature to mitigate any residual
misalignment after a common mapping function has been applied. The TBSS
processing works as follows: First, individual FA maps are normalized applying a
nonlinear transformation (similarly as described above). Based on all normalized
brains, a mean FA map (in standard space) is generated and used to create the
pseudo-anatomical white matter skeleton (it is pseudo-anatomical since white
matter is segmented only based on FA and not on anatomical volumes such as T1 or
T2). Next, the skeleton is projected on the individual FA map (in standard space),
but is deformed based on a constrained local search for maximal FA values
(Fig. 22.6). Lastly, voxel-wise testing may be performed within the skeleton as
described above. Hence, TBSS is built on the strategy that the alignment of a
skeleton containing maximal FA voxels to local FA maxima in the individual FA
maps will mitigate the residual misalignment of previous nonlinear registrations.
However, it has been criticized that this strategy primarily leads to correspondence
of FA values but not to anatomical correspondence (Zalesky 2011). In other words,
local FA maxima do not necessarily correspond to the same anatomical locations
across subjects. In addition, if crude registration errors occur, they are difﬁcult to


Fig. 22.6 Fractional
anisotropy (FA) template
brain and the respective FA
skeleton as generated by
TBSS. Please note how the
FA skeleton aligns to the
white matter but only covers
the centers and, thus, reduces
the number of multiple
comparisons
426                                                                     T. Rüber et al.

identify in the skeleton (Jones and Cercignani 2010). Another disadvantage of
TBSS concerns the fact that white matter regions exhibiting low FA values are not
included in the analysis. Also, crossing ﬁber regions exhibit low FA values but are
crucial from a neuroanatomical perspective. In newer versions of TBSS, one may
choose to use models that incorporate ﬁber-speciﬁc measures (Jbabdi et al. 2010)
which enhances analysis of crossing ﬁber regions. It may be concluded that TBSS is
a powerful tool that successfully deals with some problems that come along with
traditional analysis approaches to DTI data.
   It is important to acknowledge that TBSS is not the only attempt to deal with the
shortcomings of brain registration. However, one general problem of common
registration algorithms is their dependency on “unidimensional” scalars, such as FA
(Zalesky 2011). Conversely, DTI yields ellipsoids that are fully described by six
independent parameters, and these parameters are lost when vectors are mapped to
rotationally invariant scalars. Thus, anatomical information made available by DTI
is not considered in common brain registration algorithms. Multichannel registra-
tion algorithms which depend on all six parameters of the tensor have been pro-
posed (Guimond et al. 2001), but are not widespread.



22.6    Connectional Anatomy

DTI is a boon to modern neuroscience not only for allowing the examination of
white matter as such, but also for tractography and its potential to study connec-
tional anatomy. The human brain consists of 100 billion neurons of which 20
billion have been estimated to be located in the cerebral cortex (Azevedo et al.
2009; Noctor et al. 2007). On average, every cortical neuron builds 7000 con-
nections with other neurons and 150,000–180,000 km of myelinated ﬁbers are
believed to be part of the brain (Drachman 2005). Connectional anatomy, however,
does not solely yield insights into white matter circuits. Keeping in mind that
“nothing deﬁnes the function of a neuron more faithfully than the nature of its
inputs and outputs” (Mesulam 2005), it becomes clear that structure and function go
together in neuroscience (Blits 1999) and how DTI may inform the study of neu-
ronal mechanisms underlying cognitive functioning (ffytche and Catani 2005).
Without any doubt, in the last decade has neuroscientiﬁc attention shifted from
single loci to the networks connecting them. This has not only extended our
knowledge on brain networks but also on single loci being part of these networks.
For example, network analysis has opened an avenue for using tractography to
provide information of gray matter parcellation (Behrens and Johansen-Berg 2005).
Traditionally, cortical or subcortical regions are deﬁned based either on cytoar-
chitectonic boundaries or on gross-anatomical landmarks. However, cytoarchitec-
tonic boundaries do not necessarily correspond to gross-anatomical landmarks
(Geyer et al. 2000). Thus, another basis for the deﬁnition of great matter boundaries
is favored and connectivity-based parcellation has been named as a convincing
candidate for this purpose (Le Bihan and Johansen-Berg 2012). The underlying
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                         427




Fig. 22.7 Connectivity-based parcellation of the striatum according to its connections to several
cortical and subcortical regions [Fig. 22.1 from Cohen et al. (2009); permission for reproduction
by Nature Publishing Group]


notion of connectivity-based parcellation is that cortical and subcortical subregions
may be distinguished according to their so-called connectivity ﬁngerprint
(Passingham et al. 2002). Connectivity ﬁngerprints delineate clusters of voxels with
similar connection patterns (Fig. 22.7). Several studies have compellingly
demonstrated the potential of this novel approach by yielding connectivity-based
parcellations of the thalamus (Behrens et al. 2003a), amygdalae (Bach et al. 2011),
basal ganglia (Menke et al. 2010), cingulate cortex (Beckmann et al. 2009), of
Broca’s Area (Anwander et al. 2007), of the lateral premotor cortex (Tomassini
et al. 2007), and supplementary motor area (Johansen-Berg et al. 2004). Results
obtained by means of fMRI have yielded good correspondence with some of these
parcellations, providing validation of this approach and underlining the functional
relevance of connectivity-based boundaries (Johansen-Berg et al. 2005; Schubotz
et al. 2010; Tomassini et al. 2007).
   Tractography pushed DTI to another new ﬁeld of study called connectomics
(Hagmann et al. 2008; Sporns et al. 2005), the comprehensive studies of neural
connections in the brain. In 2009, NIH has announced a Request for Applications
for the so-called Human Connectome Project. One year later, grants totaling $40
million were awarded to two collaborating consortia. The overarching purpose of
the project is to acquire and share data about human brain connectivity. It is hoped
that “a deeper understanding of human brain connectivity and its variability will
provide valuable insights into what makes us uniquely human and what accounts
for the great diversity of behavioral capacities and repertoires in healthy adults”
(Van Essen et al. 2012).
428                                                                       T. Rüber et al.


22.7    Clinical Applications

Clinical applications of diffusion MRI broadly fall into three categories: lesion
interrogation, tissue characterization, and tract reconstruction (Huston and Field
2013). The beneﬁts of diffusion MRI are investigated in the context of many
diseases including stroke, brain development disorders, epilepsy, dementia, psy-
chiatric disorders, demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis, and brain
tumors. While diffusion MRI has contributed a lot to our understanding of the
pathologies underlying these illnesses and is used as a complementary method of
diagnosis in many cases, it is only in the case of acute brain ischemia that diffusion
MRI has really found its way into clinical routine (Dubey et al. 2013). DWI may
detect brain infarcts several hours before conventional anatomical sequences
(Munoz Maniega et al. 2004), which is why it is endorsed in the diagnosis within
the ﬁrst 12 h after acute brain ischemia (Schellinger et al. 2010). The infarct core
volume, as estimated by DWI, has also been suggested to be an important predictor
of clinical outcome and treatment efﬁcacy (Gonzalez 2012; Schellinger et al. 2010).
Even more than the volume, its degree of overlap with the corticospinal tract or the
arcuate fasciculus seems to be a predictor of motor and language impairment,
respectively (Marchina et al. 2011; Zhu et al. 2010). Indeed, diffusivity parameters
of the corticospinal tract could reliably be related to the degree of motor impairment
(Lindenberg et al. 2010; Schaechter et al. 2009). As mentioned above, diffusion
MRI may detect pathologic tissue alterations with a higher sensitivity as conven-
tional anatomical sequences in some cases. However, the low pathologic speciﬁcity
of its measures has set boundaries to its clinical usefulness in tissue characterization
(Huston and Field 2013). Its application in pre-surgical diagnostics seems to be
more promising: In neurosurgery, preoperative reconstructions of white matter
tracts may lead to a better understanding of their individual anatomy and may, thus,
facilitate their preservation during resection. A recent study with patients under-
going anterior temporal lobe resection (Yogarajah et al. 2009) revealed that the
extent of one part of the optic radiation as determined by preoperative tractography
was related to the degree of complication by superior visual ﬁeld deﬁcits. Even
more convincing, Wu et al. (2007) found that 118 patients with a highly aggressive
tumor survived on average 7.2 months longer than 120 control patients with the
same tumor if preoperative tract mapping had been performed.



22.8    Genetics/Environment/Age

White matter status may be thought to depend on genes, environment and age. It is
an intuitive notion that white matter alterations happen within the framework of
genes. This framework changes across the lifespan leaving more or less room for
the white matter effects of environment in development and adulthood. DTI may
detect even subtle white matter alterations; however, it remains challenging to
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                               429

speciﬁcally attribute these alterations to the influence of genetic factors, environ-
ment or age. Especially, it is difﬁcult to differentiate between the influence of genes
and environment (so-called nature–nurture debate) as will be shown below.
    The influence of genes may well be studied through comparison between
identical and nonidentical twins. In these studies, the excess in the pair correlation
of identical twins over the pair correlation of nonidentical twins is attributed to
genetic effects. Chiang and colleagues (Chiang et al. 2009) found that close to 80 %
of FA variance may be explained by genetic factors, especially in parietal brain
regions. Furthermore, the authors reported correlations between measures of
intellectual performance and FA values. An overlapping set of genes seems to
influence IQ scores as well as diffusivity parameters, since the authors were able to
more accurately predict IQ by using FA values in the group of identical twins than
they were in the group of nonidentical twins. In another DTI twin study (Jahanshad
et al. 2010), 20–40 % of FA brain asymmetry was found to be genetically deter-
mined. Using a group of 705 twins and their siblings, Chiang et al. (2011) inves-
tigated factors moderating the heritability of white matter features as measured by
FA. They found that higher heritability was associated with younger age, male sex,
higher intellectual performance, and higher socioeconomic status. Some of the
causal mechanisms behind their ﬁnding could only be subject to speculation. The
observation of white matter heritability decreasing along age may be interpreted as
increasing environmental influences on white matter microstructure.
    Neuroplasticity is a term ﬁrst introduced by the polish neuroscientist Jerzy
Konorski in 1948 to describe the brain’s ability to functionally and structurally adapt
to changing environmental demands. Long enough, the brain was believed to be
static after development but this conception has been substantially revised in the last
decades (Jancke 2009): “[…] there is a continuous interaction between experiential
process and brain structure. Over time, experiences are sedimented in the form of
organic habits, dispositions and interactive schemes that eventually constitute the
individual’s personality.” (Fuchs 2009) Additionally, white matter is no longer seen
as passive infrastructure but as a plastic component of the brain. Using DTI,
“neuroarcheology” (Le Bihan and Johansen-Berg 2012) may be performed to study
the lasting effects of past experiences and to keep track of their neuronal correlates.
Impressive associations between diffusivity characteristics of white matter and
experience have been reported in highly trained experts in sensorimotor skills
(Dayan and Cohen 2011). Bengtsson and colleagues reported higher FA values in
professional pianists as compared to non-musicians in the posterior limb of the
internal capsule (Bengtsson et al. 2005). Even more, the authors found several white
matter regions exhibiting a positive correlation between the amount of hours prac-
ticed and FA values. DTI-studies have also reported evidence for white matter
plasticity in response to the acquisition of other sensorimotor skills, such as ballet
dancing or playing golf. Furthermore, neuronal white matter correlates of high
cognitive abilities have been found by means of cross-sectional DTI-studies. Floel
et al. (2009) found that individual subject’s performance in an artiﬁcial learning task
was related to FA values surrounding Broca’s area (a cortical region in the left
frontal lobe which traditionally has been implicated in language processing) and
430                                                                      T. Rüber et al.

within ﬁbers arising from this area. Tsang et al. (2009) showed that variations in
performance in a mental arithmetic task reflect variability of FA values in a central
chunk of the anterior superior longitudinal fascicle. This tract connects the inferior
parietal lobe with precentral and inferior frontal regions—cortical regions that have
been shown to be coactive by means of fMRI in subjects performing mental arith-
metic tasks. As the studies presented above are cross-sectional, it remains unclear
whether the white matter alterations reported are the cause or the consequence of the
respective expertise (i.e., are people with altered diffusivity characteristics more
likely to play golf or do the alterations occur as people pick up golf playing skills).
The results of cross-sectional studies, thus, always have to be discussed in the light
of the so-called nature–nurture debate (Stiles 2011) and no ultimate inferences on
the direction of causality can be made. Longitudinal studies are clearer in this regard
and have become the gold standard for neuroimaging studies examining neuro-
plasticity. Some longitudinal DTI-studies have been run and offer intriguing insights,
since they enable the observation of the brain during the acquisition of new skills.
One of the ﬁrst longitudinal DTI-studies reported an increase of FA values in the
subcortical white matter underlying the intraparietal sulcus after subjects learned to
juggle within 6 weeks (Scholz et al. 2009). FA values in the cluster reported
increased slightly after 4 weeks without juggling but still were higher than before
subjects learned to juggle. Longitudinal studies have also found FA changes after
intensive memory training (Engvig et al. 2012; Landi et al. 2011; Takeuchi et al.
2010). Keller and Just (2009) found lower FA values in the anterior left cerebral
white matter in a group of eight to 12 year old children classiﬁed as poor readers
compared to good readers at the same age. Poor readers then were randomly
assigned to either an intervention group undergoing an intensive 100 h program of
remedial reading instruction or to a control group. Children who had undergone the
100 h program showed signiﬁcantly increased FA values in the anterior left cerebral
white matter. Even more, this FA change correlated with improvement in phono-
logical decoding. Children in the control group did not show signiﬁcant FA changes
between the ﬁrst and the second scan. Schlaug et al. (2009) found that effective
melodic intonation therapy of aphasic patients after stroke was related to an increase
in structural connectivity in the contralesional arcuate fasciculus (a white matter
pathway implicated in language processing). A recent study (Langer et al. 2012)
investigated patients whose right arm injury required limb immobilization for at least
14 days. They applied DTI to examine structural integrity of the corticospinal tracts
and, furthermore, measured cortical thickness of sensorimotor regions based on
high-res anatomical volumes, they had acquired. The authors found reduced cortical
thickness and decreased FA values in the left sensorimotor regions and left corti-
cospinal tract, respectively. The opposite changes were observed on the right side,
which may indicate a skill transfer from the left hemisphere (controlling the right
injured hand) to the right hemisphere (controlling the left non-injured hand) being
caused by a compensatory use of the non-deprived hand.
    It is an interesting notion that most of the training-induced plastic white matter
alterations described above are represented by comparably higher FA values and,
hence, contrast an age-related decrease in FA values observed after the maturational
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                431

peak. Many recent studies employ DTI to investigate the neurobiology of aging
determining this maturational peak, when maturation turns into degeneration
(Kochunov et al. 2012; Lebel et al. 2012; Sullivan et al. 2010; Westlye et al. 2010).
A link between white matter changes in the aging brain, cognitive decline and
degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease have been established, commonly
referred to as “disconnection hypothesis” (Bartzokis 2004; O’Sullivan et al. 2001).
Generally, an increase in FA/a decrease in MD until the third and fourth decade are
observed which is followed by a decrease in FA/an increase in MD. White matter
volume seems to reach its peak ten to 20 years later in life than FA (Salat et al. 2009;
Westlye et al. 2010). However, diffusivity parameters generally seem to be the better
indicator of white matter maturation. It has been proposed that the inverted u-shaped
(quadratic) course of FA along the lifespan is largely dependent on the degree of
white matter myelination (Abe et al. 2002; Bartzokis et al. 2010; Gao et al. 2009).
Keeping in mind that cognitive efﬁciency relies on the myelination of white matter
ﬁbers, this proposition provides a possible link between the changes of diffusivity
parameters on one end and the alterations of cognitive functions in the aging human.
Indeed, the zenith of FA values largely concurs with the age range in which cog-
nitive performance has been found to reach its peak (Salthouse 2009). Indeed,
alterations of cognitive processing abilities, verbal memory, and motor skills along
the lifespan have been related to diffusivity parameters (Bartzokis et al. 2010;
Hedden et al. 2005; Salthouse 2000). Recently, it was shown that age-related
over-recruiting of frontal lobe structures when completing a task-switching paradigm
were negatively correlated to FA of these structures (Zhu et al. 2013). Further studies
are warranted in this ﬁeld which derives its importance from the therapeutic
potentials based on a better understanding of the aging brain.



22.9     DTI-Studies in Neuroeconomics

DTI-tractography has rarely been used in the ﬁeld of neuroeconomics. In the fol-
lowing, two exemplary studies on associations between DTI measures and per-
sonality traits will be discussed: Olson et al. (2009) found several frontal and
temporal white matter regions which showed correlations between FA values and
results of a delay discounting task in a group of 79 adolescents. Using
DTI-tractography, Cohen et al. (2009) showed that structural connectivity between
the striatum and certain cortical as well as subcortical regions was related to
self-reported individual differences in personality traits such as novelty seeking and
reward dependence. Both studies are based on two premises: (1) That white matter
structural architecture reflects personality characteristics (as determined by delay
discounting tests and self-reports, respectively) and (2) that this may be measured
by means of DTI. Whereas the ﬁrst premise appeals to an intuitive notion (be-
havioral differences have to have a structural equivalent somewhere in the brain), it
is more surprising that they can actually be measured (second premise) by com-
parably coarse-grained methods such as DTI. In the study by Olson and colleagues,
432                                                                     T. Rüber et al.

79 adolescents between the age of 9 and 23 underwent DTI and, among other tests,
a delay discounting test. Delay discounting describes individual’s choice to prefer
an immediate reward over a larger delayed reward (Ainslie 1975). Mature delay
discounting behavior emerges in adolescent’s development and has been shown to
correlate with age and verbal IQ (Olson et al. 2007). Equally, myelination of white
matter is thought to occur as part of neuronal maturation (Arain et al. 2013) in
adolescence and may be measured by diffusivity measures (Song et al. 2002). The
aim of the current study was to relate delay discounting behavior to diffusivity
measures. Previous fMRI studies had implicated the role of frontal, parietal and
temporal regions in delay discounting (McClure et al. 2004; Wittmann et al. 2007)
which is why the authors expected to ﬁnd structure-behavior correlations in these
regions. However, they performed a whole-cerebrum voxel-wise regression anal-
ysis. Results were not corrected for multiple comparisons, but the threshold of
signiﬁcance was set to p < 0.001 and an extent threshold of 25 voxels was applied.
The application of neuroimaging data analysis not corrected for multiple compar-
isons has been heavily criticized (Bennett et al. 2009). It shall, however, not be
dismissed that the authors applied a hypothesis-free whole-brain approach albeit
having well-founded a priori hypotheses on where structural–behavioral correla-
tions may be found which partly legitimates less conservative signiﬁcance testing.
Indeed, the authors could report clusters indicating a positive FA─delay dis-
counting correlation in several white matter regions primarily in the frontal and
temporal lobes: The higher the FA values, the more the subject preferred higher
delayed rewards over lower immediate rewards. In addition, regions with associ-
ations between MD and delay discounting were found. These correlations were
negative: The lower the MD values, the more the subject preferred higher delayed
rewards over lower immediate rewards. Based on these analyses, it cannot be ruled
out that, delay discounting as well as diffusivity measures both vary under the
influence of a third (confounding) variable but are not actually related with each
other. The authors mention age and verbal IQ as possible confounding variables and
enter both as covariates into the regression equation. Several clusters remained
signiﬁcant after controlling for age and/or verbal IQ, thus, giving evidence that the
observed relation between diffusivity parameters and delay discounting is not
completely due to the general influence of neurodevelopmental maturation indi-
cated by age or part of a more general cognitive process measured by a verbal IQ
test. Consequently, observed structural–behavioral associations may be seen as
partly age-dependent and partly age-independent. To rule out that these associations
do reflect general processes of decision-making, the cluster-wise averages of
FA/MD were correlated with the outcome of a probability discounting task which
did, except for one cluster, not yield signiﬁcant results. Observed white matter
diffusivity characteristics may, thus, be viewed as speciﬁc microstructural correlate
of delay discounting. Unfortunately, the authors missed to perform additional
regression analyses for directional diffusivities. This would have been of special
interest under the premise of radial diffusivity reflecting the degree of myelination
and with regard to the fact that the frontal lobe becomes increasingly myelinated
during adolescence. Lastly, the authors related the anatomical location of clusters to
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                            433

common white matter tracts implicating their role in delay discounting. The tracts
were not individually modeled using tractography but probability masks from a
common tractography white matter atlas (Wakana et al. 2004) were used. It may be
summarized, that the study by Olson and colleagues compellingly illustrates some
of the structural white matter correlates of delay discounting and their development
in adolescence.
    The second exemplary study discussed also suggests white matter circuitry to
underlie certain personality traits. However, this study by Cohen and colleagues
uses a different methodological approach: Variations in diffusivity measures are
not found to be relevant here, rather structural connectivity as determined by
tractography was found to correlate with novelty seeking and reward dependence
in 20 healthy adults. This study as well as the study by Olson and colleagues
relied on previous studies linking the personality traits of interest to neuronal
circuitry. Cohen and colleagues mention evidence from studies linking novelty
seeking and reward processing to a hippocampus-ventral striatal-midbrain loop
and to prefrontal-striatal connections, respectively (Hollerman et al. 2000; Lisman
and Grace 2005). They, thus, applied tractography to parcellate the striatum
according to its connections to several cortical and subcortical regions (see this
chapter’s paragraph on connectional anatomy and Fig. 22.7). These regions were
deﬁned using a common atlas (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al. 2002). Voxels in the
striatum were then labeled according to the region they were most strongly
connected to. The connectional strength between these voxels and their respective
regions were found to correlate with novelty seeking in the case of connections to
the amygdala as well as the hippocampus and with reward dependence in the case
of a network to cortical regions including medical and lateral orbitofrontal cor-
tices, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and supplemental motor area. Connections
which correlated with novelty seeking did not correlate with reward dependence
and vice versa. As intriguing as these ﬁndings are, it remains unclear which
microstructural characteristics cause the altered connection strength. Even func-
tional inferences of these microstructural characteristics in terms of neuronal
efﬁciency have to be made with great caution. The authors conclude that
“although it is tempting to speculate that individuals with higher tract strength
values can transmit information more efﬁciently between regions, further work is
needed to conﬁrm this interpretation.” The explanatory gap between white matter
features as measured by DTI and character traits as deﬁned by psychology
remains unsurpassed also by the most advanced DTI-studies.



22.10     Conclusion

The advent of DTI and tractography has paved the way to one of the most flour-
ishing ﬁelds of today’s neuroscience: The non-invasive in vivo assessment and
delineation of white matter tracts. As this chapter has tried to show, DTI has made
immense contributions to distinct areas of neuroscientiﬁc research just as it has
434                                                                            T. Rüber et al.

changed our perspective on the brain as a whole. However, 25 years of experience
with DTI has forced the community to increasingly recognize the limits of this
imaging modality. In particular, the interpretation of DTI ﬁndings in terms of their
neuronal underpinnings has been proven difﬁcult. In their very readable review,
Jones and colleagues point out that “the only thing that we can say with any
certainty in diffusion MRI is that we measure a signal change when a
motion-sensitizing gradient is applied along a given axis. Inferring anything else is
dependent on the quality of the model and the quality of the data” (Jones et al.
2013). As outlined above, the tensor model is thought to be inadequate in some
regards. More promising models of diffusion data are on hand; however, they are
not in common use since most of them are connected to special hardware
requirements as well as long acquisition times and a lack of experience in ongoing
research. Hence, some of the main reasons for the continuously growing success of
DTI may well be called pragmatic. Nonetheless, MRI hardware development will
continue to push the ﬁeld of diffusion imaging forward which most likely will
compensate for some of the drawbacks of newer diffusion models. Approaches
other than the tensor model will, therefore, play a more prominent role in future
times: Diffusion Spectrum Imaging (DSI), High Angular Resolution Diffusion
Imaging (HARDI), and Q-Ball Imaging (QBI) have all been named as promising
candidates (Tournier et al. 2011).
   This chapter has provided an introduction to the mechanisms of DTI and worked
to explain its utilization while highlighting its limitations and examples of suc-
cessful applications. Notably, DTI has not yet found an established place in neu-
roeconomics. However, there is no reason why this should not be the case in times
to come. Even higher cognitive functions have already been shown to be at least
partly constituted by white matter, which makes DTI a promising tool in behavioral
psychology. It is our hope that this chapter will encourage neuroeconomists to use
DTI in their research.
