Chapter 22
Diffusion Tensor Imaging
(DTI) and Tractography

Theodor Rüber, Christian Erich Elger and Bernd Weber




Abstract Diffusion Tensor Imaging is a Magnet Resonance Imaging-technique that
allows for the non-invasive in vivo assessment and delineation of white matter tracts.
The Magnet Resonance signal is sensitized to the natural diffusion process of protons and
a tensor model is ﬁtted to the resulting data. By following the direction of the diffusion
maximum across the brain, the process of tractography yields three-dimensional
reconstructions of white matter tracts, which may be microstructurally analyzed by
means of diffusivity parameters. Before the advent of Diffusion Tensor Imaging, studies
of connectional anatomy in humans could only be conducted post-mortem. Diffusion
Tensor Imaging has shifted neuroscientiﬁc attention from single brain regions to the
networks connecting them. This, however, has not only extended our knowledge on
brain networks but also on single loci being part of these networks. Although the
biological substrates of Diffusion Tensor Imaging-derived parameters remain unclear to
a certain extent, Diffusion Tensor Imaging and tractography have successfully informed
many studies in the ﬁeld of age- or training-related neuronal changes. In addition, it has
been found to be applicable in clinical settings. However, Diffusion Tensor Imaging
studies covering the ﬁelds of neuroeconomics and behavioral psychology are sparse.
Two pioneer studies from these ﬁelds have successfully related personality character-
istics of interest to Diffusion Tensor Imaging- and tractography-derived measures. This
chapter tries to give an introduction to the mechanisms of Diffusion Tensor Imaging and
will work to explain its utilization while highlighting limitations of Diffusion Tensor
Imaging as well as examples of its successful applications.



22.1    Introduction

Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) is a modern Magnet Resonance Imaging (MRI)-
method which allows to examine the microstructural status of white matter in vivo
and non-invasively. Tractography is a modeling technique which uses DTI data to

T. Rüber (&)  C.E. Elger  B. Weber
Department of Epileptology, Bonn University Hospital, Bonn, Germany
e-mail: theodor.rueber@ukb.uni-bonn.de

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                              411
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_22
412                                                                     T. Rüber et al.

three-dimensionally reconstruct white matter pathways. The advent of DTI and
tractography has revolutionized neuroscience in the last 25 years by opening an
avenue for the study of white matter connections in living human subjects. Before
that, white matter studies in humans could only be conducted post-mortem. Tracing
neuronal connections in the brain dates back to the work of the nineteenth century
neuroanatomists: Carl Wernicke was among the ﬁrst to relate clinical pathologies to
lesions of neuronal connections (Wernicke 1874). Joseph Jules Dejerine used
myelin stains to study (so-called Wallerian) degeneration in patients which hap-
pened anterograde and retrograde to focal lesions (Dejerine and Dejerine-Klumpke
1895). Modern techniques of tract tracing exploit the active axonal transport
mechanisms of neurons in animals (Dauguet et al. 2007; Johansen-Berg and
Rushworth 2009; Mesulam 2005). Here, a tracer substance including small
fluorescent molecules, neurotoxins, latex microspheres, or viruses is injected into a
region of interest and taken up by the cell. This procedure is followed by a waiting
period of several days in which the tracer is either transported from the cell body to
the axon terminals (anterograde tracing) or from the axon terminals to the cell body
(retrograde tracing). The animal is then sacriﬁced; the brain is ﬁxed, sectioned and
post-processed to allow for visualization of the tracer substance (Johansen-Berg
and Rushworth 2009). The results may be used to localize neurons of origin,
visualize pathways “hidden” in white matter, and to spot terminal ﬁelds. For
obvious reasons, this procedure cannot be applied to humans. Thus, core questions
of human neuroanatomy had to remain unanswered. In their editorial published
1993 in Nature, Francis Crick and Edward Jones concluded that “Human neu-
roanatomy is so backward because we cannot use the common tracer methods on
humans […]” and underlined the need for new techniques to the study of the human
brain (Crick and Jones 1993). DTI has been named as “most concrete response to
their appeal” (Catani 2007). Functional MRI (fMRI) had shifted attention to cortical
areas and their functions leading to what has been termed a “new sort of
phrenology” (Mesulam 2005), and to the consideration of white matter only as
passive infrastucture. DTI and tractography have pushed white matter back in the
focus of neuroscientiﬁc attention after a long time of stagnation. This is voiced in
the common alteration of the colloquialism “gray matters” to “white matters” in the
neuroscience community.
   A detailed introduction to the mechanisms and applications of DTI is beyond the
scope of the current chapter. Rather, this chapter aims to provide a preliminary
understanding of DTI, allowing the reader to value the opportunities but be aware
of the limitations of this recent imaging modality. Emphasis of this chapter will be
analysis approaches to DTI data and applications of DTI and tractography in order
to give it a practical thrust. The principles of DTI will be briefly reviewed before
introducing its most commonly used measures. Tractography will then be discussed
and common approaches of DTI-tractography data analysis will be presented,
including pitfalls and limitations of this method. Furthermore, common DTI
applications for clinical purposes as well as research studies of anatomy and
plasticity will be reviewed. Finally, two DTI-studies related to the ﬁeld of neu-
roeconomics will be discussed and a conclusion from this chapter will be drawn.
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                 413


22.2     Basic Principles

DTI is a speciﬁc modeling technique of diffusion-weighted datasets (Basser et al.
1994b; Pierpaoli and Basser 1996). Diffusion-Weighted Imaging (DWI) is a variant
of conventional MRI (Le Bihan et al. 1986; Taylor and Bushell 1985). DWI/DTI
may be performed with existing MRI technology without the additional use of new
equipment or contrast agents. The advantages related to MRI, thus, also apply to
DTI: It is non-invasive, may be performed in vivo, is harmless to the subject as long
as security guidelines are being followed, is widely available and relatively inex-
pensive. In DWI, the MRI signal is sensitized to the tissue water diffusion rate.
From the atomistic point of view, molecular diffusion is deﬁned as a random walk
of molecules that is driven by thermal energy. Diffusion of particles was ﬁrst
observed by the Scottish botanist Robert Brown in 1827 who interpreted the
movement as “essence of life”; scientiﬁc explanation of molecular diffusion was
given by Albert Einstein almost 80 years later (Einstein 1905). The process of
diffusion may well be pictured by means of a simple experiment: Some drops of ink
are carefully poured into a glass of water. At ﬁrst, the ink will be clearly distin-
guishable in one area of the glass but will then diffuse all over and be uniformly
dissolved. In the middle of the glass, molecules are not hindered by the container.
Their diffusion process is nondirectional, whereas close to the container walls,
diffusion is directional. Directionally unrestricted diffusion is described as isotropic,
whereas directional diffusion is described as anisotropic. It is easy to see how
diffusion will be anisotropic in coherent white matter bundles, such as in the
internal capsule, where connections descend from the cortex to the spine, and how it
will be isotropic in the fluid-ﬁlled ventricles. By means of a magnetic ﬁeld gradient,
the MR signal may be sensitized to diffusion. The most basic form of diffusion
imaging, DWI, relies on a model of a three-dimensional isotropic Gaussian dis-
tribution and only yields a scalar measure of the diffusion rate, the so-called
apparent-diffusion coefﬁcient (ADC), indicated on a grayscale speciﬁcally for every
voxel. A voxel (volumetric pixel) is one of many rectangular volume elements
constituting a regularly segmented three-dimensional space. In brain imaging, one
full measurement of the head consists of many thousands voxels and is termed
volume. In a diffusion-weighted volume, fluid-ﬁlled ventricles appear dark, whereas
regions of restricted diffusivity such as gray matter or white matter ﬁber bundles
look bright. However, diffusion-weighted datasets may also be used to model the
underlying diffusivity characteristics in each voxel. The most common
three-dimensional model mapping of anisotropic diffusion as a function of spatial
location is the diffusion tensor, introduced by Basser et al. (1994a, b). In this model,
the tensor is fully described by a 3 × 3 matrix of variances and covariances.
                                    0                      1
                                     Dxx      Dxy      Dxz
                               D ¼ @ Dyx      Dyy      Dyz A
                                     Dzx      Dzy      Dzz
414                                                                        T. Rüber et al.

    Anisotropic diffusion has six degrees of freedom. This is why at least six dif-
fusion measurements of the whole brain in several different directions (i.e., six
volumes) are needed to derive the diffusion tensor matrix. However, it is intuitive
that diffusion measurements in more than six directions will yield a more accurate
diffusion tensor model and are most commonly applied (Hasan et al. 2001;
Papadakis et al. 2000). In any case, one additional volume without diffusion-
weighting, the b0, has to be acquired in every sequence which serves as a reference
image. Once the tensor model is ﬁtted, one can estimate the diffusivity in any
arbitrary direction. Diagonalization of the tensor matrix results in a set of three
orthogonal eigenvectors ê1, ê2, and ê3 representing the major, medium and minor
principle axes of diffusivity modeled. The corresponding eigenvalues λ1, λ2, and λ3
quantify the apparent diffusivities along these axes. It is the most basic premise
underlying DTI that molecular diffusion happens easier along the axis of coherent
white matter bundles, but will be hindered by axon membranes and other white
matter barriers perpendicular to it (Hagmann et al. 2006; Pierpaoli et al. 1996). The
major principal eigenvector ê1 indicating the direction of the greatest apparent
diffusivity λ1 is thus thought to be parallel to tract orientation (Moseley et al. 1990).
Since the three vectors are orthogonal to each other, the medium and minor prin-
ciple eigenvectors ê2 and ê3 are perpendicular to the tract orientation. The diffusion
tensor is best visualized by an ellipsoid pointing in the direction of maximal dif-
fusivity. In this illustration, the eigenvectors (ê1, ê2, ê3) deﬁne the directions of the
principle axes and the respective radii are deﬁned by the eigenvalues (λ1, λ2, λ3).
The ellipsoid will be orbital if diffusion is isotropic and may be cigar-shaped if
diffusion is anisotropic (Fig. 22.1).
    In this context, it is important to note that the same combination of eigenvalues
(i.e., an ellipsoid with the same shape) may be caused by different neuroanatomical
underpinnings. Anisotropy, as modeled by the diffusion tensor, may be low because
of “truly” isotropic diffusion (such as in the fluid-ﬁlled ventricles) or because of
orthogonal but highly coherent ﬁber bundles crossing within the respective voxel.
From this perspective, it becomes obvious how limits are set to the validity of
tractography by the inadequacy of the tensor model (please see paragraph on
BIOLOGICAL SUBTRATES OF DTI). Another problem concerns the display as
well as the interpretation of a 3 × 3 matrix for every one of several thousand voxels
within a brain volume. It is often tried to simplify things by converting the diffusion
tensor matrix to a scalar measure. The most commonly used scalar DTI measures
include fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), axial and radial diffu-
sivity (AD, RD). Importantly, these measures may inform researchers about the
underlying white matter status since the diffusion tensor from which they are
derived does not only model the orientation of anisotropic diffusion (which these
scalar measures do not contain) but also the magnitude and the degree of diffusion
anisotropy. In neuroscience research, FA is the most commonly used scalar. It is
rotationally invariant, ranges between 0 and 1 and describes the degree of the
anisotropy of the diffusion process.
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                                        415




Fig. 22.1 Illustrations of the diffusion eigenvectors (left), the corresponding tensor ellipsoid
(middle), and a schematic grid of voxels (right). The grid of voxels illustrates a fractional
anisotropy map with additional tensor ellipsoids which are depicted as ellipses. The grayscale
indicates fractional anisotropy ranging from close to zero (black) to almost one (bright gray).
Diffusion in the upper right corner is isotropic and apparent diffusivity is rather low as it would be
expected in gray matter. In the lower left corner diffusion also is isotropic; however, here apparent
diffusivity is rather high as it would be expected in the ventricles. From the upper left corner to the
lower right corner, diffusion is anisotropic and most major principal eigenvectors are oriented
along this diagonal axis. This is how a diffusion tensor image of a ﬁber tract descending this way
may look


                                 qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                         rﬃﬃﬃ
                          1       ðk1  k2 Þ2 þ ðk2  k3 Þ2 þ ðk3  k1 Þ2
                    FA ¼                             qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                          2                               k21 þ k22 þ k23

   Values close to 0 indicate that diffusion is isotropic (λ1 ≈ λ2 ≈ λ3), whereas
values close to 1 mean that it is anisotropic [(λ1 ≫ λ2 Ʌ λ3) V (λ1 Ʌ λ2 ≫ λ3)].
However, these extreme values are not reached in physiological environments. In the
brain, minimal FA values (approx. 0.1) are normally measured in the ventricles and
maximal FA values (approx. 0.85) in the splenium of the corpus callosum (Pierpaoli
and Basser 1996). FA is claimed to sensitively detect white matter alterations such as
degeneration or plastic remodeling (Pierpaoli and Basser 1996; Pierpaoli et al.
1996). A common albeit not always correct notion is that aging and a loss of
cognitive functions is associated with decreased FA values, whereas learning and
rehabilitation is accompanied by increased FA values (Bengtsson et al. 2005; Engvig
et al. 2012; Landi et al. 2011; Lebel et al. 2012; Lindenberg et al. 2010). This FA
decrease/increase is usually explained by increased/decreased diffusivity perpen-
dicular to the principal diffusion direction. It is thought to reflect decreased/increased
ﬁber organization or myelination on a microstructural level. However, as outlined
below one should be wary of inferences on neuroanatomical underpinnings of DTI
measures (please see paragraph on BIOLOGICAL SUBTRATES OF DTI).
416                                                                      T. Rüber et al.

Beside FA, MD is another rotationally invariant scalar. It measures the total diffusion
within a voxel.

                                   1
                               MD ¼ ðk1 þ k2 þ k3 Þ
                                   3

    In many cases, MD is inversely related to FA. It typically ranges between
approximately 2 × 10−3 in the ventricles and 0.7 × 10−3 in white matter. It is not as
commonly used in neuroscience research as FA, however, MD in the clinical
practice has proven useful for the early detection of ischemia (lack of blood supply
leading to stroke) in white matter (Mori and Barker 1999). It is important to note
that even measures of anisotropy, such as FA, cannot represent the tensor shape.
Just as for the diffusion tensor, the same FA value may be caused by different
combinations of eigenvalues. For example, a disc-shaped and a cigar-shaped
ellipsoid are properly described by the same FA value. See Fig. 22.2 for an illus-
tration of the described DTI indices.
    In the search of scalar measures being more tightly connected to the tensor shape
and distribution, the use of AD and RD has been suggested (Song et al. 2002). AD
is equivalent to the major principal eigenvalue and RD is equivalent to the average
of the medium and minor principal eigenvalues.

                                    AD ¼ k1
                                         k2 þ k3
                                    RD ¼
                                            2

   AD and RD are often subjects to a second look at the data which is taken to shed
light on the microstructural correlates of previously observed FA alterations.
However, for reasons given below, their use has been heavily criticized (please see
paragraph on BIOLOGICAL SUBTRATES OF DTI).



22.3    Tractography

Just as diffusion-weighted data becomes a lot more interesting when tensor models
are applied, diffusion tensor data becomes a lot more interesting with the applica-
tion of tractography (Basser et al. 2000; Jones et al. 1999; Mori et al. 1999; Mori
and van Zijl 2002). Tractography is a powerful aid for the interpretation of DTI
data. It has been developed “to clarify the orientational architecture of tissues by
integrating pathways of maximum diffusion coherence” (Hagmann et al. 2006).
Tractography is built on DTI’s most basic premise that the major principal eigen-
vector ê1 is oriented parallel to tract orientation. By following the direction of
the diffusion maximum from voxel to voxel across the brain, the process of trac-
tography yields beautiful three-dimensional models of white matter pathways
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                           417




Fig. 22.2 Different displays of a DTI brain volume of a 25 year old healthy female. In the upper,
middle brain the lines as well as the colors indicate the orientation of the major principal
eigenvectors. The colors do so according to the most basic red-green-blue (RGB) color coded
scheme (Pajevic and Pierpaoli 1999). Voxels in which the principal direction of diffusion is
oriented along the left-right, anterior–posterior, or superior–inferior axes are visualized in red,
green, or blue. Abbreviations: FA fractional anisotropy; L1: λ1; L2: λ2; L3: λ3; MD mean
diffusivity. Please note how coherent and unidirectional ﬁber bundles (such as the corticospinal
tract) appear bright in L1 but rather dark in L2 and L3 (i.e., it shows high axial but low radial
diffusivity values)


(see Fig. 22.3) which show striking correspondence with classical neuroanatomical
descriptions (Catani et al. 2002; Catani and Thiebaut de Schotten 2008).
    Tractography is, however, not only a means of visualization, but may, even more
importantly, be used as delineator for regions of interest (ROI) in the analysis of
DTI measures (see paragraph on ANALYSIS OF DTI DATA). Furthermore,
tractography is not only a method for qualitative analysis (that is, answering the
question whether a certain white matter voxel belongs to a tract or not) but also a
quantitative method: As set out below, tractography yields measures quantifying the
degree of connectivity. The process of tractography may be structured along three
keywords (Soares et al. 2013): seeding, propagation, and termination. Seeding
describes the delineation of one or several voxels as a ROI from which the tracts
will be drawn. ROIs may be delineated manually or derived from brain atlases and
registered to the individual brain (exactly as it is done for quantitative analysis of
diffusivity parameters; see paragraph on ANALYSIS OF DTI DATA). Once
tractography is started, ﬁber pathways, also termed “streamlines,” are initiated in
every voxel included in the seed ROI and gradually propagated through the tensor
418                                                                                 T. Rüber et al.




Fig. 22.3 Two-dimensional (left) and three-dimensional (right) rendering of two corticospinal
ﬁber tracts reconstructed by means of probabilistic tractography. The tracts presented are canonical
tracts: probabilistic tractography had been applied to several subjects and the resulting individual
tracts were normalized, converted to binary images and then summed. Color brightness indicates
the degree of voxel-by-voxel overlap of the individual normalized tracts. The canonical tracts are
superimposed onto a template brain from the Montreal Neurological Institute. FSL’s diffusion
toolbox (FDT) was used for image preprocessing and tractography (Behrens et al. 2003b; Smith
et al. 2004)


ﬁeld. Common tractography algorithms fall in two main categories: deterministic
and probabilistic tractography (Chung et al. 2011; Descoteaux et al. 2009; Mori and
van Zijl 2002). In deterministic tractography, streamlines simply follow the
direction of the major principal eigenvector ê1 in three dimensions. Whenever the
streamline reaches the edge of another voxel, it is reoriented according to ê1 of this
other voxel. However, signal noise, subject movement, and artifacts as well as the
inherent inadequacy of the tensor model (see paragraphs on BASIC PRINCIPLES
above and BIOLOGICAL SUBSTRATES OF DTI below) produce uncertainty,
which is ignored by deterministic algorithms. Probabilistic tractography on the
other hand incorporates the uncertainty of the estimation. Hence, it does not result
in well-deﬁned binary maps (“tract” or “no tract”) but in a probability map rep-
resenting the likelihood of any voxel to be connected with the seed region. These
probability maps are most commonly generated by iterations of the streamline
process. In other words, the local tensor is interpreted as a probability density
distribution and many random samples are drawn from this distribution (Behrens
et al. 2003b; Koch et al. 2002). The more streamlines emanating from the seed
region cross a certain voxel on their way through the tensor ﬁeld, the higher the
so-called structural connectivity between this voxel and the seed region is.
However, it should be kept in mind that these connectivity values are “best possible
guesses” and that they should not be interpreted as anatomical ﬁber count, which is
commonly done (Jones et al. 2013). One valuable feature of probabilistic tractog-
raphy is that it may be applied with multi-ﬁber models (Behrens et al. 2007). These
models have been developed to tackle the problem of ﬁber tracking in a
multi-orientation ﬁeld (e.g., regions where ﬁbers cross). Anatomical regions rep-
resented by voxels with several “major” principal eigenvectors are completely
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                               419

meaningless as a subject to deterministic tractography. It is important to note that in
the majority of cases more than one seed ROI is necessary to single out a speciﬁc
tract of interest. For this purpose, additional ROIs have to be deﬁned and related to
the seed ROI with logical operators such as “AND,” “OR,” and “NOT.” For
example, in FSL’s diffusion toolbox (Behrens et al. 2003b; Smith et al. 2004) one
may deﬁne a “waypoint mask,” “exclusion mask,” or a “termination mask.”
“Waypoint masks” are related with a logical “AND” to the seed ROI. That is, all
tracts have to pass this ROI on their way through the tensor ﬁeld, while all others
are being discarded. If several “waypoint masks” have been deﬁned, the logical
“AND” may be set to a logical (inclusive) “OR,” meaning that all tracts have to
pass at least one of the “waypoint masks” in order to be kept. “Waypoint masks”
and “exclusion masks” are both connected to the seed region with a logical “NOT,”
however, there is one crucial difference: Whereas pathways that have come in touch
with “exclusion masks” will be discarded as a whole, pathways that have contact
with “termination masks” will only be stopped but not discarded. That is, the
pathway from the seed ROI to the “termination mask” will be kept as result but
cannot propagate any further. Obviously, pathways are not only stopped by “ter-
mination masks” but streamlining is also aborted based on criteria inherent to the
respective tractography algorithm used. These criteria have been introduced to
prevent streamlines from propagating through vectorial ﬁelds with great uncertainty
of estimation. Common termination criteria include a minimum FA threshold of 0.2
and a turning angle threshold of roughly 60°.



22.4     Biological Substrates of DTI

It is unquestionable that DTI and tractography yield useful insights into neu-
roanatomy. However, big challenges lie in the veriﬁcation of virtual ﬁber bundles as
well as in the interpretation of diffusivity measures in terms of their underlying
neuronal substrates. Approaches to face these challenges include DTI of objects of
known structure, such as physical phantoms (Perrin et al. 2005) and validation
against anatomical data acquired by the use of other methods (Johansen-Berg and
Rushworth 2009; Lawes et al. 2008). It is easy to see how even the most complex
physical phantom will fail as an adequate model of neuronal tissue. The direct
validation of DTI indices and tractography performance against anatomical
knowledge gained by the application of complementary methods is, thus, indis-
pensable. One elegant study (Dyrby et al. 2007) has validated tractography in post-
mortem brains of three minipigs by comparing the results of probabilistic tractog-
raphy with results obtained from two established tracer methods. When inspecting
virtual ﬁber bundles in the light of ﬁber trajectories identiﬁed by one of the tracers,
overlaps of around 80 % were reported. Disjunct parts were due to false-negative as
well as false-positive tractography results. Tractography had difﬁculties identifying
the termination point of tracts originating from/terminating in subcortical gray
matter, which lead to false-positive results. False-negative, “spurious” ﬁbers were
420                                                                     T. Rüber et al.

observed in anatomical regions of high ﬁber complexity (ﬁbers crossing, kissing,
spreading…). It should be noted that approximately one- to two-thirds of all voxels
within a skull-stripped DTI brain volume has been estimated to cover these
anatomical regions with high ﬁber complexity (Behrens et al. 2007; Jeurissen et al.
2012). This sets limits to tractography’s role as in vivo dissector of white matter
macrostructures. On a microstructural scale, the relation between diffusivity
parameters such as FA, MD, AD, as well as RD and their biological substrates
remains to be elucidated. However, it should be noted that the missing link between
DTI indices and their microstructural underpinnings is not only due to a lack of
research ﬁndings in this ﬁeld; also constraints inherent to DTI and MRI such as its
resolution (with each voxel containing several ten thousand neuronal connections)
restrict the usage of DTI as physiological tool. It is important to keep in mind that
there is no one-to-one relationship between any DTI index and a single white matter
component (Johansen-Berg and Rushworth 2009). Distinct microstructural pro-
cesses may lead to the same DTI observations. Alterations of DTI indices, thus,
have to be interpreted with great caution. A common inference that is made in many
DTI papers is that alterations in diffusivity mirror changes in the degree of
myelination. However, as Jones and colleagues (Jones et al. 2013) correctly point
out “the anisotropy in a region may also be lower because here is a larger axon
diameter (Takahashi et al. 2002), a lower packing density (Takahashi et al. 2002)—
both of which mean fewer barriers to diffusion in a given space—or it could be due
to increased membrane permeability (reducing the effectiveness of a boundary).”
Indeed, it soon became clear that myelination is no requirement for diffusion ani-
sotropy in white matter (Beaulieu and Allen 1994). Rather one may think of several
barriers hindering isotropic diffusion in white matter including microtubules,
myelin, axon membranes and neuroﬁlaments (Beaulieu 2002). On the contrary,
damaged or absent myelin is reliably mirrored in reduced diffusion anisotropy
(Blaschek et al. 2013; Klawiter et al. 2011; Mukherjee et al. 2001; Werring et al.
2000). Gulani and colleagues have compared excised spinal cords from myelin-
deﬁcient rats with spinal cords from age-matched controls (Gulani et al. 2001) and
came to conclude that myelin may modulate FA by up to 20 %. One difﬁculty in
determining the relative contribution of myelin to the measured anisotropy lies in
the fact that any direct comparison between myelinated and non-myelinated nerve
ﬁbers is flawed because tissues differ in their whole structural composition (Assaf
and Pasternak 2008). Axial and radial diffusivities may be helpful when trying to
explain the emergence of observed FA alterations. Decreased axial diffusivity has
been related to the growth of neuroﬁbrils (Kinoshita et al. 1999), whereas several
studies have linked a decrease in radial diffusivity to demyelination (Budde et al.
2007; Klawiter et al. 2011; Song et al. 2002, 2003). However, in their seminal
paper, Wheeler-Kingshott and Cercignani argue that one should be wary of inter-
preting tensor eigenvalues as “axial” or “radial” and of relating these measures to
microstructural properties, such as myelin (Wheeler-Kingshott and Cercignani
2009). The crucial point the authors make is that comparing eigenvalues across
subjects without checking for the alignment of the corresponding eigenvector with
the underlying tissue structures is pointless. In particular, this correspondence may
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                 421

be called into doubt when comparing tracts affected by some pathology with tracts
from healthy controls and in voxels in which more than one principal direction is
present. In the former case, it is well conceivable how a certain pathology may
change the direction of the principal eigenvector from what would be expected in
healthy tissue architecture; in the latter case, represented by an oblate diffusion
ellipsoid, the “principal” eigenvalue may not differ much from the other eigen-
values (i.e., there are more than one principal eigenvectors), thus, making the
analyses of “axial” and “radial” diffusivities completely meaningless. It may be
concluded that DTI and tractography offer a unique way to gain insights into human
neuroanatomy. However, over those “pretty pictures” (Johansen-Berg and Behrens
2006) and their tempting inferences on neuroanatomical underpinnings, one should
not forget that DTI and tractography, like any other recently developed research
method, urgently require validation and a precise deﬁnition of its scope.



22.5     Analysis of DTI Data

In the following, three common approaches to quantitative analysis of DTI data will
be reviewed: ROI analysis (I), voxel-by-voxel analysis (II) and tract-based spatial
statistics (TBSS; III). The ﬁrst two analyses may be performed with most common
analysis programs; TBSS is part of FSL (Smith et al. 2006). ROI analyses (I) can be
performed in several ways but it is common to all of them that diffusivity param-
eters of every voxel within a two- or three-dimensional ROI are averaged and used
for statistical analysis. ROIs may be deﬁned manually on each individual brain
(I.1), they may be taken from publicly available atlases (I.2) or they may be
delineated by means of tractography (I.3). Manual deﬁnition of ROIs (I.1) is done
directly on FA maps or on anatomical volumes and then transferred to diffusion
space, depending on where the respective anatomical structure is best identiﬁable.
When drawing ROIs on FA maps, it might be helpful to superimpose diffusion
color maps indicating the main diffusion direction. ROI deﬁnition solely on FA
maps, however, is prone to preferably include high FA voxels since they are best
visible and, thus, are taken as landmarks for orientation (i.e., there is an influence of
anisotropy on ROI borders). Squared or orbital ROIs are different in this regard and,
furthermore, less time-consuming to deﬁne but these uniform ROIs also account
less for the individual forms of anatomic structures. Overall, it may be said that its
accountancy for individual anatomy is the most important advantage of manual ROI
deﬁnition, whereas on the other side its operator-dependency as well as the fact that
the manual deﬁnition work is time-killing and nerve-racking are among its disad-
vantages. The usage of atlas ROIs (I.2) is different in this regard. Here, anatomical
template regions from publicly available atlases [Harvard-Oxford cortical and
subcortical structural atlases (Caviness et al. 1996), John Hopkins University
DTI-based white matter atlas (Hua et al. 2008), Freesurfer (Fischl et al. 2002)] are
mapped on the individual brain. This approach is neither operator-dependent nor
422                                                                     T. Rüber et al.

particularly time-consuming; however, it has other difﬁculties: The anatomical
template region is generated from one or (in most cases) more brains and made
available in a three-dimensional standardized, or “stereotaxic,” coordinate space. It
has to be transferred to individual, or “native,” space in order to align with indi-
vidual anatomy using a mapping function. Individual’s brain anatomy, however,
may not correspond to the anatomy of the template brain; moreover, the mapping
function will never work perfectly leading to misalignment. [See paper by Evans
et al. (2012) for a recent review of brain atlases and their problems]. When con-
sidering the pros and cons of manually deﬁned ROIs versus atlas-derived ROIs, in
many cases ROIs delineated by tractography (I.3) will yield the best of both worlds
(Fig. 22.4): This procedure is not as operator-dependent as manual ROI deﬁnition
(making it somewhat more “objective”) and it does consider individual anatomy,
since it is run for every single subject. Tracts resulting from tractography are
thresholded (excluding low probability voxels) before diffusivity parameters of all
voxels within the respective maps are averaged. However, it is obvious that not all
anatomic regions which may be subject to DTI analysis can possibly be recon-
structed using tractography. In general, it shall not be dismissed that ROI analyses
have two systematic problems that may not be overcome: First, depending on the
size of the ROI, variation of diffusivity parameters within it is lost since all voxel
values are averaged, second, it is not feasible to investigate the whole brain
expressing a need for strong a priori hypotheses.

Fig. 22.4 Illustration of
tractography-based Region of
Interest analysis of fractional
anisotropy (FA). Tracts
resulting from tractography
are thresholded (excluding
low probability voxels) before
FA values of all voxels within
the respective tracts are
averaged [yielding “tract
speciﬁc FA”] and used for
statistical analysis
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                423

    Voxel-wise analysis (II) as well as TBSS (III, see below) resolves these issues.
In these analyses, all DTI volumes are normalized. Normalization describes the
process of registering an individual brain to a template brain using a mapping
function. Every voxel is assigned a speciﬁc “address” (Snook et al. 2007). The
crucial premise is that, after normalization a certain “address” corresponds to a
certain anatomical structure. That is, all brains and their parts align well to each
other. The standard method of brain normalization includes two steps (Ashburner
and Friston 2000; Jenkinson and Smith 2001; Snook et al. 2007): The ﬁrst step, a
linear transformation, warps the brain in order to account for global brain differ-
ences (size and position); the second step applies a nonlinear transformation which
estimates internal brain deformations. After normalization, analyses are run inde-
pendently including every voxel with the same “address,” under the assumption that
all voxels with the same “address” represent the same anatomic location across
subjects (Fig. 22.5). This enables comparison of diffusivity parameters between
groups and correlation analysis with variables of interest. The advantages of voxel-
wise analyses are obvious: They are fast, fully automated, operator-independent and
investigate the whole brain without the need for a priori ROI deﬁnition. However,
voxel-wise analyses are also connected with disadvantages. It is not surprising that
the registration of healthy brains will never work perfectly, let alone the registration
of lesioned brains (Jones and Cercignani 2010; Mukherjee et al. 2008). To alleviate
some of the registration problems faced, one normally smoothes the normalized
brains using a low pass ﬁlter. It shall not be dismissed, that smoothing FA maps is
prone to cause problems, since most white matter tracts are thin, might thus be
“washed out” by the smoothing and the selection of the right low pass ﬁlter is rather
arbitrary but influences the results of voxel-wise analyses (Jones et al. 2005).
Additionally, it is obvious that the need for brain normalization of low-resolution,
high-contrast FA maps introduces problems: Smallest shifts between groups may
incorrectly be interpreted as FA differences between groups. Furthermore, effects of
partial volumes may challenge the analysis. Partial volume effects occur when a
single voxel contains two or more tissue types but is presumed to only contain one
that is white matter (Assaf and Pasternak 2008). This is especially likely to occur in
white matter regions near the ventricles where high FA voxels are located just on
the side of low FA voxels. Certain patient groups are particularly vulnerable to
partial volume effects: Schizophrenic patients, for example, exhibit enlarged ven-
tricles as compared to healthy controls (Honea et al. 2005). Another challenge of
voxel-wise analysis concerns the sheer amount of statistical tests being performed.
A skull-stripped FA map of somewhat good resolution contains approximately
250,000 voxels. A whole-brain voxel-wise analysis, thus, comes along with a
gigantic problem of multiple comparisons (Loring et al. 2002). This problem may
be tackled with statistical correction methods. In analysis of MRI data, most
commonly correction for family-wise error (FWE) is applied (Friston et al. 1994;
Worsley 2005). A complementary, though not alternative way, is to apply
voxel-wise analysis only within certain ROIs. One might, for example, reconstruct
white matter tracts by means of tractography in native space; normalize FA maps
and use the resulting transformation matrices to also normalize white matter tracts.
424                                                                                T. Rüber et al.




Fig. 22.5 Illustration of voxel-wise analysis of fractional anisotropy. After normalization of all
volumes, statistical analyses are run independently for every voxel with the same “address” of a
skill-stripped volume. The number of statistical comparisons may be reduced by only running
voxel-wise analysis within a Region of Interest (which may be delineated by tractography as
illustrated here)
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                              425

These normalized tracts are then used to build a canonical tract, which may be
thresholded based on the voxel-by-voxel overlap of the individual normalized tracts
(Rüber et al. 2012). Another way to reduce the number of statistical comparisons, is
to restrict voxel-wise analysis to white matter by using white matter masks. These
masks may be derived from anatomical volumes with FreeSurfer (Dale et al. 1999;
Fischl et al. 1999) or other automated tools for segmentation and then transferred to
diffusion space.
    TBSS (III) has been developed to face two of the biggest challenges of con-
ventional voxel-wise DTI analysis (Smith et al. 2006): multiple comparison and
alignment. Voxel-wise analysis in TBSS is only conﬁned to the FA skeleton, which
represents the centers of all white matter tracts common to the study group. This FA
skeleton is used as an alignment-invariant feature to mitigate any residual
misalignment after a common mapping function has been applied. The TBSS
processing works as follows: First, individual FA maps are normalized applying a
nonlinear transformation (similarly as described above). Based on all normalized
brains, a mean FA map (in standard space) is generated and used to create the
pseudo-anatomical white matter skeleton (it is pseudo-anatomical since white
matter is segmented only based on FA and not on anatomical volumes such as T1 or
T2). Next, the skeleton is projected on the individual FA map (in standard space),
but is deformed based on a constrained local search for maximal FA values
(Fig. 22.6). Lastly, voxel-wise testing may be performed within the skeleton as
described above. Hence, TBSS is built on the strategy that the alignment of a
skeleton containing maximal FA voxels to local FA maxima in the individual FA
maps will mitigate the residual misalignment of previous nonlinear registrations.
However, it has been criticized that this strategy primarily leads to correspondence
of FA values but not to anatomical correspondence (Zalesky 2011). In other words,
local FA maxima do not necessarily correspond to the same anatomical locations
across subjects. In addition, if crude registration errors occur, they are difﬁcult to


Fig. 22.6 Fractional
anisotropy (FA) template
brain and the respective FA
skeleton as generated by
TBSS. Please note how the
FA skeleton aligns to the
white matter but only covers
the centers and, thus, reduces
the number of multiple
comparisons
426                                                                     T. Rüber et al.

identify in the skeleton (Jones and Cercignani 2010). Another disadvantage of
TBSS concerns the fact that white matter regions exhibiting low FA values are not
included in the analysis. Also, crossing ﬁber regions exhibit low FA values but are
crucial from a neuroanatomical perspective. In newer versions of TBSS, one may
choose to use models that incorporate ﬁber-speciﬁc measures (Jbabdi et al. 2010)
which enhances analysis of crossing ﬁber regions. It may be concluded that TBSS is
a powerful tool that successfully deals with some problems that come along with
traditional analysis approaches to DTI data.
   It is important to acknowledge that TBSS is not the only attempt to deal with the
shortcomings of brain registration. However, one general problem of common
registration algorithms is their dependency on “unidimensional” scalars, such as FA
(Zalesky 2011). Conversely, DTI yields ellipsoids that are fully described by six
independent parameters, and these parameters are lost when vectors are mapped to
rotationally invariant scalars. Thus, anatomical information made available by DTI
is not considered in common brain registration algorithms. Multichannel registra-
tion algorithms which depend on all six parameters of the tensor have been pro-
posed (Guimond et al. 2001), but are not widespread.



22.6    Connectional Anatomy

DTI is a boon to modern neuroscience not only for allowing the examination of
white matter as such, but also for tractography and its potential to study connec-
tional anatomy. The human brain consists of 100 billion neurons of which 20
billion have been estimated to be located in the cerebral cortex (Azevedo et al.
2009; Noctor et al. 2007). On average, every cortical neuron builds 7000 con-
nections with other neurons and 150,000–180,000 km of myelinated ﬁbers are
believed to be part of the brain (Drachman 2005). Connectional anatomy, however,
does not solely yield insights into white matter circuits. Keeping in mind that
“nothing deﬁnes the function of a neuron more faithfully than the nature of its
inputs and outputs” (Mesulam 2005), it becomes clear that structure and function go
together in neuroscience (Blits 1999) and how DTI may inform the study of neu-
ronal mechanisms underlying cognitive functioning (ffytche and Catani 2005).
Without any doubt, in the last decade has neuroscientiﬁc attention shifted from
single loci to the networks connecting them. This has not only extended our
knowledge on brain networks but also on single loci being part of these networks.
For example, network analysis has opened an avenue for using tractography to
provide information of gray matter parcellation (Behrens and Johansen-Berg 2005).
Traditionally, cortical or subcortical regions are deﬁned based either on cytoar-
chitectonic boundaries or on gross-anatomical landmarks. However, cytoarchitec-
tonic boundaries do not necessarily correspond to gross-anatomical landmarks
(Geyer et al. 2000). Thus, another basis for the deﬁnition of great matter boundaries
is favored and connectivity-based parcellation has been named as a convincing
candidate for this purpose (Le Bihan and Johansen-Berg 2012). The underlying
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                         427




Fig. 22.7 Connectivity-based parcellation of the striatum according to its connections to several
cortical and subcortical regions [Fig. 22.1 from Cohen et al. (2009); permission for reproduction
by Nature Publishing Group]


notion of connectivity-based parcellation is that cortical and subcortical subregions
may be distinguished according to their so-called connectivity ﬁngerprint
(Passingham et al. 2002). Connectivity ﬁngerprints delineate clusters of voxels with
similar connection patterns (Fig. 22.7). Several studies have compellingly
demonstrated the potential of this novel approach by yielding connectivity-based
parcellations of the thalamus (Behrens et al. 2003a), amygdalae (Bach et al. 2011),
basal ganglia (Menke et al. 2010), cingulate cortex (Beckmann et al. 2009), of
Broca’s Area (Anwander et al. 2007), of the lateral premotor cortex (Tomassini
et al. 2007), and supplementary motor area (Johansen-Berg et al. 2004). Results
obtained by means of fMRI have yielded good correspondence with some of these
parcellations, providing validation of this approach and underlining the functional
relevance of connectivity-based boundaries (Johansen-Berg et al. 2005; Schubotz
et al. 2010; Tomassini et al. 2007).
   Tractography pushed DTI to another new ﬁeld of study called connectomics
(Hagmann et al. 2008; Sporns et al. 2005), the comprehensive studies of neural
connections in the brain. In 2009, NIH has announced a Request for Applications
for the so-called Human Connectome Project. One year later, grants totaling $40
million were awarded to two collaborating consortia. The overarching purpose of
the project is to acquire and share data about human brain connectivity. It is hoped
that “a deeper understanding of human brain connectivity and its variability will
provide valuable insights into what makes us uniquely human and what accounts
for the great diversity of behavioral capacities and repertoires in healthy adults”
(Van Essen et al. 2012).
428                                                                       T. Rüber et al.


22.7    Clinical Applications

Clinical applications of diffusion MRI broadly fall into three categories: lesion
interrogation, tissue characterization, and tract reconstruction (Huston and Field
2013). The beneﬁts of diffusion MRI are investigated in the context of many
diseases including stroke, brain development disorders, epilepsy, dementia, psy-
chiatric disorders, demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis, and brain
tumors. While diffusion MRI has contributed a lot to our understanding of the
pathologies underlying these illnesses and is used as a complementary method of
diagnosis in many cases, it is only in the case of acute brain ischemia that diffusion
MRI has really found its way into clinical routine (Dubey et al. 2013). DWI may
detect brain infarcts several hours before conventional anatomical sequences
(Munoz Maniega et al. 2004), which is why it is endorsed in the diagnosis within
the ﬁrst 12 h after acute brain ischemia (Schellinger et al. 2010). The infarct core
volume, as estimated by DWI, has also been suggested to be an important predictor
of clinical outcome and treatment efﬁcacy (Gonzalez 2012; Schellinger et al. 2010).
Even more than the volume, its degree of overlap with the corticospinal tract or the
arcuate fasciculus seems to be a predictor of motor and language impairment,
respectively (Marchina et al. 2011; Zhu et al. 2010). Indeed, diffusivity parameters
of the corticospinal tract could reliably be related to the degree of motor impairment
(Lindenberg et al. 2010; Schaechter et al. 2009). As mentioned above, diffusion
MRI may detect pathologic tissue alterations with a higher sensitivity as conven-
tional anatomical sequences in some cases. However, the low pathologic speciﬁcity
of its measures has set boundaries to its clinical usefulness in tissue characterization
(Huston and Field 2013). Its application in pre-surgical diagnostics seems to be
more promising: In neurosurgery, preoperative reconstructions of white matter
tracts may lead to a better understanding of their individual anatomy and may, thus,
facilitate their preservation during resection. A recent study with patients under-
going anterior temporal lobe resection (Yogarajah et al. 2009) revealed that the
extent of one part of the optic radiation as determined by preoperative tractography
was related to the degree of complication by superior visual ﬁeld deﬁcits. Even
more convincing, Wu et al. (2007) found that 118 patients with a highly aggressive
tumor survived on average 7.2 months longer than 120 control patients with the
same tumor if preoperative tract mapping had been performed.



22.8    Genetics/Environment/Age

White matter status may be thought to depend on genes, environment and age. It is
an intuitive notion that white matter alterations happen within the framework of
genes. This framework changes across the lifespan leaving more or less room for
the white matter effects of environment in development and adulthood. DTI may
detect even subtle white matter alterations; however, it remains challenging to
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                               429

speciﬁcally attribute these alterations to the influence of genetic factors, environ-
ment or age. Especially, it is difﬁcult to differentiate between the influence of genes
and environment (so-called nature–nurture debate) as will be shown below.
    The influence of genes may well be studied through comparison between
identical and nonidentical twins. In these studies, the excess in the pair correlation
of identical twins over the pair correlation of nonidentical twins is attributed to
genetic effects. Chiang and colleagues (Chiang et al. 2009) found that close to 80 %
of FA variance may be explained by genetic factors, especially in parietal brain
regions. Furthermore, the authors reported correlations between measures of
intellectual performance and FA values. An overlapping set of genes seems to
influence IQ scores as well as diffusivity parameters, since the authors were able to
more accurately predict IQ by using FA values in the group of identical twins than
they were in the group of nonidentical twins. In another DTI twin study (Jahanshad
et al. 2010), 20–40 % of FA brain asymmetry was found to be genetically deter-
mined. Using a group of 705 twins and their siblings, Chiang et al. (2011) inves-
tigated factors moderating the heritability of white matter features as measured by
FA. They found that higher heritability was associated with younger age, male sex,
higher intellectual performance, and higher socioeconomic status. Some of the
causal mechanisms behind their ﬁnding could only be subject to speculation. The
observation of white matter heritability decreasing along age may be interpreted as
increasing environmental influences on white matter microstructure.
    Neuroplasticity is a term ﬁrst introduced by the polish neuroscientist Jerzy
Konorski in 1948 to describe the brain’s ability to functionally and structurally adapt
to changing environmental demands. Long enough, the brain was believed to be
static after development but this conception has been substantially revised in the last
decades (Jancke 2009): “[…] there is a continuous interaction between experiential
process and brain structure. Over time, experiences are sedimented in the form of
organic habits, dispositions and interactive schemes that eventually constitute the
individual’s personality.” (Fuchs 2009) Additionally, white matter is no longer seen
as passive infrastructure but as a plastic component of the brain. Using DTI,
“neuroarcheology” (Le Bihan and Johansen-Berg 2012) may be performed to study
the lasting effects of past experiences and to keep track of their neuronal correlates.
Impressive associations between diffusivity characteristics of white matter and
experience have been reported in highly trained experts in sensorimotor skills
(Dayan and Cohen 2011). Bengtsson and colleagues reported higher FA values in
professional pianists as compared to non-musicians in the posterior limb of the
internal capsule (Bengtsson et al. 2005). Even more, the authors found several white
matter regions exhibiting a positive correlation between the amount of hours prac-
ticed and FA values. DTI-studies have also reported evidence for white matter
plasticity in response to the acquisition of other sensorimotor skills, such as ballet
dancing or playing golf. Furthermore, neuronal white matter correlates of high
cognitive abilities have been found by means of cross-sectional DTI-studies. Floel
et al. (2009) found that individual subject’s performance in an artiﬁcial learning task
was related to FA values surrounding Broca’s area (a cortical region in the left
frontal lobe which traditionally has been implicated in language processing) and
430                                                                      T. Rüber et al.

within ﬁbers arising from this area. Tsang et al. (2009) showed that variations in
performance in a mental arithmetic task reflect variability of FA values in a central
chunk of the anterior superior longitudinal fascicle. This tract connects the inferior
parietal lobe with precentral and inferior frontal regions—cortical regions that have
been shown to be coactive by means of fMRI in subjects performing mental arith-
metic tasks. As the studies presented above are cross-sectional, it remains unclear
whether the white matter alterations reported are the cause or the consequence of the
respective expertise (i.e., are people with altered diffusivity characteristics more
likely to play golf or do the alterations occur as people pick up golf playing skills).
The results of cross-sectional studies, thus, always have to be discussed in the light
of the so-called nature–nurture debate (Stiles 2011) and no ultimate inferences on
the direction of causality can be made. Longitudinal studies are clearer in this regard
and have become the gold standard for neuroimaging studies examining neuro-
plasticity. Some longitudinal DTI-studies have been run and offer intriguing insights,
since they enable the observation of the brain during the acquisition of new skills.
One of the ﬁrst longitudinal DTI-studies reported an increase of FA values in the
subcortical white matter underlying the intraparietal sulcus after subjects learned to
juggle within 6 weeks (Scholz et al. 2009). FA values in the cluster reported
increased slightly after 4 weeks without juggling but still were higher than before
subjects learned to juggle. Longitudinal studies have also found FA changes after
intensive memory training (Engvig et al. 2012; Landi et al. 2011; Takeuchi et al.
2010). Keller and Just (2009) found lower FA values in the anterior left cerebral
white matter in a group of eight to 12 year old children classiﬁed as poor readers
compared to good readers at the same age. Poor readers then were randomly
assigned to either an intervention group undergoing an intensive 100 h program of
remedial reading instruction or to a control group. Children who had undergone the
100 h program showed signiﬁcantly increased FA values in the anterior left cerebral
white matter. Even more, this FA change correlated with improvement in phono-
logical decoding. Children in the control group did not show signiﬁcant FA changes
between the ﬁrst and the second scan. Schlaug et al. (2009) found that effective
melodic intonation therapy of aphasic patients after stroke was related to an increase
in structural connectivity in the contralesional arcuate fasciculus (a white matter
pathway implicated in language processing). A recent study (Langer et al. 2012)
investigated patients whose right arm injury required limb immobilization for at least
14 days. They applied DTI to examine structural integrity of the corticospinal tracts
and, furthermore, measured cortical thickness of sensorimotor regions based on
high-res anatomical volumes, they had acquired. The authors found reduced cortical
thickness and decreased FA values in the left sensorimotor regions and left corti-
cospinal tract, respectively. The opposite changes were observed on the right side,
which may indicate a skill transfer from the left hemisphere (controlling the right
injured hand) to the right hemisphere (controlling the left non-injured hand) being
caused by a compensatory use of the non-deprived hand.
    It is an interesting notion that most of the training-induced plastic white matter
alterations described above are represented by comparably higher FA values and,
hence, contrast an age-related decrease in FA values observed after the maturational
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                431

peak. Many recent studies employ DTI to investigate the neurobiology of aging
determining this maturational peak, when maturation turns into degeneration
(Kochunov et al. 2012; Lebel et al. 2012; Sullivan et al. 2010; Westlye et al. 2010).
A link between white matter changes in the aging brain, cognitive decline and
degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease have been established, commonly
referred to as “disconnection hypothesis” (Bartzokis 2004; O’Sullivan et al. 2001).
Generally, an increase in FA/a decrease in MD until the third and fourth decade are
observed which is followed by a decrease in FA/an increase in MD. White matter
volume seems to reach its peak ten to 20 years later in life than FA (Salat et al. 2009;
Westlye et al. 2010). However, diffusivity parameters generally seem to be the better
indicator of white matter maturation. It has been proposed that the inverted u-shaped
(quadratic) course of FA along the lifespan is largely dependent on the degree of
white matter myelination (Abe et al. 2002; Bartzokis et al. 2010; Gao et al. 2009).
Keeping in mind that cognitive efﬁciency relies on the myelination of white matter
ﬁbers, this proposition provides a possible link between the changes of diffusivity
parameters on one end and the alterations of cognitive functions in the aging human.
Indeed, the zenith of FA values largely concurs with the age range in which cog-
nitive performance has been found to reach its peak (Salthouse 2009). Indeed,
alterations of cognitive processing abilities, verbal memory, and motor skills along
the lifespan have been related to diffusivity parameters (Bartzokis et al. 2010;
Hedden et al. 2005; Salthouse 2000). Recently, it was shown that age-related
over-recruiting of frontal lobe structures when completing a task-switching paradigm
were negatively correlated to FA of these structures (Zhu et al. 2013). Further studies
are warranted in this ﬁeld which derives its importance from the therapeutic
potentials based on a better understanding of the aging brain.



22.9     DTI-Studies in Neuroeconomics

DTI-tractography has rarely been used in the ﬁeld of neuroeconomics. In the fol-
lowing, two exemplary studies on associations between DTI measures and per-
sonality traits will be discussed: Olson et al. (2009) found several frontal and
temporal white matter regions which showed correlations between FA values and
results of a delay discounting task in a group of 79 adolescents. Using
DTI-tractography, Cohen et al. (2009) showed that structural connectivity between
the striatum and certain cortical as well as subcortical regions was related to
self-reported individual differences in personality traits such as novelty seeking and
reward dependence. Both studies are based on two premises: (1) That white matter
structural architecture reflects personality characteristics (as determined by delay
discounting tests and self-reports, respectively) and (2) that this may be measured
by means of DTI. Whereas the ﬁrst premise appeals to an intuitive notion (be-
havioral differences have to have a structural equivalent somewhere in the brain), it
is more surprising that they can actually be measured (second premise) by com-
parably coarse-grained methods such as DTI. In the study by Olson and colleagues,
432                                                                     T. Rüber et al.

79 adolescents between the age of 9 and 23 underwent DTI and, among other tests,
a delay discounting test. Delay discounting describes individual’s choice to prefer
an immediate reward over a larger delayed reward (Ainslie 1975). Mature delay
discounting behavior emerges in adolescent’s development and has been shown to
correlate with age and verbal IQ (Olson et al. 2007). Equally, myelination of white
matter is thought to occur as part of neuronal maturation (Arain et al. 2013) in
adolescence and may be measured by diffusivity measures (Song et al. 2002). The
aim of the current study was to relate delay discounting behavior to diffusivity
measures. Previous fMRI studies had implicated the role of frontal, parietal and
temporal regions in delay discounting (McClure et al. 2004; Wittmann et al. 2007)
which is why the authors expected to ﬁnd structure-behavior correlations in these
regions. However, they performed a whole-cerebrum voxel-wise regression anal-
ysis. Results were not corrected for multiple comparisons, but the threshold of
signiﬁcance was set to p < 0.001 and an extent threshold of 25 voxels was applied.
The application of neuroimaging data analysis not corrected for multiple compar-
isons has been heavily criticized (Bennett et al. 2009). It shall, however, not be
dismissed that the authors applied a hypothesis-free whole-brain approach albeit
having well-founded a priori hypotheses on where structural–behavioral correla-
tions may be found which partly legitimates less conservative signiﬁcance testing.
Indeed, the authors could report clusters indicating a positive FA─delay dis-
counting correlation in several white matter regions primarily in the frontal and
temporal lobes: The higher the FA values, the more the subject preferred higher
delayed rewards over lower immediate rewards. In addition, regions with associ-
ations between MD and delay discounting were found. These correlations were
negative: The lower the MD values, the more the subject preferred higher delayed
rewards over lower immediate rewards. Based on these analyses, it cannot be ruled
out that, delay discounting as well as diffusivity measures both vary under the
influence of a third (confounding) variable but are not actually related with each
other. The authors mention age and verbal IQ as possible confounding variables and
enter both as covariates into the regression equation. Several clusters remained
signiﬁcant after controlling for age and/or verbal IQ, thus, giving evidence that the
observed relation between diffusivity parameters and delay discounting is not
completely due to the general influence of neurodevelopmental maturation indi-
cated by age or part of a more general cognitive process measured by a verbal IQ
test. Consequently, observed structural–behavioral associations may be seen as
partly age-dependent and partly age-independent. To rule out that these associations
do reflect general processes of decision-making, the cluster-wise averages of
FA/MD were correlated with the outcome of a probability discounting task which
did, except for one cluster, not yield signiﬁcant results. Observed white matter
diffusivity characteristics may, thus, be viewed as speciﬁc microstructural correlate
of delay discounting. Unfortunately, the authors missed to perform additional
regression analyses for directional diffusivities. This would have been of special
interest under the premise of radial diffusivity reflecting the degree of myelination
and with regard to the fact that the frontal lobe becomes increasingly myelinated
during adolescence. Lastly, the authors related the anatomical location of clusters to
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                            433

common white matter tracts implicating their role in delay discounting. The tracts
were not individually modeled using tractography but probability masks from a
common tractography white matter atlas (Wakana et al. 2004) were used. It may be
summarized, that the study by Olson and colleagues compellingly illustrates some
of the structural white matter correlates of delay discounting and their development
in adolescence.
    The second exemplary study discussed also suggests white matter circuitry to
underlie certain personality traits. However, this study by Cohen and colleagues
uses a different methodological approach: Variations in diffusivity measures are
not found to be relevant here, rather structural connectivity as determined by
tractography was found to correlate with novelty seeking and reward dependence
in 20 healthy adults. This study as well as the study by Olson and colleagues
relied on previous studies linking the personality traits of interest to neuronal
circuitry. Cohen and colleagues mention evidence from studies linking novelty
seeking and reward processing to a hippocampus-ventral striatal-midbrain loop
and to prefrontal-striatal connections, respectively (Hollerman et al. 2000; Lisman
and Grace 2005). They, thus, applied tractography to parcellate the striatum
according to its connections to several cortical and subcortical regions (see this
chapter’s paragraph on connectional anatomy and Fig. 22.7). These regions were
deﬁned using a common atlas (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al. 2002). Voxels in the
striatum were then labeled according to the region they were most strongly
connected to. The connectional strength between these voxels and their respective
regions were found to correlate with novelty seeking in the case of connections to
the amygdala as well as the hippocampus and with reward dependence in the case
of a network to cortical regions including medical and lateral orbitofrontal cor-
tices, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and supplemental motor area. Connections
which correlated with novelty seeking did not correlate with reward dependence
and vice versa. As intriguing as these ﬁndings are, it remains unclear which
microstructural characteristics cause the altered connection strength. Even func-
tional inferences of these microstructural characteristics in terms of neuronal
efﬁciency have to be made with great caution. The authors conclude that
“although it is tempting to speculate that individuals with higher tract strength
values can transmit information more efﬁciently between regions, further work is
needed to conﬁrm this interpretation.” The explanatory gap between white matter
features as measured by DTI and character traits as deﬁned by psychology
remains unsurpassed also by the most advanced DTI-studies.



22.10     Conclusion

The advent of DTI and tractography has paved the way to one of the most flour-
ishing ﬁelds of today’s neuroscience: The non-invasive in vivo assessment and
delineation of white matter tracts. As this chapter has tried to show, DTI has made
immense contributions to distinct areas of neuroscientiﬁc research just as it has
434                                                                            T. Rüber et al.

changed our perspective on the brain as a whole. However, 25 years of experience
with DTI has forced the community to increasingly recognize the limits of this
imaging modality. In particular, the interpretation of DTI ﬁndings in terms of their
neuronal underpinnings has been proven difﬁcult. In their very readable review,
Jones and colleagues point out that “the only thing that we can say with any
certainty in diffusion MRI is that we measure a signal change when a
motion-sensitizing gradient is applied along a given axis. Inferring anything else is
dependent on the quality of the model and the quality of the data” (Jones et al.
2013). As outlined above, the tensor model is thought to be inadequate in some
regards. More promising models of diffusion data are on hand; however, they are
not in common use since most of them are connected to special hardware
requirements as well as long acquisition times and a lack of experience in ongoing
research. Hence, some of the main reasons for the continuously growing success of
DTI may well be called pragmatic. Nonetheless, MRI hardware development will
continue to push the ﬁeld of diffusion imaging forward which most likely will
compensate for some of the drawbacks of newer diffusion models. Approaches
other than the tensor model will, therefore, play a more prominent role in future
times: Diffusion Spectrum Imaging (DSI), High Angular Resolution Diffusion
Imaging (HARDI), and Q-Ball Imaging (QBI) have all been named as promising
candidates (Tournier et al. 2011).
   This chapter has provided an introduction to the mechanisms of DTI and worked
to explain its utilization while highlighting its limitations and examples of suc-
cessful applications. Notably, DTI has not yet found an established place in neu-
roeconomics. However, there is no reason why this should not be the case in times
to come. Even higher cognitive functions have already been shown to be at least
partly constituted by white matter, which makes DTI a promising tool in behavioral
psychology. It is our hope that this chapter will encourage neuroeconomists to use
DTI in their research.



References

Abe O, Aoki S, Hayashi N, Yamada H, Kunimatsu A, Mori H, Ohtomo K (2002) Normal aging in
   the central nervous system: quantitative MR diffusion-tensor analysis. Neurobiol Aging 23
   (3):433–441
Ainslie G (1975) Specious reward: a behavioral theory of impulsiveness and impulse control.
   Psychol Bull 82(4):463–496
Anwander A, Tittgemeyer M, von Cramon DY, Friederici AD, Knosche TR (2007)
   Connectivity-based parcellation of Broca’s area. Cereb Cortex 17(4):816–825. doi:10.1093/
   cercor/bhk034
Arain M, Haque M, Johal L, Mathur P, Nel W, Rais A, Sharma S (2013) Maturation of the
   adolescent brain. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 9:449–461. doi:10.2147/NDT.S39776
Ashburner J, Friston KJ (2000) Voxel-based morphometry—the methods. Neuroimage 11(6 Pt
   1):805–821. doi:10.1006/nimg.2000.0582
Assaf Y, Pasternak O (2008) Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)-based white matter mapping in brain
   research: a review. J Mol Neurosci 34(1):51–61. doi:10.1007/s12031-007-0029-0
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                            435

Azevedo FA, Carvalho LR, Grinberg LT, Farfel JM, Ferretti RE, Leite RE, Herculano-Houzel S
    (2009) Equal numbers of neuronal and nonneuronal cells make the human brain an
    isometrically scaled-up primate brain. J Comp Neurol 513(5):532–541. doi:10.1002/cne.21974
Bach DR, Behrens TE, Garrido L, Weiskopf N, Dolan RJ (2011) Deep and superﬁcial amygdala
    nuclei projections revealed in vivo by probabilistic tractography. J Neurosci 31(2):618–623.
    doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2744-10.2011
Bartzokis G (2004) Age-related myelin breakdown: a developmental model of cognitive decline
    and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 25(1):5–18; author reply 49–62
Bartzokis G, Lu PH, Tingus K, Mendez MF, Richard A, Peters DG, Mintz J (2010) Lifespan
    trajectory of myelin integrity and maximum motor speed. Neurobiol Aging 31(9):1554–1562.
    doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.08.015
Basser PJ, Mattiello J, LeBihan D (1994a) Estimation of the effective self-diffusion tensor from the
    NMR spin echo. J Magn Reson B 103(3):247–254
Basser PJ, Mattiello J, LeBihan D (1994b) MR diffusion tensor spectroscopy and imaging.
    Biophys J 66(1):259–267
Basser PJ, Pajevic S, Pierpaoli C, Duda J, Aldroubi A (2000) In vivo ﬁber tractography using
    DT-MRI data. Magn Reson Med 44(4):625–632
Beaulieu C (2002) The basis of anisotropic water diffusion in the nervous system—a technical
    review. NMR Biomed 15(7–8):435–455. doi:10.1002/nbm.782
Beaulieu C, Allen PS (1994) Determinants of anisotropic water diffusion in nerves. Magn Reson
    Med 31(4):394–400
Beckmann M, Johansen-Berg H, Rushworth MF (2009) Connectivity-based parcellation of human
    cingulate cortex and its relation to functional specialization. J Neurosci 29(4):1175–1190.
    doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3328-08.2009
Behrens TE, Johansen-Berg H (2005) Relating connectional architecture to grey matter function
    using diffusion imaging. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 360(1457):903–911. doi:10.
    1098/rstb.2005.1640
Behrens TE, Johansen-Berg H, Woolrich MW, Smith SM, Wheeler-Kingshott CA, Boulby PA,
    Matthews PM (2003a) Non-invasive mapping of connections between human thalamus and
    cortex using diffusion imaging. Nat Neurosci 6(7):750–757. doi:10.1038/nn1075
Behrens TE, Woolrich MW, Jenkinson M, Johansen-Berg H, Nunes RG, Clare S, Smith SM
    (2003b) Characterization and propagation of uncertainty in diffusion-weighted MR imaging.
    Magn Reson Med 50(5):1077–1088. doi:10.1002/mrm.10609
Behrens TE, Berg HJ, Jbabdi S, Rushworth MF, Woolrich MW (2007) Probabilistic diffusion
    tractography with multiple ﬁbre orientations: what can we gain? Neuroimage 34(1):144–155.
    doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.09.018, S1053-8119(06)00936-0 [pii]
Bengtsson SL, Nagy Z, Skare S, Forsman L, Forssberg H, Ullen F (2005) Extensive piano
    practicing has regionally speciﬁc effects on white matter development. Nat Neurosci 8
    (9):1148–1150. doi:10.1038/nn1516, nn1516 [pii]
Bennett CM, Wolford GL, Miller MB (2009) The principled control of false positives in
    neuroimaging. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 4(4):417–422. doi:10.1093/scan/nsp053
Blaschek A, Keeser D, Muller S, Koerte IK, Sebastian Schroder A, Muller-Felber W, Ertl-Wagner
    B (2013) Early white matter changes in childhood multiple sclerosis: a diffusion tensor imaging
    study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 34(10):2015–2020. doi:10.3174/ajnr.A3581
Blits KC (1999) Aristotle: form, function, and comparative anatomy. Anat Rec 257(2):58–63
Budde MD, Kim JH, Liang HF, Schmidt RE, Russell JH, Cross AH, Song SK (2007) Toward
    accurate diagnosis of white matter pathology using diffusion tensor imaging. Magn Reson Med
    57(4):688–695. doi:10.1002/mrm.21200
Catani M (2007) From hodology to function. Brain 130(Pt 3):602–605. doi:10.1093/brain/
    awm008
Catani M, Thiebaut de Schotten M (2008) A diffusion tensor imaging tractography atlas for virtual
    in vivo dissections. Cortex 44(8):1105–1132. doi:10.1016/j.cortex.2008.05.004, S0010-9452
    (08)00123-8 [pii]
436                                                                                T. Rüber et al.

Catani M, Howard RJ, Pajevic S, Jones DK (2002) Virtual in vivo interactive dissection of white
    matter fasciculi in the human brain. Neuroimage 17(1):77–94
Caviness VS Jr, Meyer J, Makris N, Kennedy DN (1996) MRI-based topographic parcellation of
    human neocortex: an anatomically speciﬁed method with estimate of reliability. J Cogn
    Neurosci 8(6):566–587. doi:10.1162/jocn.1996.8.6.566
Chiang MC, Barysheva M, Shattuck DW, Lee AD, Madsen SK, Avedissian C, Thompson PM
    (2009) Genetics of brain ﬁber architecture and intellectual performance. J Neurosci 29
    (7):2212–2224. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4184-08.2009
Chiang MC, McMahon KL, de Zubicaray GI, Martin NG, Hickie I, Toga AW, Thompson PM
    (2011) Genetics of white matter development: a DTI study of 705 twins and their siblings aged
    12 to 29. Neuroimage 54(3):2308–2317. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.10.015
Chung HW, Chou MC, Chen CY (2011) Principles and limitations of computational algorithms in
    clinical diffusion tensor MR tractography. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 32(1):3–13. doi:10.3174/
    ajnr.A2041
Cohen MX, Schoene-Bake JC, Elger CE, Weber B (2009) Connectivity-based segregation of the
    human striatum predicts personality characteristics. Nat Neurosci 12(1):32–34. doi:10.1038/nn.
    2228, nn.2228 [pii]
Crick F, Jones E (1993) Backwardness of human neuroanatomy. Nature 361(6408):109–110.
    doi:10.1038/361109a0
Dale AM, Fischl B, Sereno MI (1999) Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface
    reconstruction. Neuroimage 9(2):179–194. doi:10.1006/nimg.1998.0395, S1053-8119(98)
    90395-0 [pii]
Dauguet J, Peled S, Berezovskii V, Delzescaux T, Warﬁeld SK, Born R, Westin CF (2007)
    Comparison of ﬁber tracts derived from in-vivo DTI tractography with 3D histological neural
    tract tracer reconstruction on a macaque brain. Neuroimage 37(2):530–538. doi:10.1016/j.
    neuroimage.2007.04.067
Dayan E, Cohen LG (2011) Neuroplasticity subserving motor skill learning. Neuron 72(3):443–
    454. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2011.10.008, S0896-6273(11)00918-4 [pii]
Dejerine J, Dejerine-Klumpke AM (1895) Anatomie Des Centres Nerveux. Rueff et Cie, Paris
Descoteaux M, Deriche R, Knosche TR, Anwander A (2009) Deterministic and probabilistic
    tractography based on complex ﬁbre orientation distributions. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 28
    (2):269–286. doi:10.1109/TMI.2008.2004424
Drachman DA (2005) Do we have brain to spare? Neurology 64(12):2004–2005. doi:10.1212/01.
    WNL.0000166914.38327.BB
Dubey P, Pandey S, Moonis G (2013) Acute stroke imaging: recent updates. Stroke Res Treat
    2013:767212. doi:10.1155/2013/767212
Dyrby TB, Sogaard LV, Parker GJ, Alexander DC, Lind NM, Baare WF, Jelsing J (2007)
    Validation of in vitro probabilistic tractography. Neuroimage 37(4):1267–1277. doi:10.1016/j.
    neuroimage.2007.06.022
Einstein A (1905) Über die von der molecularkinetischen Theorie der Wärme geforderte
    Bewegung von in ruhenden Flüssigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen. Ann Phys 17:549–569
Engvig A, Fjell AM, Westlye LT, Moberget T, Sundseth O, Larsen VA, Walhovd KB (2012)
    Memory training impacts short-term changes in aging white matter: a longitudinal diffusion
    tensor imaging study. Hum Brain Mapp 33(10):2390–2406. doi:10.1002/hbm.21370
Evans AC, Janke AL, Collins DL, Baillet S (2012) Brain templates and atlases. Neuroimage 62
    (2):911–922. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.01.024
ffytche DH, Catani M (2005) Beyond localization: from hodology to function. Philos Trans R Soc
    Lond B Biol Sci 360(1456):767–779. doi:10.1098/rstb.2005.1621
Fischl B, Sereno MI, Dale AM (1999) Cortical surface-based analysis. II: inflation, flattening, and
    a surface-based coordinate system. Neuroimage 9(2):195–207. doi:10.1006/nimg.1998.0396,
    S1053-8119(98)90396-2 [pii]
Fischl B, Salat DH, Busa E, Albert M, Dieterich M, Haselgrove C, Dale AM (2002) Whole brain
    segmentation: automated labeling of neuroanatomical structures in the human brain. Neuron 33
    (3):341–355
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                        437

Floel A, de Vries MH, Scholz J, Breitenstein C, Johansen-Berg H (2009) White matter integrity in
    the vicinity of Broca’s area predicts grammar learning success. Neuroimage 47(4):1974–1981.
    doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.05.046
Friston KJ, Worsley KJ, Frackowiak RSJ, Mazziotta JC, Evans AC (1994) Assessing the
    signiﬁcance of focal activations using their spatial extent. Hum Brain Mapp (1):214–220
Fuchs S (2009) Some aspects of speech and the brain. Peter Lang, Frankfurt am Main; New York
Gao W, Lin W, Chen Y, Gerig G, Smith JK, Jewells V, Gilmore JH (2009) Temporal and spatial
    development of axonal maturation and myelination of white matter in the developing brain.
    AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 30(2):290–296. doi:10.3174/ajnr.A1363
Geyer S, Matelli M, Luppino G, Zilles K (2000) Functional neuroanatomy of the primate
    isocortical motor system. Anat Embryol (Berl) 202(6):443–474
Gonzalez RG (2012) Clinical MRI of acute ischemic stroke. J Magn Reson Imaging 36(2):
    259–271. doi:10.1002/jmri.23595
Guimond A, Roche A, Ayache N, Meunier J (2001) Three-dimensional multimodal brain warping
    using the demons algorithm and adaptive intensity corrections. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 20
    (1):58–69. doi:10.1109/42.906425
Gulani V, Webb AG, Duncan ID, Lauterbur PC (2001) Apparent diffusion tensor measurements in
    myelin-deﬁcient rat spinal cords. Magn Reson Med 45(2):191–195
Hagmann P, Jonasson L, Maeder P, Thiran JP, Wedeen VJ, Meuli R (2006) Understanding
    diffusion MR imaging techniques: from scalar diffusion-weighted imaging to diffusion tensor
    imaging and beyond. Radiographics 26(Suppl 1):S205–223. doi:10.1148/rg.26si065510
Hagmann P, Cammoun L, Gigandet X, Meuli R, Honey CJ, Wedeen VJ, Sporns O (2008)
    Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biol 6(7):e159. doi:10.1371/
    journal.pbio.0060159
Hasan KM, Parker DL, Alexander AL (2001) Comparison of gradient encoding schemes for
    diffusion-tensor MRI. J Magn Reson Imaging 13(5):769–780
Hedden T, Lautenschlager G, Park DC (2005) Contributions of processing ability and knowledge
    to verbal memory tasks across the adult life-span. Q J Exp Psychol A 58(1):169–190. doi:10.
    1080/02724980443000179
Hollerman JR, Tremblay L, Schultz W (2000) Involvement of basal ganglia and orbitofrontal
    cortex in goal-directed behavior. Prog Brain Res 126:193–215. doi:10.1016/S0079-6123(00)
    26015-9
Honea R, Crow TJ, Passingham D, Mackay CE (2005) Regional deﬁcits in brain volume in
    schizophrenia: a meta-analysis of voxel-based morphometry studies. Am J Psychiatry 162
    (12):2233–2245. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.162.12.2233
Hua K, Zhang J, Wakana S, Jiang H, Li X, Reich DS, Mori S (2008) Tract probability maps in
    stereotaxic spaces: analyses of white matter anatomy and tract-speciﬁc quantiﬁcation.
    Neuroimage 39(1):336–347. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.07.053
Huston JM, Field AS (2013) Clinical applications of diffusion tensor imaging. Magn Reson
    Imaging Clin N Am 21(2):279–298. doi:10.1016/j.mric.2012.12.003
Jahanshad N, Lee AD, Barysheva M, McMahon KL, de Zubicaray GI, Martin NG, Thompson PM
    (2010) Genetic influences on brain asymmetry: a DTI study of 374 twins and siblings.
    Neuroimage 52(2):455–469. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.236
Jancke L (2009) The plastic human brain. Restor Neurol Neurosci 27(5):521–538. doi:10.3233/
    RNN-2009-0519, E1068WQ4LH1354P0 [pii]
Jbabdi S, Behrens TE, Smith SM (2010) Crossing ﬁbres in tract-based spatial statistics.
    Neuroimage 49(1):249–256. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.08.039
Jenkinson M, Smith S (2001) A global optimisation method for robust afﬁne registration of brain
    images. Med Image Anal 5(2):143–156
Jeurissen B, Leemans A, Tournier JD, Jones DK, Sijbers J (2012) Investigating the prevalence of
    complex ﬁber conﬁgurations in white matter tissue with diffusion magnetic resonance imaging.
    Hum Brain Mapp. doi:10.1002/hbm.22099
Johansen-Berg H, Behrens TE (2006) Just pretty pictures? What diffusion tractography can add in
    clinical neuroscience. Curr Opin Neurol 19(4):379–385
438                                                                                T. Rüber et al.

Johansen-Berg H, Rushworth MF (2009) Using diffusion imaging to study human connectional
   anatomy. Annu Rev Neurosci 32:75–94. doi:10.1146/annurev.neuro.051508.135735
Johansen-Berg H, Behrens TE, Robson MD, Drobnjak I, Rushworth MF, Brady JM,
   Matthews PM (2004) Changes in connectivity proﬁles deﬁne functionally distinct regions in
   human medial frontal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101(36):13335–13340. doi:10.1073/
   pnas.0403743101
Johansen-Berg H, Behrens TE, Sillery E, Ciccarelli O, Thompson AJ, Smith SM, Matthews PM
   (2005) Functional-anatomical validation and individual variation of diffusion
   tractography-based segmentation of the human thalamus. Cereb Cortex 15(1):31–39. doi:10.
   1093/cercor/bhh105
Jones DK, Cercignani M (2010) Twenty-ﬁve pitfalls in the analysis of diffusion MRI data. NMR
   Biomed 23(7):803–820. doi:10.1002/nbm.1543
Jones DK, Simmons A, Williams SC, Horsﬁeld MA (1999) Non-invasive assessment of axonal
   ﬁber connectivity in the human brain via diffusion tensor MRI. Magn Reson Med 42(1):37–41
Jones DK, Symms MR, Cercignani M, Howard RJ (2005) The effect of ﬁlter size on VBM
   analyses of DT-MRI data. Neuroimage 26(2):546–554. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.02.013
Jones DK, Knosche TR, Turner R (2013) White matter integrity, ﬁber count, and other fallacies:
   the do’s and don’ts of diffusion MRI. Neuroimage 73:239–254. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.
   2012.06.081
Keller TA, Just MA (2009) Altering cortical connectivity: remediation-induced changes in the
   white matter of poor readers. Neuron 64(5):624–631. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2009.10.018
Kinoshita Y, Ohnishi A, Kohshi K, Yokota A (1999) Apparent diffusion coefﬁcient on rat brain
   and nerves intoxicated with methylmercury. Environ Res 80(4):348–354. doi:10.1006/enrs.
   1998.3935
Klawiter EC, Schmidt RE, Trinkaus K, Liang HF, Budde MD, Naismith RT, Benzinger TL (2011)
   Radial diffusivity predicts demyelination in ex vivo multiple sclerosis spinal cords.
   Neuroimage 55(4):1454–1460. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.01.007
Koch MA, Norris DG, Hund-Georgiadis M (2002) An investigation of functional and anatomical
   connectivity using magnetic resonance imaging. Neuroimage 16(1):241–250. doi:10.1006/
   nimg.2001.1052
Kochunov P, Williamson DE, Lancaster J, Fox P, Cornell J, Blangero J, Glahn DC (2012)
   Fractional anisotropy of water diffusion in cerebral white matter across the lifespan. Neurobiol
   Aging 33(1):9–20. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.01.014
Landi SM, Baguear F, Della-Maggiore V (2011) One week of motor adaptation induces structural
   changes in primary motor cortex that predict long-term memory one year later. J Neurosci 31
   (33):11808–11813. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2253-11.2011
Langer N, Hanggi J, Muller NA, Simmen HP, Jancke L (2012) Effects of limb immobilization on
   brain plasticity. Neurology 78(3):182–188. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823fcd9c
Lawes INC, Barrick TR, Murugam V, Spierings, Natalia, Evans DR, Song M, Clark CA (2008)
   Atlas-based segmentation of white matter tracts of the human brain using diffusion tensor
   tractography and comparison with classical dissection. Neuroimage 39(1):62–79
Le Bihan D, Johansen-Berg H (2012) Diffusion MRI at 25: exploring brain tissue structure and
   function. Neuroimage 61(2):324–341. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.006
Le Bihan D, Breton E, Lallemand D, Grenier P, Cabanis E, Laval-Jeantet M (1986) MR imaging
   of intravoxel incoherent motions: application to diffusion and perfusion in neurologic
   disorders. Radiology 161(2):401–407. doi:10.1148/radiology.161.2.3763909
Lebel C, Gee M, Camicioli R, Wieler M, Martin W, Beaulieu C (2012) Diffusion tensor imaging
   of white matter tract evolution over the lifespan. Neuroimage 60(1):340–352. doi:10.1016/j.
   neuroimage.2011.11.094
Lindenberg R, Renga V, Zhu LL, Betzler F, Alsop D, Schlaug G (2010) Structural integrity of
   corticospinal motor ﬁbers predicts motor impairment in chronic stroke. Neurology 74(4):
   280–287. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181ccc6d9, 74/4/280 [pii]
Lisman JE, Grace AA (2005) The hippocampal-VTA loop: controlling the entry of information
   into long-term memory. Neuron 46(5):703–713. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2005.05.002
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                            439

Loring DW, Meador KJ, Allison JD, Pillai JJ, Lavin T, Lee GP, Dave V (2002) Now you see it,
   now you don’t: statistical and methodological considerations in fMRI. Epilepsy Behav 3
   (6):539–547
Marchina S, Zhu LL, Norton A, Zipse L, Wan CY, Schlaug G (2011) Impairment of speech
   production predicted by lesion load of the left arcuate fasciculus. Stroke 42(8):2251–2256.
   doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.606103
McClure SM, Laibson DI, Loewenstein G, Cohen JD (2004) Separate neural systems value
   immediate and delayed monetary rewards. Science 306(5695):503–507. doi:10.1126/science.
   1100907
Menke RA, Jbabdi S, Miller KL, Matthews PM, Zarei M (2010) Connectivity-based segmentation
   of the substantia nigra in human and its implications in Parkinson’s disease. Neuroimage 52
   (4):1175–1180. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.05.086
Mesulam M (2005) Imaging connectivity in the human cerebral cortex: the next frontier? Ann
   Neurol 57(1):5–7. doi:10.1002/ana.20368
Mori S, Barker PB (1999) Diffusion magnetic resonance imaging: its principle and applications.
   Anat Rec 257(3):102–109
Mori S, van Zijl PC (2002) Fiber tracking: principles and strategies—a technical review. NMR
   Biomed 15(7–8):468–480. doi:10.1002/nbm.781
Mori S, Crain BJ, Chacko VP, van Zijl PC (1999) Three-dimensional tracking of axonal
   projections in the brain by magnetic resonance imaging. Ann Neurol 45(2):265–269
Moseley ME, Cohen Y, Kucharczyk J, Mintorovitch J, Asgari HS, Wendland MF, Norman D
   (1990) Diffusion-weighted MR imaging of anisotropic water diffusion in cat central nervous
   system. Radiology 176(2):439–445
Mukherjee P, Miller JH, Shimony JS, Conturo TE, Lee BC, Almli CR, McKinstry RC (2001)
   Normal brain maturation during childhood: developmental trends characterized with
   diffusion-tensor MR imaging. Radiology 221(2):349–358. doi:10.1148/radiol.2212001702
Mukherjee P, Chung SW, Berman JI, Hess CP, Henry RG (2008) Diffusion tensor MR imaging
   and ﬁber tractography: technical considerations. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 29(5):843–852.
   doi:10.3174/ajnr.A1052
Munoz Maniega S, Bastin ME, Armitage PA, Farrall AJ, Carpenter TK, Hand PJ, Wardlaw JM
   (2004) Temporal evolution of water diffusion parameters is different in grey and white matter
   in human ischaemic stroke. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 75(12):1714–1718. doi:10.1136/
   jnnp.2003.033852
Noctor SC, Martinez-Cerdeno V, Kriegstein AR (2007) Contribution of intermediate progenitor
   cells to cortical histogenesis. Arch Neurol 64(5):639–642. doi:10.1001/archneur.64.5.639
Olson EA, Hooper CJ, Collins P, Luciana M (2007) Adolescents’ performance on delay and
   probability discounting tasks: contributions of age, intelligence, executive functioning, and
   self-reported externalizing behavior. Pers Individ Dif 43(7):1886–1897. doi:10.1016/j.paid.
   2007.06.016
Olson EA, Collins PF, Hooper CJ, Muetzel R, Lim KO, Luciana M (2009) White matter integrity
   predicts delay discounting behavior in 9- to 23-year-olds: a diffusion tensor imaging study.
   J Cogn Neurosci 21(7):1406–1421. doi:10.1162/jocn.2009.21107
O’Sullivan M, Jones DK, Summers PE, Morris RG, Williams SC, Markus HS (2001) Evidence for
   cortical “disconnection” as a mechanism of age-related cognitive decline. Neurology 57
   (4):632–638
Pajevic S, Pierpaoli C (1999) Color schemes to represent the orientation of anisotropic tissues from
   diffusion tensor data: application to white matter ﬁber tract mapping in the human brain. Magn
   Reson Med 42(3):526–540
Papadakis NG, Murrills CD, Hall LD, Huang CL, Adrian Carpenter T (2000) Minimal gradient
   encoding for robust estimation of diffusion anisotropy. Magn Reson Imaging 18(6):671–679
Passingham RE, Stephan KE, Kotter R (2002) The anatomical basis of functional localization in
   the cortex. Nat Rev Neurosci 3(8):606–616. doi:10.1038/nrn893
440                                                                                T. Rüber et al.

Perrin M, Poupon C, Rieul B, Leroux P, Constantinesco A, Mangin JF, Lebihan D (2005)
    Validation of q-ball imaging with a diffusion ﬁbre-crossing phantom on a clinical scanner.
    Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 360(1457):881–891. doi:10.1098/rstb.2005.1650
Pierpaoli C, Basser PJ (1996) Toward a quantitative assessment of diffusion anisotropy. Magn
    Reson Med 36(6):893–906
Pierpaoli C, Jezzard P, Basser PJ, Barnett A, Di Chiro G (1996) Diffusion tensor MR imaging of
    the human brain. Radiology 201(3):637–648. doi:10.1148/radiology.201.3.8939209
Rüber T, Schlaug G, Lindenberg R (2012) Compensatory role of the cortico-rubro-spinal tract in
    motor recovery after stroke. Neurology 79(6):515–522. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e31826356e8
Salat DH, Greve DN, Pacheco JL, Quinn BT, Helmer KG, Buckner RL, Fischl B (2009) Regional
    white matter volume differences in nondemented aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroimage
    44(4):1247–1258. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.10.030
Salthouse TA (2000) Aging and measures of processing speed. Biol Psychol 54(1–3):35–54
Salthouse TA (2009) When does age-related cognitive decline begin? Neurobiol Aging 30(4):507–
    514. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.09.023
Schaechter JD, Fricker ZP, Perdue KL, Helmer KG, Vangel MG, Greve DN, Makris N (2009)
    Microstructural status of ipsilesional and contralesional corticospinal tract correlates with
    motor skill in chronic stroke patients. Hum Brain Mapp 30(11):3461–3474. doi:10.1002/hbm.
    20770
Schellinger PD, Bryan RN, Caplan LR, Detre JA, Edelman RR, Jaigobin C, Technology
    Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of, Neurology (2010) Evidence-based
    guideline: the role of diffusion and perfusion MRI for the diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke:
    report of the Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American
    Academy of Neurology. Neurology 75(2):177-185. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181e7c9dd
Schlaug G, Marchina S, Norton A (2009) Evidence for plasticity in white-matter tracts of patients
    with chronic Broca’s aphasia undergoing intense intonation-based speech therapy. Ann N Y
    Acad Sci 1169:385–394. 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04587.x, doi:NYAS04587 [pii]
Scholz J, Klein MC, Behrens TE, Johansen-Berg H (2009) Training induces changes in
    white-matter architecture. Nat Neurosci 12(11):1370–1371. doi:10.1038/nn.2412, nn.2412 [pii]
Schubotz RI, Anwander A, Knosche TR, von Cramon DY, Tittgemeyer M (2010) Anatomical and
    functional parcellation of the human lateral premotor cortex. Neuroimage 50(2):396–408.
    doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.069
Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Woolrich MW, Beckmann CF, Behrens TE, Johansen-Berg H,
    Matthews PM (2004) Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and
    implementation as FSL. Neuroimage 23(Suppl 1):S208–219. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.
    07.051, S1053-8119(04)00393-3 [pii]
Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Johansen-Berg H, Rueckert D, Nichols TE, Mackay CE, Behrens TE
    (2006) Tract-based spatial statistics: voxelwise analysis of multi-subject diffusion data.
    Neuroimage 31(4):1487–1505. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.02.024
Snook L, Plewes C, Beaulieu C (2007) Voxel based versus region of interest analysis in diffusion
    tensor imaging of neurodevelopment. Neuroimage 34(1):243–252. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.
    2006.07.021
Soares JM, Marques P, Alves V, Sousa N (2013) A hitchhiker’s guide to diffusion tensor imaging.
    Front Neurosci 7:1. doi:10.3389/fnins.2013.00031
Song SK, Sun SW, Ramsbottom MJ, Chang C, Russell J, Cross AH (2002) Dysmyelination
    revealed through MRI as increased radial (but unchanged axial) diffusion of water. Neuroimage
    17(3):1429–1436. doi:S105381190291267X [pii]
Song SK, Sun SW, Ju WK, Lin SJ, Cross AH, Neufeld AH (2003) Diffusion tensor imaging
    detects and differentiates axon and myelin degeneration in mouse optic nerve after retinal
    ischemia. Neuroimage 20(3):1714–1722. doi:S1053811903004403 [pii]
Sporns O, Tononi G, Kotter R (2005) The human connectome: a structural description of the
    human brain. PLoS Comput Biol 1(4):e42. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010042
22   Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Tractography                                            441

Stiles J (2011) Brain development and the nature versus nurture debate. Prog Brain Res 189:3–22.
    doi:10.1016/B978-0-444-53884-0.00015-4, B978-0-444-53884-0.00015-4 [pii]
Sullivan EV, Rohlﬁng T, Pfefferbaum A (2010) Quantitative ﬁber tracking of lateral and
    interhemispheric white matter systems in normal aging: relations to timed performance.
    Neurobiol Aging 31(3):464–481. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.04.007
Takahashi M, Hackney DB, Zhang G, Wehrli SL, Wright AC, O’Brien WT, Selzer ME (2002)
    Magnetic resonance microimaging of intraaxonal water diffusion in live excised lamprey spinal
    cord. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99(25):16192–16196. doi:10.1073/pnas.252249999
Takeuchi H, Sekiguchi A, Taki Y, Yokoyama S, Yomogida Y, Komuro N, Kawashima R (2010)
    Training of working memory impacts structural connectivity. J Neurosci 30(9):3297–3303.
    doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4611-09.2010
Taylor DG, Bushell MC (1985) The spatial mapping of translational diffusion coefﬁcients by the
    NMR imaging technique. Phys Med Biol 30(4):345–349
Tomassini V, Jbabdi S, Klein JC, Behrens TE, Pozzilli C, Matthews PM, Johansen-Berg H (2007)
    Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human lateral premotor
    cortex identiﬁes dorsal and ventral subregions with anatomical and functional specializations.
    J Neurosci 27(38):10259–10269. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2144-07.2007
Tournier JD, Mori S, Leemans A (2011) Diffusion tensor imaging and beyond. Magn Reson Med
    65(6):1532–1556. doi:10.1002/mrm.22924
Tsang JM, Dougherty RF, Deutsch GK, Wandell BA, Ben-Shachar M (2009) Frontoparietal white
    matter diffusion properties predict mental arithmetic skills in children. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
    106(52):22546–22551. doi:10.1073/pnas.0906094106
Tzourio-Mazoyer N, Landeau B, Papathanassiou D, Crivello F, Etard O, Delcroix N, Joliot M
    (2002) Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical
    parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain. Neuroimage 15(1):273–289. doi:10.1006/
    nimg.2001.0978
Van Essen DC, Ugurbil K, Auerbach E, Barch D, Behrens TE, Bucholz R, Consortium W,
    U-Minn HCP (2012) The Human Connectome Project: a data acquisition perspective.
    Neuroimage 62(4):2222–2231. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.018
Wakana S, Jiang H, Nagae-Poetscher LM, van Zijl PCM, Mori S (2004) Fiber tract-based atlas of
    human white matter anatomy. Radiology 230(1):77–87. doi:10.1148/radiol.2301021640
Wernicke C (1874) Der Aphasische Symptomencomplex. Cohn and Weigert, Breslau
Werring DJ, Toosy AT, Clark CA, Parker GJ, Barker GJ, Miller DH, Thompson AJ (2000)
    Diffusion tensor imaging can detect and quantify corticospinal tract degeneration after stroke.
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 69(2):269–272
Westlye LT, Walhovd KB, Dale AM, Bjornerud A, Due-Tonnessen P, Engvig A, Fjell AM (2010)
    Life-span changes of the human brain white matter: diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and
    volumetry. Cereb Cortex 20(9):2055–2068. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhp280
Wheeler-Kingshott CA, Cercignani M (2009) About “axial” and “radial” diffusivities. Magn
    Reson Med 61(5):1255–1260. doi:10.1002/mrm.21965
Wittmann M, Leland DS, Paulus MP (2007) Time and decision making: differential contribution
    of the posterior insular cortex and the striatum during a delay discounting task. Exp Brain Res
    179(4):643–653. doi:10.1007/s00221-006-0822-y
Worsley KJ (2005) An improved theoretical P value for SPMs based on discrete local maxima.
    Neuroimage 28(4):1056–1062. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.06.053
Wu JS, Zhou LF, Tang WJ, Mao Y, Hu J, Song YY, Du GH (2007) Clinical evaluation and
    follow-up outcome of diffusion tensor imaging-based functional neuronavigation: a prospec-
    tive, controlled study in patients with gliomas involving pyramidal tracts. Neurosurgery 61
    (5):935–948; discussion 948–939. doi:10.1227/01.neu.0000303189.80049.ab
Yogarajah M, Focke NK, Bonelli S, Cercignani M, Acheson J, Parker GJ, Duncan JS (2009)
    Deﬁning Meyer’s loop-temporal lobe resections, visual ﬁeld deﬁcits and diffusion tensor
    tractography. Brain 132(Pt 6):1656–1668. doi:10.1093/brain/awp114
442                                                                           T. Rüber et al.

Zalesky A (2011) Moderating registration misalignment in voxelwise comparisons of DTI data: a
   performance evaluation of skeleton projection. Magn Reson Imaging 29(1):111–125. doi:10.
   1016/j.mri.2010.06.027
Zhu LL, Lindenberg R, Alexander MP, Schlaug G (2010) Lesion load of the corticospinal tract
   predicts motor impairment in chronic stroke. Stroke 41(5):910–915. doi:10.1161/
   STROKEAHA.109.577023, STROKEAHA.109.577023 [pii]
Zhu Z, Johnson NF, Kim C, Gold BT (2013) Reduced frontal cortex efﬁciency is associated with
   lower white matter integrity in aging. Cereb Cortex. doi:10.1093/cercor/bht212
