Chapter 23
Molecular Genetics

Martin Reuter, Andrea Felten and Christian Montag




Abstract This chapter presents a concise introduction to molecular genetics. While
readers familiar with the ﬁeld of genetics may ﬁnd this article trivial, those readers
less experienced in the area may consider this a kind of ‘refresher’, still others may
be new to the area, having not heard about this topic since their biology classes at
school. Our aim is to provide all of our readers with new knowledge—or at least a
different perspective—on molecular genetics, with a particular emphasis on the
neuroeconomics framework. Being mindful of the varying levels of familiarity with
genetics our readership may have, we want to provide a ‘crash course’ that starts
with the very basics in genetics and concludes with the most recent developments
and perspectives in the ﬁeld. Our own experience from interdisciplinary cooperative
projects is that our colleagues from other disciplines, such as economics, often ask
for a simple introduction to behavioral genetics. Unfortunately, we were unaware of
any reference to date that ﬁts this description. It is for this reason we decided to
write this chapter and to ask experts in other neuroscientiﬁc ﬁelds to do the same in
this book for methods like EEG, MRI, etc.




M. Reuter (&)  A. Felten
Department of Psychology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
e-mail: martin.reuter@uni-bonn-diff.de
A. Felten
e-mail: andrea.felten@uni-bonn-diff.de
M. Reuter  A. Felten
Center for Economics and Neuroscience (CENs), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
C. Montag
Department of Molecular Psychology, Institute of Psychology and Education, Ulm
University, Ulm, Germany
e-mail: christian.montag@uni-ulm.de
C. Montag
Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation, Center for Information in Medicine, School of Life
Science and Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, People’s Republic of China

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                                  443
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_23
444                                                                         M. Reuter et al.


23.1     Introduction

Molecular genetics is a very broad ﬁeld encompassing a group of different methods
that are applied by different scientiﬁc disciplines with diverse research foci.
Whereas some researchers are interested in the structure of the genes and the
genetic code, others want to unravel how the transcription (“reading”) of the genes
is influenced or how protein biosynthesis is accomplished. Another focus of
research, known as behavioral genetics, investigates how genes influence our
behavior. The later aspect is relevant for neuroeconomists who are, by deﬁnition,
interested in the biological basis of human decision making—hence also in
behavior.
   A large proportion of the population holds a rather naïve view of genes as
something obscure, unchangeably ﬁxed before birth, that determines our lives in a
fatalistic way. Most people are not aware that genes simply represent a blueprint for
constructing all kinds of proteins that are necessary for our organism to function
properly. This implies that at every moment of our life genes in different tissues of
our body are active in order to produce “gene products” (e.g. proteins, enzymes,
hormones, neurotransmitters, etc.). This production process—known as protein
biosynthesis—does not work blindly, but is regulated by the demands of our body.
In turn, what our body needs largely depends on environmental stimuli. For
example, eating a huge portion of spaghetti at lunch demands that carbohydrates
must be metabolized. The hormone responsible for this is insulin. Therefore, the
external stimulus of having spaghetti for lunch initiates the production of insulin. In
our genome, on the short arm of chromosome 11, we have a gene that provides the
relevant information on how to produce insulin. This gene is necessary so that our
body ‘knows’ how to build insulin. Our genome is the entirety of our genetic
information. This information is mainly present in our genes. The genes are located
on the chromosomes.1 A gene is a distinct part of a chromosome that provides the
information for the synthesis of a speciﬁc gene product (e.g. insulin). So if we think
back to our spaghetti example, the need for insulin initiates certain molecules,
referred to as transcription factors that bind to the promoter region of the insulin
gene. The promoter is a part of a gene that functions like a switch. If this switch is
turned on by the transcription factors, it initiates the reading (transcription) of the
gene. Our chromosomes are located in the nucleus of each cell of our body,
however, the “factories” that build up the gene products, called ribosomes, are




1
 The human genome consists of 23 pairs of chromosomes, which are divided into gonosomes and
autosomes. Gonosomes (the X and the Y chromosomes) refer to the chromosomes deﬁning human
sex. The XX genotype marks the female and the XY genotype the male gender. Autosomes are all
other chromosomes which are not gonosomes. There is also additional genetic information on
mitochondrial DNA.
23   Molecular Genetics                                                                     445

located in the cytoplasm of the cells. Therefore, the blueprints showing how to
produce the gene product (i.e. which amino acids have to be chained up) must be
transferred from the nucleus into the cytoplasm.2 The transfer of information is
done by the messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), a single stranded copy of the
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). The DNA is a double-stranded molecule that pro-
vides the genetic information within genes. This information is written in a rather
simple language, the genetic code. The genetic code consists of only four letters, A
(adenine), T (thymine), C (cytosine), G (guanine) that are in fact nucleotides,
molecules composed of a nucleobase, a ﬁve-carbon sugar and at least one phos-
phate group that form the DNA. The gene transcription is the process of reading and
translating those parts of a gene (exons and introns, the latter spliced out in mature
mRNA) into mRNA that are essential for the synthesis of the gene product. Here it
is important to know that the DNA consists of two antiparallel strands forming the
DNA double helix, stabilized by hydrogen bonds and base stacking: The nucleotide
A is always paired with a T and C is always paired with a G (see Fig. 23.1). The
transcription of DNA into mRNA means that if there is an A on the DNA the
mRNA will contain uracil (U), a G is translated into a C, a C into a G, and a T is
translated into A. The structure of uracil is very similar to that of thymine. In the
open reading frame of exonic regions, the sequence of three nucleotides codes for a
distinct amino acid. Such a triplet of nucleotides/bases is called a codon. With the
exception of three stop codons, each codon codes for a distinct amino acid, how-
ever, an amino acid can sometimes be coded by different codons.
    The short mRNA that conveys the information for the synthesis of one protein at
its maximum leaves the nucleus of the cell and migrates into the cytoplasm. At the
ribosomes, the information of the mRNA must be translated into a chain of amino
acids forming a protein. Here another form of RNA, the transfer RNA (tRNA)
comes into play. The tRNA has two functions, ﬁrst it carries an anticodon that is the
complementary nucleotide sequence to a given codon on the mRNA, and second
the tRNA picks up the appropriate amino acid in the cytoplasm that is coded by the
mRNA. Step by step the codons are translated into amino acid chains until the gene
product, i.e., the protein, is built up. In sum, a protein consists of a chain of amino
acids and the order of this amino acid chain, is provided by the blueprint that is our
genes.




2
 Cytoplasm refers to both cytosol and the organelles. Cytosol is the fluid substance in the cell
separated from the outer cell wall by the cell membrane. Organelles refer to structures such as
ribosomes within the cell.
446                               M. Reuter et al.

Fig. 23.1 The structure of
the DNA double helix as ﬁrst
identiﬁed by James Watson
and Francis Crick in 1953.
The DNA double strand that
comes in the form of a wound
helix gets its stability by
knitting the two single strands
together. The nucleotide A is
always paired with a T and C
is always paired with a G
23   Molecular Genetics                                                              447


23.2     Genetic Variability—Polymorphisms

This rough overview of the protein biosynthesis is crucial to our understanding of
how genetic variations can cause individual differences in behavior. It must ﬁrst be
mentioned that there is a 99.9 % overlap in the genome of two unrelated humans.
This means that most of the sequences of base pairs constituting our genome (a total
of 3.2 billion bases/nucleotides/letters) are invariant across individuals! In other
words, tiny variations among the remaining 0.1 % (corresponding to 3,000,000
bases) may have huge effects. This great similarity in the genetic code across
individuals is the prerequisite for belonging to the same species, i.e., we have
comparable metabolic, motor, cognitive, etc., processes. However, the small dif-
ferences in the DNA sequence across individuals cause the thrilling differences in
personality, abilities, and behavior. If two people, let us call them Peter and Bob,
met to compare their DNA sequences, they would only detect differences on
average in every thousand letters. For example, at position 1003 of a certain gene,
Peter has an A and Bob has a T. Adenine (A) and Thymine (T) are called alleles at
position 1003. Loci on the DNA where there is no variation in the population are
called monomorph and have only one possible allele. However, a gene locus where
there is variability is called polymorphism if it occurs at least in 1 % of the pop-
ulation. If the prevalence of such a base exchange is lower than 1 %, it is called
“mutation.” In other words, polymorphisms are mutations that are rather wide-
spread in a population. A mutation occurs by chance through a deﬁcient
self-reproduction of genetic material. Only when such a “mistake” of nature occurs
in the gametes they are transferred to the next generation, i.e., they are heritable.
The “Out of Africa Hypothesis” postulates that every living human being is des-
cended from a small group we immodestly call Homo sapiens (“wise human”) in
Africa, who then dispersed across the globe and successfully conquered the world
(while other forms of the genus homo such as Homo erectus or the newly dis-
covered Homo denisova or Homo naledi did not survive to the present day). The
migration of Homo sapiens started about 70,000 years ago. Since this time, the
Homo sapiens population has dramatically increased and accordingly, the more
humans that exist, the higher is the probability that a “mistake” in DNA redupli-
cation or DNA repair takes place. If an individual inherits a mutation that is not
adaptive for survival or reproduction, the probability that this individual will pass
this mutation on to the next generation is low. This is the process known as natural
selection. Therefore, polymorphisms, which are widely distributed mutations,
cannot be completely disastrous. The opposite might even be more accurate—these
mutations will bring advantages in certain environmental niches.
    There exist different kinds of polymorphisms. By far, the most widespread form
is the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) that is deﬁned by an alteration in a
single nucleotide/base (as in the example of Peter and Bob). The deletion of a base
can be fatal if it occurs in a coding region (located in an exon) that is translated into
an amino acid sequence. By the deletion of a single base, the reading frame is
destroyed, i.e., all ensuing codons are translated incorrectly or the translation
448                                                                              M. Reuter et al.




Fig. 23.2 Consequences of a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). Depicted is a small
sequence from the coding region of a gene. a DNA strand with exclusively wild-type alleles;
b deletion SNP in the third base of codon 1. Although the ﬁrst amino acid of the polypeptide
remains unchanged, because both codons—ACC and ACG—code for the amino acid threonine,
the rest of the codons lead to other amino acids. Most severe, the transcription ends with codon 4
because TAG is a stop codon. Lysine is no longer considered. The protein cannot be synthesized
c a SNP where there is a transition from G to T in the ﬁrst base of the second codon. Leucine
instead of valine is inserted into the polypeptide. Typically, such a SNP does not prevent the
production of the protein, but alters its functionality


process ends too early (see Fig. 23.2b in comparison to Fig. 23.2a: a cytosine at
position 3 has been deleted). Therefore, deletion polymorphisms in exons that
change the reading frame are very rare, because the consequences are so disastrous
that the organism can likely not survive without the production of this protein. Base
pair transitions as depicted in the comparison of Fig. 23.2a, c (there is a G to T
transition at codon No. 2, resulting in production of an alternative amino acid) are
rather frequent and mostly do not prevent the production of the protein. However,
this base pair transition may have consequences on the structure and functionality
of the protein (e.g. reducing its thermostability3). SNPs do not only occur in coding
regions but can also be observed all over the genome. We have just observed that
polymorphisms in the coding region of a gene are very likely to have an effect on
the gene product if it is related to an amino acid exchange. An exception is the
presence of a silent mutation, as depicted in the comparison of Fig. 23.2b, c. Some


3
Thermostability describes how stable a certain structure is in the face of rising temperature.
23   Molecular Genetics                                                           449

amino acids can be coded by different codons. The codons ACC and ACG both
code for threonine (1st codon). Silent mutations are less likely to result in alter-
native gene products with altered functionality, although this may happen.
    Another hot candidate for changes in functionality of a gene is the promoter
region. The promoter initiates the transcription of a gene. Polymorphisms in the
promoter region of a gene may have an influence on the efﬁciency of transcription
factors to bind to the DNA, disturbing transcription complex assembly, and
recruitment of RNA Polymerase II. Therefore, polymorphisms in the promoter
region can affect the mRNA expression. Lower levels of mRNA expression are
often related to a lower amount of the gene product (e.g. number of expressed
neurotransmitter receptors in the brain).
    Another form of polymorphism is the variable number of tandem repeats
polymorphism (VNTR). Here, a sequence of bases is repeated several times on a
gene. Individuals may differ in the number of these repeats. The dopamine trans-
porter polymorphism DAT1-VNTR belongs to this family of polymorphisms. The
most common alleles observable are a 9 and a 10 times repeat of a sequence of 40
bases in the 3′ un-translated region (3′UTR) of the dopamine transporter gene
(SLC6A3), however, the number of repeats possible can range from 3–11
(Vandenbergh et al. 1992). Although results are controversial, the 10-repeat allele is
most commonly related to an increased level of DAT1 expression (Heinz et al.
2000). Within the category of VNTRs which belongs to the simple sequence repeats
(SSRs) polymorphism, also known as microsatellite polymorphism or short tandem
repeats (STRs). Here, very few bases, normally 2–6 bases, are repeated many times.
The SSRs are often analyzed for kinship or population diversity analyses.
A prominent example for the role of SSRs for social behavior is the microsatellite
polymorphism in the promoter region of the arginine vasopressin 1A receptor
(AVPR1A) gene, that influences partnership satisfaction in humans and explains
bonding differences between the monogamous prairie vole and the promiscuous
meadow vole (Walum et al. 2008; Lim et al. 2004).
    Copy-number variations (CNVs) constitute alterations in the genome charac-
terized by a variation in the number of copies of one or more sections of the DNA.
CNVs correspond to relatively large regions of the genome that have been deleted
(fewer than the normal number of copies) or duplicated (more than the normal
number of copies). Reasons for CNVs are incorrect DNA duplications or insertional
transpositions (gain in copy number) or deletions (losses of copies), as well as more
complex rearrangements of the DNA. CNVs account for about 12 % of human
genomic DNA and each variation may range from about one kilobase (1 kb = 1000
bases/nucleotides) to several megabases (1 Mb = 1,000,000 bp) in size. The
functionality of a gene can be altered by CNVs through disruption of a regulatory
element (e.g. an enhancer or suppressor site) or by causing functional loss of a gene
by a deletion. As with traditional polymorphisms, some CNVs do not have phe-
notypic effects, e.g., the CNV does not result in an observable change at the level of
behavior. Meanwhile, some prominent CNVs have been successfully related to
psychiatric diseases like schizophrenia, attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
450                                                                    M. Reuter et al.

(ADHD), autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) or Williams–Beuren syndrome
(WBS) (for an overview see Cook and Scherer 2008).



23.3    Extraction of DNA

Before we can analyze polymorphisms located on the genome, the DNA has to be
extracted. Eukaryotic organisms (humans, animals, plants, fungi, and protists) store
most of their DNA inside the nucleus of the cells (genomic DNA) and some of their
DNA in organelles (e.g. mitochondria in humans and chloroplasts in plants).
Therefore, the cell wall and the cell nucleus must be separated prior to analysis.
This is done using an enzyme, proteinase K, in the presence of a chaotropic salt,
which immediately inactivates all nucleases (nucleases can degrade the DNA).
After cell lysis, the sample is pipetted into a reaction tube containing a ﬁlter
composed of glass ﬁbers. The DNA binds selectively to the glass ﬁbers in the tube.
Bound DNA is puriﬁed in a series of rapid “wash-and-spin” steps to remove
contaminating cellular components (e.g. organelles). Finally, low salt elution
releases the puriﬁed DNA from the glass ﬁbers. Today DNA extraction kits con-
taining the ﬁlter tubes and all necessary reagents are commercially available. In
addition, only pipettes and a centrifuge are necessary to conduct the DNA
extraction. In modern labs, DNA extraction is typically performed by robots. These
automated DNA extraction machines rely on alternate techniques that do not use
ﬁlter tubes but instead rely on magnetic beads or vacuum units.



23.4    Genotyping

Genotyping is the process of determining the given alleles at a certain polymorphic
locus in our genome. Due to the fact that we have a diploid set of chromosomes,
each individual has two alleles at a distinct gene locus. For example, with respect to
a SNP characterized by an A → G transition, an individual can have two identical
alleles across the two chromosomes (AA or GG) or different alleles (AG) on each
chromosome. AA, AG, and GG represent the three possible genotypes at this
polymorphic site and the two alleles are named A and G.
    The revolutionary invention of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) by Kary
Mullis in 1983 provided the starting point for molecular genetics research by
making genotyping possible. The main problem in genotyping a polymorphic
region on the genome is how tiny the information is that one is interested in: In the
case of a SNP one out of three billion bases is exchanged. Furthermore, we have to
keep in mind that the DNA is located in the small nucleus of a cell. In other words,
the information we are interested in is unbelievably small. In order to solve this
problem we have to amplify the “signal” to enable us to decide whether a certain
polymorphic region contains, for example, an A or a G at a particular locus. PCR is
23   Molecular Genetics                                                                     451

conducted by a PCR machine that is simply a copy machine for nucleic acids (DNA
or RNA). In brief, the principle of PCR—a series of repetitive chemical reactions
running in a reaction tube—is as follows:
    At ﬁrst, you must mark the region on the DNA where the polymorphism is
located. This is done by designing two oligonucleotides (a chain of about 17–25
bases), called primers, that are complementary to the original DNA strand. The
forward primer binds to the 3′ → 5′ strand and the reverse primer to the 5′ → 3′
strand. The two primers mark a region of about 200 base pairs, along which the
SNP is located (i.e. the target region). The experimenter has to verify that the
sequence of the primers—although very small—does not occur anywhere else in
the genome, i.e., the primer sequence is speciﬁc to the region of interest. The aim of
the PCR is to make more than a billion copies of the target region. So if you want to
build up new copies you need to insert nucleotides (A, C, T, and G) into your
reaction tube. As with other PCR reagents, these synthetic nucleotides are also
commercially available from biotech companies. Reduplication of DNA is a pro-
cess that is constantly ongoing in the living organism. PCR imitates this process.
The crucial ingredient of a PCR reaction mix is a polymerase that does the
ampliﬁcation process. Most common is the Taq polymerase.4 Finally, you must put
a few ng/µl of DNA (the template) into the tube. The PCR contains the repetition of
at least 30 PCR cycles. Each PCR cycle consists of three phases; denaturation,
annealing, and elongation, each requiring a different temperature. During denatu-
ration the temperature is raised to 95 °C to divide the two complementary DNA
strands. Once the DNA strands are separated, the primers can anneal to the single
DNA strands at a temperature of about 60 °C. Note, the exact annealing temper-
ature can vary depending on the PCR protocol used and the sequence of the bases
and primers in the target region. Then the temperature is raised up to 72 °C
allowing the Taq polymerase to work.5 The Taq now elongates its own sequence by
incorporating the synthetic nucleotides previously added to the PCR reaction mix.
The PCR starts with double-stranded template DNA. After the ﬁrst PCR cycle we
have two copies, after the second cycle four copies, after the third cycle eight
copies, and so forth (see Fig. 23.3). The number of PCR copies per PCR run is
calculated as 2n, with n indicating the number of PCR cycles. Therefore, a PCR run
with 30 cycles would result in over 1 billion copies of the target region. The aim of
a PCR is to amplify the signal of the polymorphic regions by producing billions of
copies. However, a conventional PCR does not provide the genotype information,
but only creates the prerequisites for genotyping. Genotyping is achieved by putting




4
 This thermostable enzyme called Thermus aquaticus (Taq) has not been “invented” by a scientist,
but has been extracted naturally from a hot thermal spring called Morning Glory Pool in the US
national park Yellowstone.
5
 The great variance of temperatures in a PCR explain why a thermostable enzyme is needed and
scientists are lucky to have found such an enzyme in nature.
452                                                                           M. Reuter et al.

Fig. 23.3 Schematic overview on polymerase chain reaction (PCR). a The starting point is a c
double-stranded DNA template. The lens glass highlights the region on the genome where a single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP; red letter) is located. It is apparent that the two DNA strands are
complementary to each other (a G is paired with a C and an A is paired with a T). b The
DENATURATION phase is portrayed. Heating the reaction tube up to 95 °C separates the two
complementary DNA strands. c The ANNEALING phase is depicted. Lowering the temperature to
about 60 °C allows the primers to bind to the single-stranded DNA. The bases of the primers are
complementary to the DNA strands. d The ELONGATION phase is portrayed. At 72 °C the Taq
polymerase can elongate the primers by incorporating synthetic nucleotides available in the
reaction tube. e The status after the ﬁrst PCR cycle is depicted. A double-stranded DNA template
has been copied and results in a double-stranded DNA


the DNA amplicon (resulting from the described PCR process) on a
gel-electrophoresis unit. If the polymorphism constitutes a VNTR, this indicates
that the alleles differ with respect to the ampliﬁed fragment length. For example, the
9 repeat allele of the dopamine transporter polymorphism DAT1 is 40 bases shorter
than the 10 repeat alleles. Using an electric ﬁeld, shorter PCR amplicons move
faster through the matrix of the electrophoresis gel (often made out of agarose) than
longer amplicons. By labeling the PCR product with a dye (typically ethidium
bromide), the different bands on the gel can be visualized later by means of a UV
light. Samples of subjects who are heterozygous exhibit two bands, one upper band
indicates homozygosity for the long allele and one lower band indicates homozy-
gosity for the short allele (see Fig. 23.4). Of note, the direction of flow of the DNA
fragments in Fig. 23.4 goes from the pockets to the bottom of the picture. In order
to use gel-electrophoresis for genotyping SNPs (the PCR amplicons do not differ in
size if there is a base exchange at a certain gene locus) the PCR amplicon has to be
treated with an enzyme digest. Here, a speciﬁc restriction enzyme is able to cut the
DNA strand into two shorter pieces in the presence of a certain allele (e.g. the G
allele), but does not affect the DNA in the presence of the alternate allele (e.g. A).
By means of the enzyme digest we yield two different strand lengths dependent on
the absence or presence of the respective allele and this can be visualized/genotyped
by means of gel-electrophoresis (this works similar to the mechanism described in
Fig. 23.4). Today, more elaborate techniques like Real-Time (RT) PCR are avail-
able that allow ampliﬁcation and genotyping in one PCR run. The advantage of
RT-PCR is that the time-consuming gel-electrophoresis is no longer necessary. In
brief, during the RT-PCR ampliﬁcation additional oligonucleotides labeled with
fluorescent dyes (the so-called ‘probes’) are annealed to the target region. The
probes are either complementary to the wild type (the typical allele) or to the mutant
(non-standard) allele and by means of a melting curve analysis following the last
PCR cycle, the genotypes can be determined with perfect reliability (for a detailed
description of Real-Time PCR see Reuter et al. 2005). A disadvantage of RT-PCR
is that mainly SNPs can be genotyped with this method.
23   Molecular Genetics   453
454                                                                             M. Reuter et al.




Fig. 23.4 Results of a gel-electrophoresis for the VNTR dopamine transporter polymorphism
DAT1. The most common alleles observable are a 9- and a 10-times repeat of a sequence of 40
bases in the 3′ un-translated region (3′UTR) of the dopamine transporter gene (SLC6A3), however,
the number of possible repeats ranges from 3–11 (Vandenbergh et al. 1992). Genotypes are made
visible under an UV light. Column 1 (from left to right) indicates a sample being homozygous for
the 9-repeat allele (genotype 9/9), in columns 2 and 7 the samples are homozygous for the
10-repeat allele (genotype 10/10), in columns 3–6 and column 9 the samples are heterozygous
(genotype 9/10), and column 8 shows the DNA ladder used to mark the size of the
PCR-amplicons. Flow direction of the DNA fragment is from the upper to the lower part of
the ﬁgure. The DNA fragment is inserted in the pocket at the upper part of the ﬁgure and then
floats through the gel after the running buffer is set under electricity


23.5     The Candidate Approach

Behavioral genetics started in the 1990s with the so-called candidate gene approach.
Due to the restricted throughput of PCR machines at this time, scientists chose
distinct genes for their analyses (genotyping) according to ﬁndings from the liter-
ature. For example, if individual differences in reward processing was the pheno-
type under investigation then dopaminergic genes were the best starting point,
because dopamine has (and is) postulated to be the ﬁnal common neural pathway of
reward (Spanagel and Weiss 1999). As a consequence polymorphisms located on
genes coding for dopamine receptor genes (e.g. DRD2), the dopamine transporter
gene or enzymes involved in the metabolism of dopamine (e.g. COMT) were
genotyped. In sum, the candidate gene approach is theory driven and therefore it is
a deductive method (Montag and Reuter 2014). Nowadays, technical advances in
PCR machines and PCR product analyzers make it possible to analyze many
essential SNPs across whole genes in reasonable time.
23   Molecular Genetics                                                        455


23.6     Sequencing

Sequencing is a technique that allows reading of the original genetic code, i.e.,
through sequencing the precise order of bases within a DNA or RNA molecule can
be determined. In contrast, genotyping only allows the determination of genotypes
at a particular polymorphic region. In 1977, Frederick Sanger and colleagues
developed a sequencing technique, the Sanger sequencing method, popularly used
for over 25 years and which is still in use today. This method is based on the
selective incorporation of chain-terminating dideoxynucleotides (ddGTP, ddATP,
ddTTP, and ddCTP) by DNA polymerase during in vitro PCR. This means that
after a dideoxynucleotide has been inserted in the nucleotide chain during the
elongation process (see PCR), no further nucleotide can be incorporated and
ampliﬁcation is terminated. To get information on the order of the nucleotide
sequence of a distinct DNA strand, the experimenter has to run four separate PCR
reactions. Each reaction contains all four deoxynucleotides (dATP, dGTP, dCTP
and dTTP—i.e. one dNTP for each base A, G, C and T), but only one of the four
dideoxynucleotides. The results of the DNA ampliﬁcation is made visible by put-
ting the PCR products of the four PCR runs on separate lanes on an electrophoresis
gel (see Fig. 23.5, left).
   Sequencing was revolutionized by the invention of the dye-terminator
sequencing method, which is currently used by high-throughput DNA sequence
analyzers. By labeling the ddNTPs with fluorescent dyes, like in RT-PCR analysis,
sequencing depends on just one rather than four PCR reactions. The fluorescent
dyes emit light at different wavelengths that are measured by a sequencer machine
(see Fig. 23.5, right).



23.7     Genome Wide Scan Technique

Besides following the already described candidate gene approach, genome wide
scans (GWS) are often conducted to grasp as much variation as possible across the
complete DNA to spot genetic variants associated with a phenotype of interest. For
example, if researchers are interested in identifying which genetic variants are
responsible for anxiety, they could draw participants from a large genetic databank
based on their anxiety scores gathered via self-report (e.g. high and low anxiety
scores). In a second step, researchers test the frequency of millions of allelic
variants in the anxious versus the non-anxious group: signiﬁcant higher/lower
statistical prevalence rates of a particular SNP in the comparison of low and high
anxious humans could be seen as an association with anxious behavior.
   GWSs conducted to cover genetic variations across the genome which differs in
terms of ﬁne granularity. The greater coverage of the DNA required, the more
expensive the procedures are. If the researchers aim for a complete coverage of
genetic variation of a single person, the complete genome must be sequenced. This
456                                                                               M. Reuter et al.




Fig. 23.5 Schematic overview of sequencing results. Left Sanger sequencing. For each of the four
nucleotides (A, T, G, C) a separate analysis has to be run. The product of each reaction is spotted
in a separate lane on an electrophoresis gel. The nucleic acid molecules are separated by applying
an electric ﬁeld to move the negatively charged molecules through a matrix of agarose or other
substances like polyacrylamide. Shorter molecules move faster and migrate further than longer
ones, because shorter molecules migrate more easily through the pores of the gel. Right
Dye-terminator sequencing: The ddNTPs are labeled with different fluorescent dyes, which emit
light at different wavelengths and are measured by an optical unit of the sequencing machine


means that basically every base of a person’s DNA is read out (see Sequencing).
Clearly this is a very costly endeavor, which is usually prohibitively expensive.
Therefore, researchers need to choose between a range of chips (e.g. available from
companies such as Illumina) giving information on up to ﬁve million SNPs of a
single participant. Among these SNPs are up to 4.2 million TagSNPs. The ﬁrst
TagSNPs were derived by sequencing the DNA of N = 270 participants from four
populations in the International HapMap project. In contrast to the major success of
having sequenced the complete human genome of two persons in the year 2000, the
HapMap project provided for the ﬁrst time a sufﬁcient number of participants to
reliably detect common genetic variants on the human DNA. TagSNPs take
advantage of the linkage disequilibrium between SNPs lying closely to each other
on the genome. Speciﬁcally, SNPs located in adjacent areas are likely to be
inherited together. A perfect linkage equilibrium is characterized by r2 = 1.
Knowing the genotypes of a series of TagSNPs covering a larger genomic area
gives researchers information on which genetic variants to expect without having
genotyped every single one of the known SNPs in this area. TagSNPs can be
23   Molecular Genetics                                                           457

inferred by means of haplotype analyses. These are mathematical algorithms that
calculate the linkage between SNPs in a certain gene region on one chromosome.
   The newest large international genomic project is called 1kGP and investigates
the human genome of a much larger group consisting of N = 2500 participants from
25 populations around the globe. By sequencing this large number of participants it
will be possible to get more detailed insights into the variability of human DNA,
detecting alleles with a minor allele frequency of >1 % in the population. A large
number of the aforementioned 4.2 million TagSNPs were detected by this new
project. It has been suggested that it is possible to cover up to 35 million SNPs with
5 million TagSNPs. Among the 5 million SNPs covered, about 2 million SNPs can
be found in genic regions. The rest of the covered SNPs can be found in intergenic
regions—the vast areas lying between genes. These areas have been known as ‘junk
DNA’ for a long time, because researchers thought that intergenic regions are
evolutionary relics on our DNA and no longer of importance. This view has
changed in recent years, as these intergenic regions appear responsible for much of
the regulatory processes of gene activity.



23.8     Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization—Time
         of Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS)

MALDI-TOF-MS is a technique that can be used for high-throughput genotyping.
However, the throughput, i.e., the number of genotypes assessed per run (about
15,000), is much lower than in GWS studies (GWS; see above). Therefore, the
choice of which method to use for genotyping (PCR, Sequencing,
MALDI-TOF-MS or GWS) depends on the size and the aim of the planned project.
Clearly, the available funding for a project also plays an important rule, because
GWS—although providing ﬁne-grained information on each participant—are still
more costly than analyzing a number of SNPs of a person by means of
MALDI-TOF-MS. Results of GWS studies often come up with only a very small
number of polymorphisms that hold the massive correction for multiple testing.
Often nothing is known about the gene on which these SNPs are located. The
straightforward strategy is now to screen these genes by covering at least all
TagSNPs. In addition, a further approach would be the investigation of all relevant
genes of a certain neural pathway by means of Tag-SNP analysis. For example, if a
researcher is interested in reward processing, he or she could investigate all
pathway-based genes of relevance for dopaminergic signaling. Here,
MALDI-TOF-MS is the method of choice.
    Before conducting a MALDI-TOF-MS analysis there are several preprocessing
steps. The scientist has to set up a list of SNPs he/she is interested in. By software
supported in silico6 analysis the primers for the PCR analysis and so-called


6
In silico means that the designs are conducted on a computer.
458                                                                    M. Reuter et al.

extension primers for an ensuing extension reaction have to be designed and tested
for compatibility. The best possible result is to “plex” up to 40 different SNPs in
one reaction. When using a 384-well PCR plate it is possible to get 40 by 384
(=15,360) genotype results. Before the actual analysis, the preprocessed samples
(preprocessing encompasses three different biochemical reactions including PCR)
must be spotted by a nanodispenser on a microchip, which is then inserted into the
mass spectrometer. Using a laser each well of the microchip is then ﬁred and the
molecules fly high through the wind tunnel of the mass spectrometer, which is
under a vacuum. The time it takes for the molecules to fly to the top of the wind
tunnel (time-of-flight) gives information on the size of the molecules, e.g., smaller
molecules fly high faster. Using earlier plex designed in silico, it has been ensured
that each of the genotypes of the approximately 40 SNPs has a distinct molecular
size. The mass spectrometer is capable of detecting DNA fragments within a range
of 4500–9000 Da, and can distinguish between analytes separated by 16 Da or
more (analytes are typically 18–25 nucleotides).



23.9    Epigenetics

Genetic research had—and often still has—a bad image among the public.
Although people are aware that genetic research can prospectively promote the
development of new medical therapies, the fear of the misuse of genetic information
remains prevalent in the minds of many. For example, the perception that important
phenotypes such as Intelligence, which is proven to be causally related to profes-
sional success, are strongly and genetically determined (heritability estimates for
intelligence range between 0.50 and 0.70; Bouchard et al. 1990), makes many
people uncomfortable, because it means that our own influence on our fate is
limited. A strong heritability for psychiatric diseases has also been proven
(McGufﬁn et al. 2001). However, the fact that many disorders, such as depression,
are influenced by many genes makes identiﬁcation of the polymorphisms involved
very complicated. The same is true for intelligence and other complex phenotypes,
such as those studied in Neuroeconomics. In contrast to monogenetically caused
disorders, such as the neurological condition Huntington’s disease, a complex
concert of hundreds of genes influences the aforementioned psychological pheno-
types. It can be assumed that each of the single genetic markers merely represents a
genetic risk factor, which only comes into play when additional risk factors—not
just genetic ones—are also present. These risk factors can be environmentally
conditioned. For example, stress, ﬁnancial worries, relationship problems, the ill-
ness of one’s child, etc., can trigger the onset of a psychiatric disease if a genetic
risk factor is given.
   On the other hand, we know that environmental factors, e.g., treatments, train-
ings, or therapies can ameliorate or cure a disease. It could be shown that therapy
outcome can be dependent on the genetic makeup of an individual. For example,
Knuts et al. (2014) reported that a sample of agoraphobia patients those carrying the
23   Molecular Genetics                                                               459

5-HTTLPR low expression genotypes had a more favorable response to exposure
therapy two weeks following treatment, compared to patients with other genotypes.
Using a slightly different approach, Caspi et al. (2003) demonstrated that the risk
for depression is dependent on 5-HTTLPR genotype but only in the presence of
critical life events. The risk for depression increases only exponentially in carriers
of the 5-HTTLPR ss-genotype. If no critical life events are present, carriers of the
ss-, the sl-, and the ll-genotype do not differ with respect to their risk for depression.
The study by Caspi et al. is one of the ﬁrst and most prominent studies demon-
strating a gene by environment interaction. At this point in time the molecular
mechanisms of how environmental factors can influence genes were totally
unknown. Interestingly, the term “epigenetics” had already been coined in 1942 by
the British developmental biologist Conrad Hal Waddington. At this time even the
structure of DNA was still unknown. Epigenetics denotes processes that act outside
the regulation of gene expression, but that affect it (Epi stems from an old Greek
word meaning “over” or “outside of”). Epigenetics is a ﬁeld of biology that
investigates what factors determine the activity of a gene and thus the development
of the cell temporarily and whether some of these changes are inherited by the next
generation. In molecular genetics, epigenetic analyzes focus mostly, in addition to
histone modiﬁcations, on methylation analysis. DNA methylation is a modiﬁcation
of DNA that occurs through the addition of a methyl group to the 5-carbon position
of a cytosine ring (see Fig. 23.6a). Notably, DNA methylation only occurs if the
cytosine base (C) is followed by a guanine base (G). Adjacent cytosine and guanine
bases are knitted together by a phosphodiester bond (p). This is the reason why the
sequence of a cytosine-phosphoguanine is designated as CpG-site (see Fig. 23.6b).
CpG islands are regions in the human genome where the prevalence of CpG-sites is
very high (i.e. >50 %) and the observed-to-expected CpG ratio is greater than
60 %. CpG islands represent about 1 % of the genome (see Fig. 23.6c). A strongly
methylated gene has a low or no expression rate. Hypermethylated genes are
densely “packed,” which prevents the transcription factors from binding. This is the
reason why genes that are not expressed in a certain cell type are hypermethylated.
For example, the insulin gene is strongly methylated in a neuronal cell in which
insulin is not produced. Therefore, cell differentiation is closely related to
methylation.
    Two methods are widely used to assess the percentage of CpG methylation in a
given DNA region: Bisulﬁte-Sequencing and MALDI-TOF-MS. Both techniques
demand bisulﬁte treated DNA. Treatment of DNA with bisulﬁte converts cytosine
residues to uracil (U), but leaves 5-methylcytosine residues unaffected. In other
words, if a CpG site is methylated the 5-methylcytosine is unchanged, whereas in
the case of no methylation, a uracil replaces the cytosine base. After the DNA
sequence is bisulﬁte treated, the Bisulﬁte Sequencing is run as in normal
sequencing. However, MALDI-TOF-MS needs a special chemistry to ﬁnally allow
quantiﬁcation of the percentage of methylation for discrete CpG sites. However, the
principle of MALDI-TOF-MS remains unchanged.
460                                                                            M. Reuter et al.




Fig. 23.6 Methylation in epigenetics: a DNA methylation is a modiﬁcation to DNA that occurs
through the addition of a methyl group to the 5 carbon position of a cytosine ring. DNA
methylation only occurs if the cytosine base (C) is followed by a guanine base (G). b Adjacent
cytosine and guanine bases are knitted together by a phosphodiester bond (p). This is why the
sequence of a cytosine-phosphoguanine is designated as CpG-site. c CpG islands are regions in
the human genome where the prevalence of CpG-sites is very high (i.e. >50 %) and the
observed-to-expected CpG ratio is greater than 60 %. CpG islands represent about 1 % of the
genome


References

Bouchard TJ Jr, Lykken DT, McGue M, Segal NL, Tellegen A (1990) Sources of human
   psychological differences: the Minnesota study of twins reared apart. Science 250(4978):223–
   228
Caspi A, Sugden K, Mofﬁtt TE, Taylor A, Craig IW, Harrington H, McClay J, Mill J, Martin J,
   Braithwaite A, Poulton R (2003) Influence of life stress on depression: moderation by a
   polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene. Science 301(5631):386–389
Cook EH Jr, Scherer SW (2008) Copy-number variations associated with neuropsychiatric
   conditions. Nature 455(7215):919–923
Heinz A, Goldman D, Jones DW, Palmour R, Hommer D, Gorey JG, Lee KS, Linnoila M,
   Weinberger DR (2000) Genotype influences in vivo DAT availability in human striatum.
   Neuropsychopharmacology 22:133–139
Knuts I, Esquivel G, Kenis G, Overbeek T, Leibold N, Goossens L, Schruers K (2014)
   Therapygenetics: 5-HTTLPR genotype predicts the response to exposure therapy for
   agoraphobia. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 24(8):1222–1228
Lim MM, Wang Z, Olazábal DE, Ren X, Terwilliger EF, Young LJ (2004) Enhanced partner
   preference in a promiscuous species by manipulating the expression of a single gene. Nature
   429(6993):754–757
23   Molecular Genetics                                                                    461

McGufﬁn P, Riley B, Plomin R (2001) Genomics and behavior. Toward behavioral genomics.
   Science 291(5507):1232–1249
Montag C, Reuter M (2014) Disentangling the molecular genetic basis of personality: from
   monoamines to neuropeptides. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 43:228–239
Reuter M, Küpper Y, Schmitz A, Breuer JP, Wend U, Hennig J (2005) Detection of new single
   nucleotide polymorphisms by means of Real Time PCR. J Genet 84:341–345
Spanagel R, Weiss F (1999) The dopamine hypothesis of reward: past and current status. Trends
   Neurosci 22(11):521–527
Vandenbergh DJ, Persico AM, Hawkins AL, Grifﬁn CA, Li X, Jabs EW, Uhl GR (1992) Human
   dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) gene maps to chromosome 5p15.3 and displays a VNTR.
   Genomics 14:1104–1106
Walum H, Westberg L, Henningsson S, Neiderhiser JM, Reiss D, Igl W, Ganiban JM, Spotts EL,
   Pedersen NL, Eriksson E, Lichtenstein P (2008) Genetic variation in the vasopressin receptor
   1a gene (AVPR1A) associates with pair-bonding behavior in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
   105:14153–14156
