Chapter 24
Hormones

Robert Miller and Clemens Kirschbaum




Abstract With the advent of readily available, convenient, and cost-efﬁcient bio-
chemical tools, the analysis of hormones has become a valuable approach to gain
deeper insight into physiological processes, which influence human behavior.
Neuroeconomic research has beneﬁted from this development as indicated by a
continuously growing number of publications during the past 20 years, relating
variation in various endocrine systems to human decision-making. However, an
informed reception and interpretation of such research relies heavily on knowledge
about endocrine physiology and methods. Therefore, the present chapter aims to
serve as a primer for endocrine methods by providing an overview about the most
relevant aspects of design and data acquisition, as well as biochemical, and sta-
tistical methodology for hormone analyses. Proceeding from the brief delineation of
endocrine systems’ properties, various approaches to the measurement of hormone
concentrations and to the inference on endocrine process components are presented
in order to enable the reader to take part in this promising ﬁeld of research.



24.1    Introduction

With the advent of readily available, convenient, and cost-efﬁcient biochemical
tools, the analysis of hormones has become a valuable approach to gain deeper
insight into physiological processes, which influence human behavior.
Neuroeconomic research, in particular, has beneﬁted from this development as
indicated by a continuously growing number of publications during the past
20 years, which is exemplarily illustrated in Fig. 24.1. This growing research
interest is discussed by Amos Nadler and Paul Zack in Chap. 3 of the present book,


R. Miller (&)  C. Kirschbaum
Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
e-mail: robert.miller@tu-dresden.de
C. Kirschbaum
e-mail: clemens.kirschbaum@tu-dresden.de

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                       463
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_24
464                                                                                R. Miller and C. Kirschbaum



                          60                 Cortisol
                                             Oxytocin
                          50

                                             Testosterone
                                             Progesterone
 Number of publications




                                             Estradiol
                          40
                          30
                          20
                          10
                          0




                               1993   1995     1997   1999   2001     2003     2005   2007    2009    2011
                                                             Year of publication

Fig. 24.1 Number of hormone-related publications on decision making per year as listed by
Scopus (Elsevier, 2013)


who provide a comprehensive, content-related review on the most relevant ﬁndings
relating variation in various endocrine systems to human decision-making.
    However, an informed reception and interpretation of the respective research
results, and even more importantly, active participation in this promising ﬁeld of
research, relies heavily on knowledge about endocrine physiology and methods.
Therefore, the present chapter aims to serve as a primer for endocrine methods by
providing an overview about the most relevant aspects of design and data acqui-
sition, as well as biochemical, and statistical methodology for hormone analyses. As
such, we do not intend to discuss speciﬁc endocrine systems and functions, but
occasionally illustrate their features by selected examples.



24.2                           Characteristics of Endocrine Systems

Endocrine systems are mostly deﬁned by complex interaction patterns of different
molecules that serve, in contrast to neuronal signal transduction, to unfold some
lagged physiological impact over time. Some of these molecules, which are
involved in endocrine signal transduction, are called hormones. Hormones differ in
their physical and chemical properties due to their speciﬁc molecular structure (see
Table 24.1). They are secreted by various glands and distributed by the blood in
order to serve as chemical messengers altering cell function at remote target sites,
mostly by activation of their associated intracellular or membrane-bound receptor
24   Hormones                                                                                 465

Table 24.1 List of selected hormones (adopted from Knox et al. 2011)
Chemical formula         Hormone                    Also known as                   Acronym
Peptide/protein hormones (large molecules, water-soluble)
C257H387N65O76S6         Insulin                    –                               –
C43H67N15O12S2           Vasopressin                Arginine vasopressin,           AVP/ADH
                                                    antidiuretic hormone
C207H308N56O58S          Corticotropin              Adrenocorticotropic hormone     ACTH
C990H1532N262O300S7      Somatropin                 Somatotropin, growth hormone    GH
C208H344N60O63S2         Corticoliberin             Corticotropin-releasing         CRH/CRF
                                                    hormone/factor
C55H75N17O13             Gonadoliberin              Luliberin, gonadorelin,         GnRH/LHRH
                                                    gonadotropin-releasing
                                                    hormone,
                                                    luteinizing-hormone-releasing
                                                    hormone
C1014H1609N287O294S27    Lutropin                   Luteinizing hormone             LH
α:                       Follitropin                Follicle-stimulating hormone    FSH
C437H681N121O135S13
β:
C975H1513N267O304S26
C21H40Cl2O2S2            Prolactin                  Lactropin, lactotrophic         PRL/LTH
                                                    hormone
C43H66N12O12S2           Oxytocin                   –                               OXT
α:                       Thyrotropin                Thyroid-stimulating hormone     TSH
C975H1513N267O304S26
Amine hormones (small molecules, rather water-soluble)
C9H13NO3                 Adrenaline                 Epinephrine                     –
C8H11NO3                 Noradrenaline              Norepinephrine                  –
C15H11I4NO4              Thyroxine                  –                               T4
C15H12I3NO4              Triiodothyronine           –                               T3
Steroid hormones (small molecules, lipid-soluble)
C21H28O5                 Aldosterone                –                               –
C21H30O5                 Cortisol                   Hydrocortisone, compound F      F
C19H28O2                 Dehydroepiandrosterone     Androstenolone, prasterone      DHEA
C18H24O2                 Estradiol                  Oestradiol                      E2
C18H22O2                 Estrone                    Oestrone                        E1
C18H24O3                 Estriol                    Oestriol                        E3
C21H30O2                 Progesterone               –                               P4
C19H28O2                 Testosterone               –                               –



molecules. After secretion and distribution, hormones are bound by speciﬁc plasma
proteins (i.e., binding globulins) and/or continuously degraded to their respective
metabolites by enzymes. Finally, they are cleared from the blood and excreted by
the kidneys (renal clearance) and/or the liver (biliary clearance).
466                                                          R. Miller and C. Kirschbaum

   All endocrine systems involve the secretion and elimination of several hormones
that serve “communication” between their respective physiological components. Such
components interact by feed-forward and feedback loops, enabling self-regulation
toward a systemic equilibrium. For instance, the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis, is formed by the three endocrine organs: (1) the paraventricular nucleus of
the hypothalamus, (2) the pituitary gland, and (3) the adrenal cortex, which interact by
CRH, ACTH, and cortisol. Upon deflection from the equilibrium state (e.g., by stress
experience or external zeitgebers), the hypothalamus releases CRH into the pituitary,
which in turn releases ACTH that signals the adrenal cortex to synthesize cortisol.
Thus, a feed-forward loop is established. Cortisol, however, inhibits further release of
CRH and ACTH by a feedback loop. In consequence, complex and oscillating signal
cascades are established, which are present not only in the HPA axis, but in any
endocrine system. For a more detailed in-depth discussion of speciﬁc endocrine sys-
tems the reader shall be referred to Barrett (2005).
   An explicit consideration of these properties is crucial, if one intends to inves-
tigate the influence of hormones on human decision-making processes. The major
issues that arise from these properties and that ought to be taken into account for
designing such a study shall be summarized as follows:
(a) Operationalization of endocrine constructs: Any study investigating hormone
    effects, needs to appropriately quantify the construct of interest. Endocrine
    activity, however, is a continuous process, rather than a ﬁxed state, which
    involves many physiological subprocesses that unfold their impact across time
    (e.g., the speed and the magnitude of hormone secretion, and the speed of
    hormone metabolization and excretion). Thus, only extensive sampling and
    hormone measurement can provide a basis for inference on such subprocesses
    (although it also bears the danger of having to deal with huge amounts of data,
    which can be analyzed and interpreted in various ways). If one, for instance,
    assumed that an experimental intervention altered exclusively the amount of a
    secreted hormone, the sampling of two specimens might be considered suf-
    ﬁcient in order to assess this hypothesis; a ﬁrst specimen at the concentration
    nadir and a second at the concentration peak (as illustrated in Fig. 24.2). If we,
    however, concurrently wanted to investigate competing hypotheses (e.g., that
    the same intervention did not alter the amount of a secreted hormone, but
    rather the secretory speed), the sampling of two specimens would be insufﬁ-
    cient. This is due to the presumed convolution of multiple endocrine sub-
    processes; the change of hormone concentration in between two sampling
    occasions could be interpreted as a difference in the amount of secreted hor-
    mone although it was actually generated by another mechanism (Fig. 24.2,
    blue line). To avoid such interpretative biases, an appropriate study design is
    required that adequately considers available knowledge about the hormone
    kinetics and dynamics, and rules out alternative mechanistic effect
    explanations.
24   Hormones                                                                                467




Fig. 24.2 Example of how an inadequate operationalization of endocrine constructs may promote
misleading data interpretation. The dot-dashed lines represent the change of hormone concen-
trations (a and b) in between two specimens (red dots) that are sampled in each of two
experimental conditions (black and blue lines). As a differs from b, one might infer that the
amount of secreted hormone (doses) differs between both conditions. However, a varying speed of
hormone secretion caused the observable difference by selectively shifting the concentration peak
in the blue condition, whereas the hormone doses actually remained unchanged


(b) Pacemakers and zeitgebers: Most endocrine systems exhibit pronounced
    ultradian, circadian, and infradian (e.g., terrestrial or lunar revolution)
    rhythms, which presumably serve to maintain physiological adaptability of the
    investigated organism to environmental changes. In consequence, all mea-
    sured hormone concentrations fluctuate and therefore encompass only a low
    amount of trait variance. This is an inherent problem of hormone measurement
    that can only be partly alleviated by rigid monitoring and controlling for
    possible confounding state variables (e.g. sampling time, season, menstrual
    cycle and the intake of oral contraceptives in case of female participant sex,
    time of awakening, currently and previously encountered phases of stress, or
    recent intake of meals or legal drugs; Kirschbaum et al. 1997), are well-known
    sources for deflected hormone signals. Another countermeasure to account for
    such unwanted variance components is to perform repeated hormone sampling
    in similar settings, as has been for instance proposed for the reliable assess-
    ment of trait-speciﬁc variability in the acute HPA axis activity (Hellhammer
    et al. 2007; Kirschbaum et al. 1990).
(c) Time lags: Delays between hormone secretion and corresponding psy-
    chophysiological responses restrict the time window, in which humoral effects
    on information processing in the central nervous system could be observed.
    Such delays are in particular problematic, when the physiological effect me-
    diators are located more “downstream” from the measured/manipulated hor-
    mone. For the HPA axis, such an endocrine signal cascade is exemplarily
468                                                             R. Miller and C. Kirschbaum

    depicted in Fig. 24.3. The issue is further intensiﬁed by within-brain metabolic
    and/or transport mechanisms, which are still subject to further research. For
    instance, Droste et al. (2008) found that stress-induced corticosteroid secretion
    peaks in the brain about 30 min later than in blood plasma. In humans, the
    corresponding peak of peripheral cortisol levels is commonly observed about
    30–40 min after stress induction (Dickerson and Kemeny 2004), which results
    in a time lag of at least 60 min that needs to pass before the associated
    humoral stress effects are likely to be detectable. Finally, there is
    tissue-speciﬁc hormone metabolization (e.g. fat tissue has been shown to
    locally convert physiologically inactive cortisone to cortisol; Andrew et al.
    2005), which may further alter the temporal delay of hormonal feed-forward
    and feedback loops and thus differentially change the oscillatory dynamics of
    the endocrine system.
(d) Hormone structure and kinetics: Hormones primarily rely on blood perfusion
    in order to reach their target sites. However, some parts of biological tissue are
    more richly perfused than others (e.g. fat vs. muscle tissue) which may result
    in a varying concentration of hormones at different target sites (depending on
    the hormone’s molecular structure and corresponding properties). Small,
    lipophilic hormones can easily penetrate tissue and therefore bypass their
    exclusive distribution by the blood stream to a certain degree. By contrast,
    comparably large, hydrophilic peptide hormones (e.g. Oxytocin) cannot ben-
    eﬁt from this property, which has serious implications for specimen selection
    and the availability of the hormone to target sites such as brain tissue, which is




Fig. 24.3 Transit-compartment model (Bonate 2011) illustrating the kinetics of HPA hormones
after stimulation by bolus CRH administration. The model was informed by data from Schürmeyer
et al. (1984). Assuming a direct correspondence of CRH/ACTH elimination to ACTH/cortisol
secretion, ACTH is predicted to peak 9 min after challenge whereas the cortisol blood
concentration peaks 41 min after challenge
24   Hormones                                                                       469

     probably most relevant to the ﬁeld of Neuroeconomics. In this regard, the
     blood brain barrier that is formed by endothelial cells covering the interior
     surface of blood vessels, should be taken into particular account. This barrier
     prevents large molecules, and peptide hormones in particular, to enter the
     blood vessels of the brain from the peripheral blood stream and vice versa.
     Consequently, central peptide hormone levels differ from levels in peripheral
     specimens (e.g. saliva) and ought to be measured in specimens such as the
     cerebrospinal fluid. Conversely, central peptide hormone levels cannot be
     altered by peripheral pharmacological challenge. Instead, the blood brain
     barrier needs to be bypassed as for instance by intranasal substance admin-
     istration (e.g. Guastella et al. 2013).



24.3    Measurement of Hormone Concentrations

24.3.1 Selection of Specimen and Analytes

In analytical chemistry, the term specimen is used to refer to any sample of a certain
compound, which is to be analyzed. Any specimen contains a certain amount of
hormones (i.e., the analyte), which is to be determined by some measuring system.
The remains of the specimen form the so-called matrix, which can in turn influence
the measurement of the analyte. Proceeding from the cursorily outlined properties
of endocrine systems (see Sect. 24.2), there are various options of which and how
many specimens within a certain time period are to be assayed for what analyte by
what measurement system. Regarding specimen and analyte selection, the inclined
researcher has to consider three design parameters, which determine the adequacy
of endocrine activity assessment.
    First, specimen selection is supposed to rest upon theoretical considerations. The
most proximate choices for specimens comprise biochemical compounds contain-
ing an analyte that is most likely indicative for activity of the investigated endocrine
system. According to the physiological knowledge about endocrine systems in
general, blood and excrements (urine and feces) are the most reasonable options.
While blood is presumably the most suitable type of specimen for monitoring
currently bioavailable hormone concentrations, it is barely suited for monitoring
long-term hormone exposure. Conversely, excrements can serve quite well for such
a purpose, but any measured analyte concentration within these specimens is
dependent on the volume of food and fluid being ingested by the participant.
Consequently, these confounders have to be controlled. Depending on the avail-
ability of knowledge about speciﬁc metabolic processes, however, other specimen
might as well be taken into consideration. The most prominent example for such a
specimen forms saliva for the monitoring of current hormone concentrations. Saliva
is particularly useful to determine steroid hormones, but larger hormones have also
been found to be present in saliva although these rely on active transport
470                                                          R. Miller and C. Kirschbaum

mechanisms (Gröschl 2008; Vining et al. 1983). Furthermore, many salivary hor-
mones do not seem to be (mostly steroids, but no peptides; Hofman 2001) influ-
enced by the flow rate of saliva. The popularity of saliva sampling is mostly due to
the ease of its collection (by commercially available sampling tools; e.g. Gröschl
et al. 2008) and its noninvasiveness, which results in a substantially facilitated
implementation process as compared to blood sampling. Hair has also been shown
to contain considerable amounts of steroid analytes (e.g. Gao et al. 2013). With a
barely interindividually varying growth rate of 1 cm per month has been proposed
to reflect cumulative hormone expose across time periods (Stalder and Kirschbaum
2012), that are substantially longer than those covered by feces or urine. However,
the mechanism of analyte incorporation into hair needs still to be unveiled.
    The second design parameter concerns to the number of specimen, which should
be sampled from each subject. This is not only of practical importance, as hormone
determination for many specimen and analytes can be quite costly (see Fig. 24.4),
but also closely linked to the choice of specimen, as the number of specimen per
subject is (given a reliable measurement) only relevant with regard to the time
period required to infer on the construct of interest (as has been mentioned in the
previous section). Example given, 3 cm of hair are supposed to contain an analyte
concentration, which reflects cumulative hormone expose during the last 3 months.
If this cumulative hormone exposure is the construct of interest, only one specimen
is required. If one, by contrast, intends to infer on the change of cumulative hor-
mone exposure due to some experimental intervention at least two specimens need
to be taken at an appropriate time interval. Analogous deliberation is particularly
important, if subprocesses of endocrine activity are to be investigated (e.g. the
speed of hormone secretion and concurrent elimination). Such a research question
needs at least three specimens covering reasonably distant sampling points and
containing analytes, which reflect the organism’s current hormonal status (i.e. blood
or saliva). With complex endocrine systems acquisition of only two specimens
bears the risk, that the construct of interest is not reasonably assessed. This is due to


Fig. 24.4 Relation between
study cost, number of
sampled specimens per
subject, and number of tested
subjects. While the costs
increase linearly with the
number of sampled
specimens, more subjects
increase the study cost in a
quadratic fashion
24   Hormones                                                                     471

the fact that endocrine activity can hardly be, at least from a physiological point of
view, characterized by only two parameters (i.e., the mean and variance of hor-
mone level change in between two sampling occasions). Similarly, research
questions that involve the assessment of hormonal rhythms, should similarly con-
sider at least three specimens during the phase of rising hormone levels, around the
expected peak, and during the phase of decreasing hormone levels.
   The third design parameter concerns the choice of analyte in the specimens,
which is to be measured. Apart from the directly measuring the hormones being
involved signal transduction of the investigated endocrine system, endocrine
activity is not only indicated by hormones that directly unfold their associated
physiological effects but also by their metabolites, which are concurrently present
within the same specimen. Such considerations may become important, if the
kinetics of the respective target hormone require special precautions, which com-
plicate the process of specimen collection. Adrenaline and noradrenaline form
prominent examples for such a case, as their half-lives amount to less than ﬁve
minutes, which requires that specimens are to be preprocessed and frozen imme-
diately after collection. Their metabolites metanephrine and normetanephrine,
however, persist much longer and may also serve to indicate activity of the sym-
pathetic nervous system. In a similar fashion, it is reasonable to choose those
analytes that are directly involved in endocrine signal transduction and easily
obtainable, but yield a longer half-life than the other hormones being involved in
the respective endocrine system (e.g., cortisol is eliminated much slower than CRH
or ACTH). Another occasion, where metabolite assessment may become handy,
concerns study designs, in which endocrine activity is induced pharmacologically
and the specimens are to be obtained from the same route that is used for substance
administration (e.g. oral administration of cortisol and saliva collection; see
Perogamvros et al. 2010).



24.3.2 Laboratory Methods

The determination of hormones from blood, saliva, urine, or any other specimen
requires highly sensitive biochemical methods, since the concentrations of these
analytes are typically in the nanomolar to picomolar (10−9–10−12 M) range. Thus,
even minute quantities of endocrine substances must be captured with high preci-
sion and reproducibility. Following seminal work by the nobel-laureate Rosalyn
Yalow in the 1970s, a rapid acceptance and increasing use of immunological
approaches, which show just these characteristics, has been seen (Wild 2013).
Today, almost any endocrine parameter can be assessed by so-called immunoassays
and literally hundreds of commercial test kits are available on the market.
Immunoassays are today probably the most frequently employed method of mea-
suring hormone levels in a given matrix.
   The measurement principle of any immunoassay is based on the use of proteins
generated by the B lymphocytes of the immune system, i.e., the antibodies. In our
472                                                        R. Miller and C. Kirschbaum

body, these proteins bind foreign materials (“antigens”) that may jeopardize the
integrity and health of an organism. Millions of different antibodies can be gen-
erated by the immune systems, allowing us to become “immune” to virtually every
pathogen or foreign material on earth. With certain biochemical tricks, antibodies
against any hormone can be generated by injecting the hormone into a different
species (like sheep or swine). After repeated injection, or “immunization,” high
concentrations of antibodies produced against the particular human hormone can be
found in this host. Attaching a biochemical label to such an antibody now allows
for its use to quantify the amount of the hormone in plasma, serum, urine, feces,
saliva, cell extracts, or supernatants. The nature of the biochemical label gives the
name to the speciﬁc immunoassay: Attaching a radioactive compound to the
antibody will result in a radioimmunoassay (RIA), enzymes as labels will produce
enzyme immunoassays (EIA or ELISA), depending on the speciﬁc composition of
the test, while light-emitting labels will result in fluorescence or chemiluminescence
immunoassays (FIA or CLIA), respectively.
    Immunoassays typically require sample volumes between 10 and 200 microliters
per determination, which are used in singlet or duplicate (with the mean of the two
replicates serving as the measured concentration). The reproducibility of an
immunoassay result is reflected in the intra- and interassay coefﬁcients of variation.
Deﬁned as the standard deviation of repeated assays performed from the same
specimen divided by the average concentration measured, these coefﬁcients should
not exceed 12–15 % for reliable and reproducible results. Most modern assay
systems are able to deliver much better performance, the better kits give interassay
CVs below 5 %.
    While immunoassays are the ﬁrst choice for reliable and rather inexpensive
analysis, they sometimes lack the required speciﬁcity. Since a given antibody will
not bind exclusively to the molecule it has been raised against, a certain crossre-
activity with matrix components of similar molecular structure is usually seen.
Crossreactivity may be sufﬁciently low so that the ‘true’ analyte concentration is not
signiﬁcantly overestimated. For example, most immunoassay for cortisol will also
detect its metabolite, cortisone, with a crossreactivity between less than 1 % to
more than 10 % (the latter posing a signiﬁcant source of measurement error; see
Miller et al. 2013). An even more difﬁcult situation arises with a much higher
crossreactivity to certain glucocorticoids used for the treatment of certain medical
conditions (e.g., inflammatory disorders). One of such glucocorticoids, pred-
nisolone, is detected by anticortisol antibodies with 50–80 % crossreactivity! If a
reliable differentiation between those steroids is required, other analytical methods
need to be employed.
    Among the most speciﬁc biochemical methods available to date for analysis of
molecules in a complex matrix, the measurement of hormones using liquid chro-
matography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) is becoming the
gold standard for such analytic purpose. With this method, the analytes are not
detected after binding, but rather identiﬁed on the basis of its molecular mass. It is
therefore superior to immunoassays due to much greater speciﬁcity. Despite this
24   Hormones                                                                     473

clear advantage, this methodology is unsuited for most smaller research labs, since
LCMS/MS equipment is still prohibitively expensive, requires highly trained per-
sonnel, and allows for rather low throughput.



24.4    Data Analysis

Given that alteration of an endocrine system can be achieved by simple experi-
mental manipulations (e.g. by intranasal injection of Oxytocin; Guastella et al.
2013, or by brief inhalation of carbon dioxide; Wetherell et al. 2006), and that one
intends to use some measured hormone concentration C only as means to check for
intervention efﬁcacy (i.e., to use C as a dependent variable), analyses of endocrine
data are comparably straightforward. Here, the general linear model (GLM, see
Everitt 2009) is particularly straightforward to implement, and can be easily
interpreted as long as its prerequisites are considered (Miller and Plessow 2013). If
one, however, intends to use endocrine activity as an explanatory variable, data
analyses becomes much more complex, as an adequate quantiﬁcation of the con-
struct of interest requires speciﬁcation an appropriate statistical (measurement)
model. In biobehavioral studies, the application of two major options for quan-
tiﬁcation of endocrine activity is observable: (a) data-driven quantiﬁcation
approaches, which can in most cases be related to the calculation of change scores,
and (b) theory based approaches (including area-under-the-concentration-curve
calculations), which have been originally developed for pharmacological studies
but are also about to become more prominent in the ﬁeld of Neuroeconomics.



24.4.1 Data-Driven Quantiﬁcation of Endocrine Activity

Considering that hormone levels fluctuate continuously across time due to the
inherent properties of the respective endocrine system, a large variety of models
have been proposed to infer on the status of the investigated system from a limited
number of specimens, which have been sampled at discrete points of time. Such
data are called panel data. Statistical models for the analysis of panel data can be
roughly differentiated into models in which the change of hormone concentration
per unit of time is considered explicitly (being referred to as continuous-time
models) and models in which time is considered implicitly (being referred to as
discrete-time models).
    Continuous-time models commonly incorporate estimation of a time-related
parameter. In the present context, the simplest form of such a model is a linear
regression (see formula I below) that relates C at two different points in time t0 and
t1 to the time on its original scale.
474                                                                R. Miller and C. Kirschbaum


                               Cðt0 ; t1 Þ ¼ aa  time þ ca

    Such a simple model, however, assumes that the change that occurs in between
t0 and t1 is the same for each time unit, which is quite unrealistic considering the
inherent nonlinear kinetics of endocrine markers. In case a third data point C(t2) is
added to the present example, which deviates from the projected linear trajectory of
C across time, one could sufﬁciently account for it by adding an additional quad-
ratic term (see formula II below). This model also implies that any continuous
change that occurs in between t0 and t2, can be reasonably approximated by the
given equation.

                     Cðt0 ; t1 ; t2 Þ ¼ ab  time þ bb  time2 þ cb

   By contrast, discrete-time models do not assume a continuous trajectory of
C across time. Proceeding from the examples mentioned above, the simplest model
for analyzing panel data of such kinds is a repeated-measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA). As such ANOVA also belongs to the GLM-class, its model equation is
quite similar to the listed regression models, but uses dummy-coded sampling times
as predictors. Consequently, the equation for the C(t0, t1) example is the same as in
formula I, but different for the C(t0, t1, t2) example represented by formula II.

               Cðt0 ; t1 ; t2 Þ ¼ ac  timeðt0 ; t1 Þ þ bc  timeðt0 ; t2 Þ þ cc

   These outlined examples illustrate, that the distinction between continuous- and
discrete-time models is of a rather conceptual kind, because all examples belong to
the same model class. Differences between them mostly relate to the coding of time
and thus to the interpretation of the model coefﬁcients. From a content perspective,
however, continuous-time modeling yields a major advantage as compared to
discrete-time modeling of hormone time series: Given an adequate theoretical
foundation, they enable a precise quantiﬁcation of endocrine activity at any point in
time, which is formed by occasional (or forced) secretory events and concurrent
hormone elimination. By contrast, endocrine parameters that have been obtained by
discrete-time models can only be used to infer on endocrine activity at the time of
sampling, which restricts their comparability with the results reported by other
studies (i.e., its interpretability) for the beneﬁt of a more convenient usability.
   Any statistical model for hormone time series relies on appropriate theoretical
assumptions on the construct being investigated. In the most basic and popular, but
rather data-driven case, change of C can be formalized as ΔC(ti) = C(ti) − C(ti−1)
occurring in between two points in time ti and ti−1, at which specimens have been
sampled. Although ΔC can serve as a convenient and easily interpretable indicator
of endocrine activity, it relies on discrete points in time (i.e., any informative
change of in-between and outside of bounds of specimen sampling is disregarded).
Although this problem can be alleviated by sampling of more than two specimens,
the analytical complexity would concurrently increase because the number of
possible ΔCs grows in a quadratic fashion the more specimens are sampled.
24   Hormones                                                                    475

    Continuous-time modeling of ΔC can provide a solution to this problem,
although no mechanistic and physiological knowledge about endocrine functioning
used. A key aspect of the continuous-time modeling of endocrine activity rests on
the idea that any ΔC(ti) within a certain, ﬁxed time window (Δt = ti − ti−1) also
contains information about ΔC within any other Δt. By rescaling ΔC(ti) according
to length of its corresponding time window Δti, a difference quotient ΔCi/Δt can be
obtained that denotes any change of hormone levels within one unit of its time
scale. This quotient can be interpreted similar to the regression parameter aa in
formula I (see above). Furthermore, any ΔCi can be modeled by an autoregression
that predicts C(ti) by C(ti−1) [or its rearranged form C(ti − Δt); (see Bollen and
Curran 2004)]. The integration of both trains of thought implies the difference
equation given below, where A as a matrix containing all autoregression parameters
relating the difference quotient ΔCi/Δt to any sampling point:

                             DCðti Þ
                                     ¼ A  Cðti  DtÞ
                              Dt

    If we now let Δt converge toward zero, the autoregression matrix A will deﬁne
the slope of C at any point in time, and thus become a matrix containing the
local change (or drift) parameters of C(ti). This is formalized by the deterministic
differential equation given below. Solving this formula yields a nonlinear regression
function where t0 represents the beginning of the time series (i.e., the initial sam-
pling point):

                                 dCðtÞ
                                       ¼ A  CðtÞ
                                  dt

                                C ðtÞ ¼ C ðt0 ÞeAðtt0 Þ

   Implementation of such a model and its extension by randomly occurring
deflections of C that can be related it to the change of concurrently assessed psy-
chological constructs, has been extensively elaborated by Voelkle et al. (2012) and
shall therefore not be discussed any further.



24.4.2 Theory-based Quantiﬁcation of Endocrine Activity

Although the previously presented model may render useful to merely describe the
change of C across time, it fails to adequately account for endocrine activity in
response to a certain experimental intervention due to lack of the incorporation of
knowledge that may cause corresponding change of C (by its underlying subpro-
cesses). As has been mentioned above, the adequate formalization of such mech-
anisms relies on substantive theory. For the modeling of endocrine time-series in
particular, the pharmacokinetic compartment theory might serve as a reasonable
476                                                             R. Miller and C. Kirschbaum

starting point. This theory has originally been developed for the analysis of sub-
stance absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion within and between
different physiological compartments (Bonate 2011; Gabrielsson and Weiner 2007).
Each of such compartments (e.g., the adrenal glands and the blood) contains a
speciﬁc amount of the investigated substance at each point in time, which is
determined by the exchange of substance between those compartments (being
indicated by various kinetic parameters ki). Proceeding from this reasoning, one can
directly specify differential equations for each compartment that can be integrated
into a single physiologically plausible model of the whole system: If we assume,
for instance, that a certain amount of substance within the adrenal glands (C1:
compartment 1) entered the blood (C2: compartment 2) unidirectionally, we would
specify two differential equations; with Ci(t) representing the substance concen-
tration at any time in the respective compartment i, ka representing the substance’s
transfer (or absorption) rate from C1 to C2, and kel representing the substance’s
elimination rate from C2.

                            dC1 ðtÞ
                                    ¼ ka C1 ðtÞ
                              dt
                            dC2 ðtÞ
                                    ¼ ka C1 ðtÞ  kel C2 ðtÞ
                              dt

   Notably, specimen sampling from C1 is optional, as ka and C1(t) can be esti-
mated as well from C2 specimens being sampled across time. Using Laplace
transforms (Mayersohn and Gibaldi 1970), both differential equations can be solved
and integrated to a nonlinear regression function. Similar to the solution of the
data-driven continuous-change differential equation in the previous section, such a
function relies on information about the initial state of the system. This is indicated
by C1(t0); the need to estimate an initially available concentration of target sub-
stance in C1.

                                   C1 ðt0 Þ ka  kel t          
                        C2 ðtÞ ¼                e       eka t
                                   ðka  kel Þ

   Adopting the compartment model outlined above for hormone analysis by
assuming that C2 corresponded to the blood compartment, from which hormones
were measured [i.e., C(t) = C2(t)], C1 could be regarded as a latent compartment
containing the fraction of hormone to be secreted (before feedback inhibits any
further feed-forward hormone release). However, its implementation is (yet) im-
plausible, because the blood compartment C(t0) would contain no hormone at all at
the beginning of specimen sampling. Such an assumption is inconsistent with the
empirically observable patterns of continuously oscillating endocrine activity (e.g.,
Brown et al. 2001; Klerman et al. 2003) that cause hormone concentrations to
deviate substantially from zero at any point in time. Within a conventional panel
design comprising blood sampling in temporal proximity to a single secretory
event, we could use a generalization of the derived formula for estimating C(t) after
24   Hormones                                                                           477

n previous substance administrations (Gabrielsson and Weiner 2007), that is, C(t0)
is assumed to converge toward some steady state gives a ﬁxed phase τ (that deﬁnes
the elapsed time period before C1(t0) is reinstated). The corresponding equation is
provided below:
                                                                               
                       C1 ðt0 Þka          1  enkel s kel t    1  enka s ka t
      C2 ðtÞ ¼ CðtÞ ¼                                   e                     e
                      ðka  kel Þ          1  ekel s             1  eka s

   As n increases toward inﬁnity and given the substance has been completely
transferred to C2 as t approaches the phase duration τ, the minimal C(t0) can be
calculated by the following formula, with t0 denoting a point in time that is found
between the initial sample and the ﬁrst observable rise of hormone levels.
                                                  kel s 
                                    C1 ðt0 Þka      e
                         C ðt0 Þ ¼             
                                   ðka  kel Þ    1  ekel s

    Fitting of such a model can nowadays be conveniently be implemented via
commercially available nonlinear regression tools (e.g. R, NONMEM, or SAS) or
utilization of generic Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo methods (e.g. WinBUGS; see
Lunn et al. 2002, or STAN). We illustrate such a model in Fig. 24.5, that has been
ﬁtted to the mean cortisol concentrations being obtained before, during, and after
stress-induction by von Dawans et al. (2011).
    Proceeding from such a model, one can also estimate the overall extent of
endocrine activity by calculating the amount of hormone that is additionally
available as compared to a scenario, where endocrine stimulation was unsuccessful.
Such a measure can be quantiﬁed as the difference between the area under the
concentration curve (AUCC) given a pulse was present (within the time period from
t0 = 0 to phase duration τ, see solid line in Fig. 24.4) and AUCC given no pulse was
present (i.e., the time period from t0 = τ to twice the phase duration 2τ, see dashed
line in Fig. 24.4):

                        C1 ðt0 Þka
                AUCC ¼
                       ðka  kel Þ
                                     nkel s
                                                                       
                            Zs 1  e
                                                  kel t     1  enka s ka t
                                               e                         e dt
                             0
                                 1  ekel s                 1  eka s
                                                                               1
                         Z2s                                         
                               1  enkel s kel t          1  enka s ka t A
                                             e                          e dt
                                1  ekel s                 1  eka s
                          s


   Conditional on the validity of the proposed model for mapping the kinetics of C,
this AUCC to actually quantiﬁes endocrine activity on a theoretical basis. In contrast
478                                                                     R. Miller and C. Kirschbaum




Fig. 24.5 Empirical salivary cortisol concentrations and the predicted salivary cortisol trajectory
before, during, and after HPA stimulation by a stress-protocol (TSST-G; see von Dawans et al.
2011). Model ﬁtting yielded the following parameters: the amount of cortisol being secreted
relative to the volume of distribution C1(t0) = 26.06 nmol/L, the rate of cortisol secre-
tion ka = 0.083, and the rate of cortisol elimination ke = 0.026. The dotted line denotes the
steady state C(t0), that is, the concentration that needs to be reached before the cortisol in C1(t0) is
secreted again (after τ minutes). The dashed line shows the predicted trajectory of cortisol
concentrations in case no endocrine response would have been elicited due to the stress-protocol


to the ΔC operationalization of endocrine activity, which crucially depends on the
time specimens are sampled, the AUC is easily interpretable and represents a more
holistic operationalization of individual endocrine activity. Due to the complexity
of its calculation from such parametric models, however, nonparametric AUC
variants have been proposed (e.g., AUCi and AUCg being calculated from trape-
zoidal C decomposition; Fekedulegn et al. 2007; Pruessner et al. 2003), which are
based on linear interpolation between all discrete points in time. Consequently,
these variants are no real, but rather discrete-time indicators of endocrine activity, as
the sampling time of specimens is crucial to recover the data generating mechanism.
Despite of this shortcoming, they can be regarded as convenient data-driven
approximations to the information being provided by continuous-time AUCs (given
a sufﬁcient number of available specimens). Finally, their utility with regard
to measuring endocrine activity has been supported by (Fekedulegn et al. 2007),
who showed that a combination of AUCi and AUCg may serve well to account for
the major fraction of time-series variance in hormone concentrations.
24   Hormones                                                                                 479


References

Andrew R, Westerbacka J, Wahren J et al (2005) The contribution of visceral adipose tissue to
   splanchnic cortisol production in healthy humans. Diabetes 54:1364–1370
Barrett EJ (2005) The endocrine system. In: Boron WF, Boulpaep EL (eds) Medical physiology: a
   cellular and molecular approach. Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia
Bollen KA, Curran PJ (2004) Autoregressive latent trajectory (ALT) models a synthesis of two
   traditions. Sociol Method Res 32:336–383
Bonate PL (2011) Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic modeling and simulation, 2nd edn.
   Springer, New York City
Brown EN, Meehan PM, Dempster AP (2001) A stochastic differential equation model of diurnal
   cortisol patterns. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 280(3):E450–E461
Dickerson SS, Kemeny ME (2004) Acute stressors and cortisol responses: a theoretical integration
   and synthesis of laboratory research. Psychol Bull 130:355–391
Droste SK, de Groote L, Atkinson HC et al (2008) Corticosterone levels in the brain show a
   distinct ultradian rhythm but a delayed response to forced swim stress. Endocrinology
   149:3244–3253
Everitt BS (2009) Multivariable modeling and multivariate analysis for the behavioral sciences.
   CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL
Fekedulegn DB, Andrew ME, Burchﬁel CM et al (2007) Area under the curve and other summary
   indicators of repeated waking cortisol measurements. Psychosom Med 69:651–659
Gabrielsson J, Weiner D (2007) Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic data analysis, 4th edn.
   Swedish Pharmaceutical Press, Stockholm
Gao W, Stalder T, Foley P et al (2013) Quantitative analysis of steroid hormones in human hair
   using a column-switching LC-APCI-MS/MS assay. J Chromatogr B Anal Technol Biomed
   Life Sci 928:1–8
Gröschl M (2008) Current status of salivary hormone analysis. Clin Chem 54:1759–1769
Gröschl M, Köhler H, Topf HG et al (2008) Evaluation of saliva collection devices for the analysis
   of steroids, peptides and therapeutic drugs. J Pharmaceut Biomed 47:478–486
Guastella AJ, Hickie IB, McGuinness MM et al (2013) Recommendations for the standardisation
   of oxytocin nasal administration and guidelines for its reporting in human research.
   Psychoneuroendocrinology 38:612–625
Hellhammer J, Fries E, Schweisthal OW et al (2007) Several daily measurements are necessary to
   reliably assess the cortisol rise after awakening: state-and trait components.
   Psychoneuroendocrinology 32:80–86
Hofman LF (2001) Human saliva as a diagnostic specimen. The Journal of Nutrition 131:1621S–
   1625S
Kirschbaum C, Steyer R, Eid M et al (1990) Cortisol and behavior: 2. application of a latent
   state-trait model to salivary cortisol. Psychoneuroendocrinology 15:297–307
Kirschbaum C, Gonzalez Bono E, Rohleder N et al (1997) Effects of fasting and glucose load on
   free cortisol responses to stress and nicotine. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 82:1101–1105
Klerman EB, Adler GK, Jin M et al (2003) A statistical model of diurnal variation in human
   growth hormone. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 285:E1118–E1126
Knox C, Law V, Jewison T et al (2011) DrugBank 3.0: a comprehensive resource for ‘omics’
   research on drugs. Nucleic Acids Res 39:D1035–D1041
Lunn DJ, Best N, Thomas A et al (2002) Bayesian analysis of population PK/PD models: general
   concepts and software. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn 29:271–307
Mayersohn M, Gibaldi M (1970) Mathematical methods in pharmacokinetics. I. Use of Laplace
   transform in solving differential rate equations. Am J Pharm Educ 34:608–614
Miller R, Plessow F (2013) Transformation techniques for cross-sectional and longitudinal
   endocrine data: application to salivary cortisol concentrations. Psychoneuroendocrinology
   38:941–946
480                                                                 R. Miller and C. Kirschbaum

Miller R, Plessow F, Rauh M et al (2013) Comparison of salivary cortisol as measured by different
    immunoassays and tandem mass spectrometry. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38:50–57
Perogamvros I, Keevil BG, Ray DW et al (2010) Salivary cortisone is a potential biomarker for
    serum free cortisol. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95:4951–4958
Pruessner JC, Kirschbaum C, Meinlschmid G et al (2003) Two formulas for computation of the
    area under the curve represent measures of total hormone concentration versus time-dependent
    change. Psychoneuroendocrinology 28:916–931
Schürmeyer TH, Avgerinos PC, Gold PW et al (1984) Human corticotropin-releasing factor in
    man: pharmacokinetic properties and dose-response of plasma adrenocorticotropin and cortisol
    secretion. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 59:1103–1108
Stalder T, Kirschbaum C (2012) Analysis of cortisol in hair—state of the art and future directions.
    Brain Behav Immun 26:1019–1029
Vining RF, McGinley RA, Symons RG (1983) Hormones in saliva: mode of entry and consequent
    implications for clinical interpretation. Clin Chem 29:1752–1756
Voelkle MC, Oud JHL, Davidov E et al (2012) An SEM approach to continuous time modeling of
    panel data: Relating authoritarianism and anomia. Psychol Methods 17:176–192
von Dawans B, Kirschbaum C, Heinrichs M (2011) The trier social stress test for groups
    (TSST-G): a new research tool for controlled simultaneous social stress exposure in a group
    format. Psychoneuroendocrinology 36:514–522
Wetherell MA, Crown AL, Lightman SL (2006) The four-dimensional stress test: psychological,
    sympathetic-adrenal-medullary, parasympathetic and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal responses
    following inhalation of 35 % CO2. Psychoneuroendocrinology 31:736–747
Wild D (2013) The immunoassay handbook: theory and applications of ligand binding, ELISA
    and related techniques, 4th edn. Elsevier, Oxford
