Chapter 25
Eye Movements

Ulrich Ettinger and Christoph Klein




Abstract The study of eye movements may provide a “window to the soul”, that
is, a unique opportunity to investigate the mind and brain of humans and animals. In
this chapter we argue that the study of eye movements may also be of use in
neuroeconomics research. We ﬁrst describe the types of eye movements that are of
relevance in this context and outline their neural correlates. We then outline the key
oculographic methods that are likely to be applied in neuroeconomics experiments
and point out the advantages of oculomotor research over manual motor experi-
ments. We address the long researched issue of the association between eye
movements and visual attention. That research supports the beneﬁt of studying eye
movements as a concurrent level of analysis in addition to manual responses in
order to better understand the temporal and spatial features of attention. We then
review key literature on the pupil, which shows a close relationship between pupil
dynamics and various cognitive and affective states. Finally, we summarise some
important ﬁndings from oculomotor research in the ﬁeld of neuroeconomics. It is
concluded that the study of eye movements represents a convenient, objective and
reliable method that may yield important additional data to better understand
economic decision-making processes as well as their neurophysiological correlates.




U. Ettinger (&)
Department of Psychology, University of Bonn, Kaiser-Karl-Ring 9, 53111 Bonn, Germany
e-mail: ulrich.ettinger@uni-bonn.de
C. Klein
Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Freiburg,
Hauptstr. 8, 79104 Freiburg, Germany
e-mail: christoph.klein.kjp@uniklinik-freiburg.de; c.klein@bangor.ac.uk
C. Klein
Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy,
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
C. Klein
School of Psychology, Bangor University, Penrallt Road, LL57 2AS Bangor, UK

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                                   481
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_25
482                                                             U. Ettinger and C. Klein


25.1    Introduction

It has long been suggested that the eye is the “window to the soul”. Wade and Tatler
(2005, p. 1) in their comprehensive history of oculomotor research quote De
Laurens in a writing from the sixteenth century as stating “Orpheus called the eyes,
the looking glasses of nature: Hesichius, the doores for the Sunne to enter in by:
Alexander the Peripatecian, the windowes of the mind, because that by the eyes we
doe cleerely see what is in the same, we pearce into the deepe thoughts thereof, and
enter into the privities of his secret chamber”.
    The notion that the eye may offer privileged access to the study of the mind, i.e.
to human and animal cognition, motivation, emotion, ability and personality as well
as psychopathology, has been reiterated in modern times (Stern and Dunham 1990).
The eye offers a wealth of information about ongoing cognitive and emotional
processes, ﬁrst and foremost of course about where the person is directing their
overt visual attention (see below). Additionally, the measurement of eye blinks as
well as the characterisation of the more subtle features of the eye such as the size of
the pupil can be used proﬁtably to make inferences about state variations in the
viewer’s arousal levels as well as demands on information processing (see below).
    Together, the eye and its internal as well as external movements presents an
easily accessible model system that can be studied across species—a microcosm
within which to explore the interactive processes of perception, cognition and motor
control as well as their neural substrates, their modulation by emotion and their
impairments in disease (Leigh and Zee 2006; Liversedge et al. 2011).
    Historically, the scientiﬁc study of eye movements can be broadly structured into
four eras (Duchowski 2002; Rayner 1998). First, in the nineteenth century and in
the early twentieth century, basic facts about the oculomotor system were discov-
ered. These discoveries include fundamental eye movement characteristics such as
saccadic latencies (reaction times) as well as the phenomenon of saccadic sup-
pression, i.e. the reduction of visual perception during saccades which facilitates a
stable representation of the visual world despite changes to the retinal image during
fast ocular movements. The second phase, from the 1930– 1950s, a time when
psychology was dominated by the behaviourist paradigm, saw a stronger focus of
applications of eye movement research. A third major impetus into oculomotor
research could be observed in the 1970s to the late 1990s, due to the increasing
availability of ever more accurate oculographic methods. Fourth, we are today in
the fortunate position to be able to draw upon a range of easily available and highly
sophisticated oculographic hardware and software systems. These allow us not only
to record eye movements with never seen temporal and spatial resolution but also to
perform interactive experiments, for example, by modifying the visual input on the
basis of eye movements or eye position (Duchowski 2002). An additional devel-
opment with major impact on applied as well as basic research is the measurement
of eye movements outside the laboratory in everyday life situations (Holmqvist
et al. 2011). Finally, signiﬁcant recent advances in the development of oculographic
methods include the availability of eye-trackers that are compatible with magnetic
25   Eye Movements                                                                483

resonance imaging (MRI) scanners, thus allowing precise recording of eye move-
ments simultaneously to the acquisition of brain images.
   In this chapter, it will be proposed that the study of eye movements may inform
neuroeconomics research. To do so, different types of eye movements will ﬁrst be
described and fundamental methodological issues in their study will be detailed.
The key oculographic methods are then reviewed before it will be argued, thus the
study of eye movements offers signiﬁcant advantages in neurocognition research in
comparison to standard manual motor experiments. Next, the processes of visual
perception and attention and their interactive relationships with movements of the
eyes will be outlined. Finally, literature on eye movements and neuroeconomics
will be discussed.



25.2    Types of Eye Movements

The human eye movement repertoire can be classiﬁed into different types of eye
movements along various lines. A widely recognised functional classiﬁcation by
Leigh and Zee (2006) distinguishes between saccades, ﬁxation, smooth pursuit,
vestibular eye movements, optokinetic eye movements, the quick phase of nys-
tagmus and vergence eye movements.
   Another commonly made distinction is that between gaze stabilising and gaze
shifting eye movements (Gilchrist 2011). Gaze stabilizing eye movements are those
that maximise stability of foveal processing during target movement, head move-
ment or both, such as vestibular, optokinetic and smooth pursuit eye movements.
Fixation, although not characterised by overtly observable eye movements, is also
considered a mechanism of oculomotor gaze stabilisation. The primary gaze
shifting movements on the other hand are saccades, i.e. rapid eye movements that
serve to bring the image of an object of interest onto the fovea. Of most relevance to
oculomotor paradigms in experimental psychology and cognitive neuroscience are
saccades, smooth pursuit eye movements and ﬁxation.
   Saccades (from the French word “la saccade”, meaning “jerk”) are fast, jerk-like
and ballistic eye movements with durations of 20–50 ms and a maximal velocity of
up to 600°/s. In everyday situations humans efﬁciently explore their visual envi-
ronment by making approximately 3–4 saccades per second (or about 12,000 per
hour) with maximal amplitudes of approximately 15°, beyond which gaze shifts are
more likely to be implemented by head movements (Gilchrist 2011). Saccades can
also be elicited very easily in experimental settings by instructing the observer to
shift their gaze from one (e.g. central) target to a sudden-onset target at another
location (e.g. in the periphery). This basic “prosaccade” task, which is considered to
involve largely automatic processing, can be experimentally modiﬁed in order to
tap speciﬁc cognitive processes (Hutton 2008). For example, spatial working
memory can be assessed by asking a saccade to the location of a briefly flashed
peripheral target to be executed after a short delay interval (Crawford et al. 1989;
Ettinger et al. 2005; Sawaguchi and Goldman-Rakic 1991). Temporal and/or spatial
484                                                             U. Ettinger and C. Klein

prediction abilities can be challenged by requiring the execution of saccades to a
target that is displayed in different locations in a temporally and/or spatially pre-
dictable manner (Allman et al. 2012; Joiner and Shelhamer 2006). Another variant
is the so-called antisaccade task, in which a saccade to the opposite location of a
peripheral target is requested, thus requiring cognitive control functions (Hutton
and Ettinger 2006; Munoz and Everling 2004). Importantly, non-human primates
can also be trained to make saccades in different experimental paradigms, allowing
the development of cross-species model systems of cognitive processes (see below).
    Prosaccades are controlled by a neural network involving posterior parietal
cortex, frontal and supplementary eye ﬁelds, superior colliculus, striatum, thalamus
and cerebellum, whereas volitional saccades recruit increased activation levels in
these areas and involve additional activations, such as in the dorsolateral and
ventrolateral prefrontal cortices (for reviews, see Johnston and Everling 2008;
McDowell et al. 2008; Muri and Nyffeler 2008). See Fig. 25.1 for an illustration of
some of the areas mediating prosaccades.
    Smooth pursuit serves to keep the image of a slowly moving object on the fovea
by matching smooth eye velocity to target velocity as closely as possible (Barnes
2008, 2011). Pursuit typically involves a combination of smooth eye movements
and saccades. The latter may be compensatory, reducing position error when eye
velocity is higher or lower than target velocity or intrusive, occurring in segments of
otherwise good pursuit, for example by anticipating future target movement. The
neural control of smooth pursuit eye movements (Fig. 25.2) involves motion sen-
sitive neurons in the visual cortex (V5 in humans, MT/MST in monkeys), the
posterior parietal cortex, the frontal and supplementary eye ﬁelds, the cerebellum
and pontine, vestibular and oculomotor nuclei (for reviews, see Ilg and Thier 2008;
Lencer and Trillenberg 2008; Sharpe 2008).
    Fixation occurs in periods when the eyes are relatively still and when most visual
information is gained from the environment, primarily by foveal but also parafoveal
and peripheral visual processing. Movements of the eyes do in fact occur during

Fig. 25.1 Neural correlates
of saccadic eye movements.
The ﬁgure shows clusters of
signiﬁcant activation
(p < 0.05 corrected cluster
level) in a prosaccade task in
healthy humans measured
with fMRI at 3T ﬁeld
strength. Unpublished data
(Herweg, Weber and
Ettinger). FEF frontal eye
ﬁelds; IPS intraparietal sulcus
25   Eye Movements                                                                           485




Fig. 25.2 Neural correlates of smooth pursuit eye movements. The ﬁgure shows clusters of
signiﬁcant activation (p < 0.05 corrected voxel level) in a smooth pursuit task in healthy humans
measured with fMRI at 3T ﬁeld strength. Unpublished data (Meyhöfer, Steffens, Weber and
Ettinger). FEF frontal eye ﬁelds; SEF supplementary eye ﬁelds; IPS intraparietal sulcus; V1
primary visual cortex; V5 motion sensitive area in visual cortex


ﬁxation, particularly tremor, drift and microsaccades (Martinez-Conde et al. 2013).
These are small movements, however, and are not usually noticed by the viewers
themselves or by untrained observers.
   The reason for the interest of experimental psychology in saccades, pursuit and
ﬁxations lies primarily in the close relationship of these types of eye movements
with overt visual attention. The link between these will be elaborated upon later in
this chapter, after oculographic recording methods and their advantages have been
delineated.



25.3     Oculographic Methods

At present,1 researchers interested in the study of eye movements can choose
between a range of different recording methods. Good current overviews of these
oculographic methods have recently been published (Eggert 2007; Haslwanter and
Clarke 2010; Holmqvist et al. 2011; Shelhamer and Roberts 2010); older but still
insightful reviews can be found in Yarbus (1967) and Young and Sheena (1975).
The methods most commonly used in psychology and neuroscience include
video-based combined corneal reflection and pupil tracking, infrared limbus ocu-
lography, electro-oculography (EOG), dual Purkinje tracking and the scleral search


1
 The history of methods in oculomotor research is summarised in detail by Wade and Tatler
(2005).
486                                                               U. Ettinger and C. Klein

coil technique. In the context of neuroeconomic experiments with eye movement
recordings, where saccades and ﬁxations are likely to be the most relevant oculo-
motor events, video-based combined corneal reflection and pupil trackers, infrared
limbus trackers as well as the older EOG are suggested to be the most suitable
methods, as they have good temporal and spatial performance characteristics, are
non-invasive and relatively quick to set up and calibrate. These methods are
described in the following.
   EOG involves the placing of surface electrodes lateral to each eye as well as to a
reference region such as the forehead. The method exploits the observation that the
human eye represents an electrical dipole, with the retina being more negative than
the cornea (hence the term “corneo-retinal potential”), and whose axis is approxi-
mately collinear with the optical axis of the eye. There is a small difference in
potential due to electrical activity of retina cells at the fundus of the eye. Given that
the electrical dipole moves with every rotation of the eye, differences in electrical
potential at the skin surface can be used to detect changes in eye position.
   Advantages of EOG include the accurate recording of horizontal eye movements
over a relatively large amplitude range (up to ±40°; Leigh and Zee 2006) whilst
being non-invasive and causing only minimal discomfort to participants.
Disadvantages primarily include the presence of (electrical, electro-cortical and
electro-myographic) noise as well as eyelid artefacts. Additionally, vertical eye
movements are measured much less reliably than horizontal eye movements due to
the concurrent movement of the eye lid.
   Infrared limbus oculography (e.g. Reulen et al. 1988) uses emitter/detector
arrays placed directly in front of the eye, usually by being ﬁxed to a headset. The
emitters shine infrared light onto the eye, from where it is reflected back onto the
detectors. The intensity of the reflected light differs between iris and sclera and,
accordingly, the distribution of light across the array of sensors of reflected light
changes when the eye moves. This signal can be used to measure eye movements
with high temporal and spatial performance characteristics. Disadvantages of the
method include artefacts due to movements of the head or the headset, discomfort
from wearing the headset and blocking of the visual ﬁeld due to the emitter/detector
arrays.
   Video-based combined corneal reflection and pupil trackers are currently
amongst the most widely used oculographic methods in psychology. Unlike other
methods, these eye-trackers work on a combination of two different signals, viz. the
image of the pupil and the reflection of infrared light from the cornea (the ﬁrst
Purkinje image; see Fig. 25.3). These signals together yield a precise and accurate
measure of the point of regard with excellent temporal and spatial resolution. Such
eye-trackers often work remotely, that is the infrared light source and camera are
placed away from the participant, e.g. below the computer screen that displays the
experimental stimuli (see Fig. 25.4 for an example), thus posing zero discomfort to
participants. A further advantage of these eye-trackers is the possibility of not only
obtaining eye position data but simultaneously also a measure of pupil size with
every sample (see below).
25   Eye Movements                                                                             487




Fig. 25.3 Pupil and corneal reflection images. The pictures show images of the pupil (in blue) and
the ﬁrst corneal reflection (in yellow) obtained by a video-based combined pupil and corneal
reflection tracker (EyeLink 1000; SR Research Ltd., Ottawa, Ontario, Canada). Picture used with
permission from SR Research Ltd.




Fig. 25.4 Setup of a remote eye-tracker. The picture shows as an example of a laboratory setup
the EyeLink 1000 eye-tracker (SR Research Ltd.). The infrared light source and camera are placed
remotely, beneath the monitor that displays the stimulus for the participant. A chinrest is used to
minimise head movements. Picture used with permission from SR Research Ltd.


    Video-based combined corneal reflection and pupil trackers tend to be user
friendly and quick to set up. However, this scientiﬁc method still requires precise
operating and attention to detail in order to yield valid data. In this context, a
number of laboratory conditions have to be considered (Holmqvist et al. 2011). In
brief, an ideal eye-tracking laboratory is a quiet room with dim but strictly con-
trollable light conditions. Complete darkness should be avoided as it may lead to
enlarged and more variable pupil size, which can pose problems for pupil tracking.
Additionally, the infrared light source may become visible in complete darkness
and pose a source of distraction for participants. When a light source is used to
488                                                                 U. Ettinger and C. Klein

moderately illuminate the laboratory it should be placed such that no direct light
falls onto the eye, the camera or the computer screen.
    Other factors that need to be considered when applying this method are certain
participant characteristics that may reduce the ease with which data can be collected
or the quality of the collected data. Makeup such as mascara may lead to the
detection of signal mistaken as pupil and should thus be avoided. Droopy eyelids
may cover the pupil thereby causing partial signal loss. Glasses may usually be
worn without preventing accurate recordings; however, they can also produce
signals that may be mistakenly interpreted as pupil or corneal reflection.



25.4    Methodological Advantages of Oculomotor Research

Psychologists and cognitive neuroscientists wishing to study certain cognitive
processes often face the problem of operationalising their measurement. A typical
experimental setup involves presenting a stimulus (input), which then arguably
engages the individual in a certain cognitive process, and recording the response to
that stimulus (output). Most often the output that is studied is a manual motor
response, such as a button press or a joystick movement, or a verbal response.
Whilst this standard procedure is being successfully employed in the pursuit of
numerous research questions, the study of ocular movements as an alternative
motor response may offer certain advantages over manual responses. These
advantages have been put forward most clearly in the context of research on psy-
chiatric and neurological patients (Klein and Ettinger 2008), but they also hold in
other research settings.
   First, oculomotor responses and associated cognitive processes have been
studied intensively with unit recordings in non-human primates and other animals,
providing a rich set of comparative data and background knowledge on the neural
mechanisms of such cognitive processes. A prime example of this is the investi-
gation of spatial working memory and its correlation in the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLFPC) using the oculomotor delayed response task in non-human pri-
mates (Sawaguchi and Goldman-Rakic 1991) as well as humans (Sweeney et al.
1996). The ability to perform the same tasks in both experimental animals and
humans provides a comprehensive and systematic description of the relevant
cognitive and neural processes.2
   Second, eye movements can be observed directly and without much technical
artefacts. Speciﬁcally, movements of the eyes, which involve only six muscles, are
more easily recorded and interpreted than movements of the limbs, which involve
dozens of muscles. The high precision of measurement stems from the fact that the
eyeball can rotate only within the socket. The resultant oculographic recordings
allow for the derivation of a manifold of meaningful, speciﬁc and reliably


2
See also the work of Glimcher et al. (2005) on saccadic decision making discussed below.
25   Eye Movements                                                                489

measurable parameters (Holmqvist et al. 2011). This holds both for eye movements
recorded in the laboratory and in the “ﬁeld”, that is in ecologically valid situations
such as during domestic tasks, whilst moving through the environment, whilst
driving a car or operating a plane or when engaged in sports (for reviews, see Land
and Tatler 2009; Duchowski 2002).
    Third, oculomotor tasks are hands- and language-free, they typically utilise
simple stimuli and instructions and they are shorter than complex neuropsycho-
logical assessments of cognitive function. These tasks are therefore culture fair and
they have proven highly acceptable to a diverse range of individuals from the
general population, including children and older participants as well as cognitively
impaired patients.
    Fifth, nowhere in the human brain can the complex interaction of perception and
action—elaborated in the “Gestaltkreis” theory by von Weizsäcker (1996)—be
studied more directly than in the oculomotor system. And due to the dynamic nature
of this interplay an important feature of the interaction between “mind” and “world”
becomes visible and analysable that remains completely concealed during the
simple measurement of manual reaction times: the process nature of these inter-
actions. In order to understand the structure of such processes, however, it is
required to understand the interplay between vision, attention and eye movements
(see below).
    Together these methodological advantages of oculomotor research reiterate its
importance in the operationalisation of the measurement of speciﬁc cognitive
processes in basic and applied research situations where manual motor responses
would otherwise be used to indicate the output of the organism.



25.5    Eye Movements, Attention and Vision

Before we investigate the interaction of eye movements, attention and vision in
more detail, we need to ask why we move our eyes at all. Or, as Delgado-García
(2000) put it: “Why move the eyes if we can move the head”? The answer to this
question lies in the observation that eye movements serve at least two important
purposes: (1) By shifting the point of gaze, they allow swift, high-acuity, foveal
processing of visual stimuli without the need to perform conspicuous—and com-
paratively clumsy—head movements. (2) They stabilise visual perception by
compensating for head or body movements.
   Both arguments point to the important role of eye movements in supporting
visual perception, a point expanded by Findlay and Gilchrist (2003) in relation to
the importance of eye movements in visual attention. The primary role of the eye
amongst all human sensory organs, in turn, is buttressed by the dual observations
that the eyes take in more information (bits) than any other sensory organ and that
approximately 50 % of human neocortex responds to changes in the visual envi-
ronment. Thus, eye movements serve to maximise the quality and structure of the
490                                                                        U. Ettinger and C. Klein




 (a) Fovea centralis:                           (b) Diagrammatic representation of the visual
                                                system in primates, showing the visual information
 Source:
                                                processing pathways. (Image by Prof. Peter
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fovea_centralis   Schiller. Used with permission.)

                                                Source: MIT Open Courseware

Fig. 25.5 The visual system


information intake of the most important of human sensory modalities. But why
should this be the case? The answer is revealed by the mere anatomy of the eyes.
    Figure 25.5 provides an illustration of the visual system of primates. Through
the pupil, light reaches the photoreceptors (i.e. rods (dim light) and cones (bright
light, colours)) on the retina. Transduction in the photoreceptors translates light
information from a spotlight into an electric signal. The highest density of cones
enabling the most precise viewing can be found in the central fovea, a roughly
1.5 mm small area located about 5° temporally to the visual axis. From the pho-
toreceptors the neural impulses are sent via retinal ganglion cells to the lateral
geniculate nucleus of the thalamus and from there to the primary visual cortex V1
and further to the visual association cortices V2–V5, from where visual information
spreads out to be processed by various cortical and sub-cortical regions. With
regard to the intricate link between eye movements and visual attention, the mere
fact that the central fovea comprises less than 1 % of the retinal size but projects to
over 50 % of the visual cortex to process the light that comes from only the central
2° of the visual ﬁeld makes clear how strongly the selective nature of visual
attention is anatomically “embodied”.
25   Eye Movements                                                                   491

    Whilst these (functional) anatomic considerations underline the importance of
the visual system as a system of information selection, many of the close and
complex relationships between eye movements and visual attention have over the
decades been unveiled by experimental research in human and non-human primates
(for a recent review primarily of the experimental literature, see Kowler 2011).
Here, two fundamental questions can be asked. First, how do “top-down” and
“bottom-up” factors interact; and second, how important are low-level features such
as contrast, colour or motion compared to other higher level stimulus structures
such as objects or gist (Einhäuser et al. 2008)?
    One of the answers to the second question has been the concept of “saliency
maps” suggested by Koch and Ullman (1985) as a spatial distribution of local
contrasts of features such as colour, luminance or movement. The higher the
physical salience of a location in the visual ﬁeld, the greater is the likelihood that it
is attended and ﬁxated. The corresponding rather low-level perceptual analyses are
thought to take place at early stages of information processing in the visual system.
The concept of saliency maps is certainly intriguing as a theoretical approach that
enables precise predictions of ﬁxation locations. On the one side, such models have
indeed been shown to outperform random models of ﬁxation location (Foulsham
and Underwoord 2008). On the other side, however, multiple other factors in
addition to such “outstanding” features are involved in determining our gaze
position that emphasise in different ways top-down aspects of gaze control,
including strategic decisions (Najemnik and Geisler 2005), speciﬁc interests
(Birmingham et al. 2009; Einhäuser et al. 2008) or speciﬁc tasks (Buswell 1935;
Yarbus 1967).
    Amongst the different top-down factors, strategic decisions may aim for opti-
mising task performance. This may include gazing at locations that maximise the
probability of ﬁnding a searched target (Najemnik and Geisler 2005) or aligning
gaze near the centre position in a scene to identify large portions of the scene with
this single optimal viewing position (Tatler 2007). Speciﬁc interests such as interest
in relevant social information, in addition, may override perceptual saliency and
direct an observer’s gaze to heads and eyes in complex social scenes (Birmingham
et al. 2009). Similarly, objects that can be identiﬁed as “interesting” because they
can be recalled retrospectively by the participants, explain the allocation of attention
and ﬁxations better than early perceptual saliency which, however, may impact on
an object’s saliency and thus contribute to an object’s “interestingness” indirectly
(Einhäuser et al. 2008). In line with the implied interaction of top-down and
bottom-up factors, Cerf et al. (2008), too, found that the combined influences of
face preference (top-down) and low-level salience (bottom-up) improve the pre-
diction of gaze positions. The aforementioned examples thus indicate that visual
attention is in fact controlled both by exogenous bottom-up processes of perceptual
saliency and endogenous top-down processes (Chica et al. 2013).
    One of the crucial issues in understanding the dynamics of eye movements refers
to the spatial sequencing of saccades during the exploration of visual scenes.
According to Kowler (2011), two concepts have been important here. The ﬁrst, the
“winner-takes-all” principle, deﬁnes how saccadic goals are chosen; the second
492                                                               U. Ettinger and C. Klein

principle, called “inhibition of return”, speciﬁes how the currently ﬁxated area is
left again to ﬁxate another goal. According to the ﬁrst principle, the region with the
momentarily highest “strength” (e.g., due to its saliency) attracts the attention, but
quickly loses its strengths for other regions to be ﬁxated, according to the second
principle. During such sequences of saccades, (covert) visual attention moves to the
location that is about to be ﬁxated next before the eyes move to that location
(Henderson et al. 1989). The strength of the coupling of movements of attention
and of the eyes has also been shown by experiments demonstrating that it is not
possible to orient attention to one location whilst moving the eyes to another
(Hoffman and Subramanian 1995).
    This sequence of alternations between attending a certain location, followed by
its inhibition and the focussing of the next salient location, generates a scan path of
ﬁxations and saccades across a stimulus of interest (Liechty et al. 2003). Scan paths
have been described since Noton and Stark’s (1971) seminal observation that when
participants look at visual stimuli (here: different patterns) their gazes follow
repeatedly a ﬁxed path that is characteristic of an individual subject. These
researchers also observed that different individuals develop different scan paths for
the same pattern, and each individual develop different scan paths for different
patterns, but that each scan path remained consistent across different presentations
of the same pattern. The “replication” of scan paths developed during viewing
conditions in the absence of the stimulus under conditions of visual imagery is
certainly amongst the clearest demonstrations of top-down factors in gaze control.
    According to some authors, there are two different states of covert visual
attention during the exploration of complex stimuli, viz. local and global (Liechty
et al. 2003). During states of local visual attention, short saccades are employed to
extract information from speciﬁc and adjacent locations of a stimulus; during states
of global visual attention, long saccades are used to extract and integrate infor-
mation from various locations of a complex stimulus (Liechty et al. 2003). Local
and global visual attention is thought to be controlled by the inferior temporal and
posterior parietal cortex, respectively; their interaction is thought to be controlled by
the prefrontal cortex (Liechty et al. 2003).
    To conclude, the anatomy of the human eye with the central fovea as a small
area of outstanding visual acuity “dictates” the dynamics of visual attention and eye
movements as a temporal-spatial process that is co-determined both by perceptual
bottom-up factors and cognitive-motivational top-down influences. Needless to say
that no technique is better suited to investigating these dynamics of visual infor-
mation processing than oculographic methods.



25.6    Pupillometry

Information processing through eye movements is inevitably associated with
complex cognitive and emotional processes and their central and autonomous
correlates. Modern eye-trackers can measure one particular facet of this complex
25   Eye Movements                                                                   493

response in addition to the proper eye movements, namely the pupil size and its
changes and fluctuations. This classical psychophysiological parameter has been
shown to be sensitive to a range of cognitive and affective states that may be
relevant at the workplace or in confrontation with stimuli from an economics
context, such as signals of ﬁnancial rewards.
    Pupillary responses manifest either in increase or decrease of the pupil diameter.
The increase in pupil diameter is called dilation or “mydriasis” and is caused by the
iris dilator. The iris dilator is a muscle bundle composed of radially arranged muscle
ﬁbres that is controlled by sympathetic innervation from the superior cervical
ganglion, which is itself under tonic excitatory control descending from the
hypothalamus (Kandel et al. 2000). The decrease in pupil diameter is called con-
striction or “miosis” and is effected by the iris sphincter muscle. This muscle is
composed of circularly arranged muscle ﬁbres and is innervated by the parasym-
pathetic nervous system exerting its effects through the mesencephalic Nucleus
Edinger-Westphal that innervates the ciliary ganglion cells through the oculomotor
brain nerve III (Kandel et al. 2000).
    More recently, pupil size has been shown to co-vary intra-individually with the
ﬁring rate of the locus coeruleus (LC), one of the brain’s two origins of nora-
drenergic neurons. The LC, which is located in the pons, has been associated with
general arousal through its widespread afferent projections but is not directly or
anatomically linked with the pupil (Aston-Jones and Cohen 2005). According to
Aston-Jones and Cohen (2005), the LC provides a tonic mode of ﬁring that can vary
between low activity in inattentive, non-alert states and high activity in distractible
states that promote task shifting. This structure, in addition, provides a phasic mode
of ﬁring when the subject is engaged in a task. The tonic and phasic modes interact
in that prominent phasic LC ﬁring which takes place during phases of moderate
tonic ﬁring, that is, when the subject is neither drowsy nor distracted and shifting to
another task. According to Aston-Jones and Cohen (2005), these patterns of LC
ﬁring are controlled by the anterior cingulate (ACC) and orbitofrontal cortices
(OFC), both of which are thought to monitor task-related utility.
    In one experiment, worthwhile to be described in some detail, these researchers
presented human participants with a discrimination task, in which task difﬁculty and
rewards for correct responses continually increased. Initially, the reward value
increased faster than task difﬁculty and thus error rates; after several trials, however,
the increase in task difﬁculty led to increased number of errors and reduced reward
rate. In line with the tonic-phasic distinction of LC ﬁring, the authors observed a
steady rising of baseline (tonic) pupil diameter with increasing task difﬁculty, and a
decrease in phasic discrimination-related pupil dilation. When discrimination suc-
cess declined and participants abandoned the current task series to start a new one,
baseline pupil diameter was greatest. This pattern of ﬁndings, which conﬁrms
Wilder’s “Law of Initial Values” (Wilder 1958), exempliﬁes nicely some of the
features of the pupillary dynamics: it is sensitive to both cognitive and
affective/motivational processes (which may be as fundamental as those proposed
by Aston-Jones and Cohen 2005); it encompasses both tonic and phasic responses;
it is controlled both by more proximal (N. Edinger-Westphal) and more distal
494                                                            U. Ettinger and C. Klein

(hypothalamus) brain structures and may be correlated with the activity in
anatomically not directly related brain regions (LC, ACC, OFC). Therefore, the
dynamics of the human pupil can be expected to be sensitive to a wide range of
tasks, situations and states and hence they may help in interpreting the ﬁndings of
eye movement studies that employ the experimental variation of conditions, situ-
ations or states.
   In line with this overall summary, dilation of the pupil, in comparison to
appropriate control conditions, has been associated with high task load/difﬁculty
(Beatty 1982a; Hess and Polt 1964; Kahneman and Beatty 1966; Moresi et al. 2008;
Steinhauer et al. 2004), high stimulus presentation rate (Poock and Noel 1975), low
stimulus probability (Reinhard and Lachnit 2002), processing of ambiguity
(Ben-Nun 1986; Schluroff et al. 1986), exploratory versus exploitative gambling
choices (Jepma and Nieuwenhius 2011), emotional excitement or emotional
valence (Goldwater 1972; Partala and Surakka 2003), (un)pleasantness of verbal
passages (White and Maltzman 1978), pleasantness of pictures (Metalis and Hess
2013), positive or negative emotional baby voices (Partala and Surakka 2003),
interest value (Hess and Polt 1960) or aesthetic liking (Johnson et al. 2010).
Conversely, decreases in task-evoked phasic responses or smaller tonic pupil
diameters have been reported with increasing time-on-task (Beatty 1982b) or in
insomniacs (Lichtstein et al. 1992). Sleepiness, however, is not only associated with
miotic responses but also with faster oscillations of the pupil diameter (McLaren
et al. 1992).
   These examples amply illustrate that pupil recordings may provide valuable
additional insights into the processing of difﬁculty or effort-related aspects of
stimuli in a wide range of settings of relevance to decision making and experimental
economics.



25.7    Oculomotor Research in Neuroeconomics

Neuroeconomics is an interdisciplinary scientiﬁc endeavour that aims to understand
human decision making, particularly in the context of economic choices. The goal
of neuroeconomics is thus to use neuroscientiﬁc data in order to better understand
the deliberation process in decision-making situations with the ultimate goal of
improving economic models.
   Accordingly, the methods of neuroeconomics are drawn from its constituent
scientiﬁc ﬁelds, namely neurobiology, behavioural and experimental economics as
well as cognitive, social and evolutionary psychology (see Part 8 of this book).
They include behavioural experiments in which participants can obtain ﬁnancial
rewards, “games” where participants’ rewards depend on the behaviour of other
(simulated or real) participants, recordings of heart rate and skin conductance,
electroencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG), positron emis-
sion tomography (PET), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), animal
25   Eye Movements                                                               495

studies involving single-neuron recordings and, of course, oculography, viz. the
recording of eye movements.
    Here we argue that the recording of eye movements (with or without concurrent
recordings of neurophysiological activity) may be one particularly useful method to
inform our understanding of the neural and cognitive processes taking place during
economic decision making. This argument is based on the methodological advan-
tages of oculography detailed above as well as our understanding of the association
between attentional processes and eye movements and their neural mechanisms.
Indeed, oculographic recordings in the study of decision making were ﬁrst made in
the 1970s (Russo and Rosen 1975) and have since been used proﬁtably to elucidate
the underlying processes. In the following we will not provide a comprehensive
overview of the published work in neuroeconomics that has used oculographic
methods; instead, we will give some examples selected to illustrate the richness of
oculographic approaches in neuroeconomics and refer the reader at this point to
further relevant articles (see e.g. Causse et al. 2011; Costa-Gomes et al. 2001;
Glöckner and Herbold 2011; Krajbich et al. 2010; Lohse and Johnson 1996;
Middlebrooks and Sommer 2011; Reutskaja et al. 2011; Ross et al. 2011; Stritzke
et al. 2009).
    In one recent example, Arieli et al. (2011) recorded eye movements in a decision
task where participants had to choose amongst two lottery scenarios with differing
prizes and probabilities. They aimed to compare two possible procedures that may
be implemented in the decision-making process, viz. the holistic and component
procedures. In the holistic procedure, participants treat the two alternatives holis-
tically, for example by evaluating the certainty equivalent of each alternative and
selecting the one with the higher certainty equivalence or by computing the
expectation of each of the two alternatives and selecting the one with the higher
expectation. In the component procedure, it is thought that participants compare the
prizes and the probabilities as separate components. Using eye movement record-
ings, Arieli et al. (2011) found that the more difﬁcult of these problems were
associated with saccades between the same components of the two alternatives,
suggesting a component procedure, whereas in easier problems saccades between
elements within the same alternative were more frequent, suggesting a holistic
processing approach. That study thus nicely demonstrates how the investigation of
eye movements can provide valuable information on the likely cognitive processes
taking place during decision making.
    Similarly, Camerer and colleagues (e.g. Bhatt and Camerer 2005) have used
oculographic methods to distinguish between different neuroeconomic theories
which make similar predictions at the behavioural level. As these theories could not
be distinguished purely in terms of the participants’ behavioural decisions, the
recording of eye movements provided an additional level of analysis that helped to
rule out alternative explanations.
    In addition to serving as a tool to enrich behavioural experiments by providing
an additional level of explanation, eye movements have also been studied in the
search for the neural substrate of economic decision making in non-human pri-
mates. An impressive example of this approach is the work by Glimcher and
496                                                                      U. Ettinger and C. Klein

colleagues (see e.g. Glimcher et al. 2005; Glimcher 2009). These researchers have
developed a neurobiological model of decision making that is based on utility
theory from economics and makes prominent use of eye movement behaviour and
neurophysiology in monkeys.
    In this model, the ﬁnal stages of saccadic decision making involve the selection of
that action from a number of alternatives that is judged to be most desirable in a
“winner-takes-all” process, resulting in a saccade in a certain direction. Work by
Schall and colleagues (Hanes and Schall 1996; Schall and Thompson 1999) has
shown that frontal eye ﬁeld (FEF) neurons display topographic ﬁring over the
stimulus position in a “winner-takes-all” fashion that encodes the direction of the
saccade; when the level of activity at that location exceeds a certain threshold, a
saccade is executed. Of importance to an understanding of saccadic decision making
are, however, also the processing steps that lead up to this decision in the FEFs.
    For example, in studies using moving stimuli, Newsome and colleagues (Parker
and Newsome 1998) observed that the topographically arranged neurons in MT are
motion sensitive. It was also shown that the outputs of these neurons are passed on
to neurons in the posterior parietal cortex, where they are mathematically inte-
grated, thereby generating a topographic map of motion direction from which they
extract a decision variable which is then passed on to the FEFs.
    This process is not just a model of primitive, low-level decision making, but
likely a model of much more complicated decisions with relevance to neuroeco-
nomics was shown in a study by Platt and Glimcher (1999). In that study, monkeys
were trained to make saccades to the right or left, and both the likelihood and the
magnitude of reward for these saccades were manipulated experimentally. It was
found that the ﬁring of neurons in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) accurately
represented the expected value of a saccade, thus yielding a directly measureable
neural substrate of economic choice. In other words, area LIP represents a topo-
graphic map in which the relative expected value or utility of each possible saccade
is coded.3
    Glimcher and colleagues also draw upon work by Schultz et al. (1997) on
dopamine release in the striatum in order to explain from where LIP neurons receive
information about the physiological expected utilities. Schultz et al. (1997) observed
that dopamine neurons code what is called reward prediction error in learning theory
(Sutton and Barto 1998), that is, these neurons receive inputs on expected and on
actual reward, calculate the difference (the so-called reward prediction error) and
transmit the results to cortical and basal ganglia neurons using dopamine as neuro-
transmitter. As such, the outputs of the computations of these neurons may explain
how physiological expected utilities are generated in parietal neurons.
    On the basis of the observation of neuronal encoding in LIP of relative expected
utility under such fairly straightforward experimental conditions, Glimcher and


3
 Of note, a recent study by Leathers and Olson (2012) showed that LIP neurons encode not just the
reward value of saccades but also an incurred penalty, suggesting that these neurons represent not
the action value but the motivational salience of the stimulus (see, however, Newsome et al. 2013).
25   Eye Movements                                                                      497

colleagues went on to investigate how their ﬁring patterns would respond when an
action, i.e. the choice of saccade direction, was less clearly related to an expected
value than in the above studies.
   In a series of experiments, Dorris and Glimcher (2004) engaged both humans and
monkeys in a version of the inspection game, a strategic game from game theory
where one participant, the inspector, veriﬁes the another participant, the inspectee,
adheres to certain rules. The monkeys played against a computer in a saccadic choice
version of the game. At the behavioural level, the experiments showed that the
monkeys’ dynamic behaviour closely resembled that of humans, supporting the cross-
species validity of the oculomotor model of this game. At the neurophysiological
level, the research showed that the brain topographically encodes, in directly mea-
surable neural activity patterns, the relative desirabilities of all possible actions (which
are of course directly and unambiguously measurable via oculographic methods). As
Glimcher et al. (2005) argue, it may be these topographic maps in LIP which represent
the neural substrate of economic decision making.
   The implications of the development of oculomotor model systems of economic
choice are wide ranging. Given the availability of cross-species models and the
above described advantages of studying the eye movement system of further models
could be developed allowing the study of a wide range of influences on economic
decision making, from state factors such as pharmacological challenges to trait
factors such as genetics (cf. the chapters by Reuter and Montag in this book).
   Glimcher and colleagues also draw conclusions from these studies concerning the
historical tension between prescriptive and descriptive approaches to the study of
economic decision making (see Chap. 1, by Reuter and Montag, in this book).
Prescriptive approaches emphasise the optimal and efﬁcient decision making of homo
economicus, whereas descriptive approaches, based on data collection, often obtain
evidence of irrational economic decisions leading to poor utility maximising.
Neuroeconomics as a discipline may contribute to the debate between these approa-
ches by studying the mechanisms of decision making in the brain using experimental
model systems, some of which may involve saccadic eye movements as the means to
indicate the outcome of the decision-making process. According to Glimcher et al.
(2005), the neurobiological work on primate saccadic decision making provides
evidence against the dual-systems view held by some economists, that decisions arise
out of a conflict between two interacting systems, one being clearly utility based (and
evolutionarily recent) and the other being irrational (and evolutionarily old). Instead,
the work by Glimcher and others has identiﬁed direct evidence of neural activity
representing—in many situations—classical expected utility.



25.8     Conclusions

The present chapter has provided an introduction to the study of eye movements as
a method in neuroeconomics research. We have described different recording
techniques, highlighted the history of oculomotor research, and listed advantages of
498                                                                     U. Ettinger and C. Klein

oculography over other behavioural measurements of cognition. An important
aspect of oculomotor research concerns the complex interplay between eye
movements and visual attention that underlies the cycle of saccades and ﬁxation.
Furthermore, we touched upon the sensitive dynamics of pupil responses, the
measurement of which can be obtained “for free” when using modern eye-trackers,
and gave examples of how neuroeconomic research may beneﬁt from eye move-
ment recordings. Overall, we hope to have raised interest in this method in
researchers in neuroeconomics.
   What can be concluded from the work described in this chapter? We will phrase
our answers to this question in the form of theses and proposals for future eye
movement research in the ﬁeld of neuroeconomics.
1. The study of eye movements provides a rich body of behavioural and neuro-
   scientiﬁc evidence that can be incorporated into neuroeconomics research. This
   applies especially to the work on attention and decision making as well as their
   neural correlates.
2. Neuroeconomics research may beneﬁt from the systematic integration of eye
   movement recordings in more or less all research settings, be it the behavioural
   lab, the MRI scanner or the ﬁeld. As described, such recordings may provide an
   additional level of analysis with which it may be possible to separate competing
   accounts of economic decision making.
3. The availability of cross-species models of economic decision making provides
   a highly innovative model system which builds upon animal neurophysiology,
   behavioural oculomotor research and human neuroeconomics. Such work pro-
   vides an important foundation for extending research into utility theory and
   neuroeconomic decision making into animal behaviour and neurophysiology,
   for example involving direct pharmacological interventions to modulate the
   reward system, by drawing upon the method of recording eye movements.



References

Allman AA, Ettinger U, Joober R, O’Driscoll GA (2012) Effects of methylphenidate on basic and
   higher-order oculomotor functions. J Psychopharmacol 26(11):1471–1479
Arieli A, Ben-Ami Y, Rubinstein A (2011) Tracking decision makers under uncertainty. Am
   Econ J Microecon 3:68–76
Aston-Jones G, Cohen JD (2005) An integrative theory of locus coeruleus-norepinephrine
   function: adaptive gain and optimal performance. Annu Rev Neurosci 28:403–450
Barnes GR (2008) Cognitive processes involved in smooth pursuit eye movements. Brain Cogn
   68:309–326
Barnes GR (2011) Ocular pursuit movements (Chapter 7). In: Liversedge SP, Gilchrist I,
   Everling S (eds) The Oxford handbook of eye movements. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Beatty J (1982a) Task-evoked pupillary responses, processing load, and the structure of processing
   resources. Psychol Bull 91:276–292
Beatty J (1982b) Phasic not tonic pupillary responses vary with auditory vigilance performance.
   Psychophysiology 19(2):167–172
25   Eye Movements                                                                             499

Ben-Nun Y (1986) The use of pupillometry in the study of on-line verbal processing, evidence for
    depth of processing. Brain Lang 28:1–11
Bhatt M, Camerer CF (2005) Self-referential thinking and equilibrium as states of mind in games:
    fMRI evidence. Games Econ Behav 52:424–459
Birmingham E, Bischof WF, Kingstone A (2009) Saliency does not account for ﬁxations to eyes
    within social scenes. Vision Res 49:2992–3000
Buswell GT (1935) How people look at pictures: a study of the psychology and perception in art.
    University Chicago Press, Oxford
Causse M, Baracat B, Pastor J, Dehais F (2011) Reward and uncertainty favor risky
    decision-making in pilots: evidence from cardiovascular and oculometric measurements.
    Appl Psychophysiol Biofeedback 36:231–242
Cerf M, Harel J, Einhäuser W, Koch C (2008) Predicting human gaze using low-level saliency
    combined with face detection. Adv Neural Inf Process 20:241–248
Chica AB, Bartolomeo P, Lupianez J (2013) Two cognitive and neural systems for endogenous
    and exogenous spatial attention. Behav Brain Res 237:107–123
Costa-Gomes M, Crawford VP, Broseta B (2001) Econometrica 69(5):1193–1235
Crawford TJ, Henderson L, Kennard C (1989) Abnormalities of nonvisually-guided eye
    movements in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 112(Pt 6):1573–1586
Delgado-García JM (2000) Why move the eyes if we can move the head? Brain Res Bull 52
    (6):475–482
Dorris MC, Glimcher PW (2004) Activity in posterior parietal cortex is correlated with the relative
    subjective desirability of action. Neuron 44(2):365–378
Duchowski AT (2002) A breadth-ﬁrst survey of eye-tracking applications. Behav Res Methods
    Instrum Comput 34(4):455–470
Eggert T (2007) Eye movement recordings: methods. In: Straube A, Büttner U
    (eds) Neuro-Ophthalmology, vol 40. Karger Publishers, pp 15–34
Einhäuser W, Spain M, Perona P (2008) Objects predict ﬁxations better than early saliency. J Vis
    8:1–26
Ettinger U, Hejda S, Flak V, Corr PJ (2005) Prepulse inhibition of the acoustic startle reflex and
    oculomotor control. Psychophysiology 42:473–482
Findlay JM, Gilchrist ID (2003) Active vision: the psychology of looking and seeing. Oxford
    University Press, Oxford
Foulsham T, Underwoord G (2008) What can saliency models predict about eye movements?
    Spatial and sequential aspects of ﬁxations during encoding and recognition. J Vis 8:1–17
Gilchrist I (2011) Saccades (Chapter 5). In: Liversedge SP, Gilchrist I, Everling S (eds) The
    Oxford handbook of eye movements. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Glimcher PW (2009) Choice: towards a standard back-pocket model. In: Glimcher PW,
    Camerer C, Poldrack RA, Fehr E (eds) Neuroeconomics: decision making and the brain.
    Academic Press, New York, pp 501–519
Glimcher PW, Dorris MC, Bayer HM (2005) Physiological utility theory and the neuroeconomics
    of choice. Games Econ Behav 52(2):213–256
Glöckner A, Herbold AK (2011) An eye-tracking study on information processing in risky
    decisions: evidence for compensatory strategies based on automatic processes. J Behav
    Decision Mak 24:71–98
Goldwater BC (1972) Psychological signiﬁcance of pupillary movements. Psychol Bull 77:340–
    355
Hanes DP, Schall JD (1996) Neural control of voluntary movement initiation. Science 274
    (5286):427–430
Haslwanter T, Clarke AH (2010) Eye movement measurement, electro-oculography and
    video-oculography. Handb Clin Neurophysiol 9:61–79
Henderson JM, Pollatsek A, Rayner K (1989) Covert visual attention and extrafoveal information
    use during object identiﬁcation. Percept Psychophys 45:196–208
Hess EH, Polt JM (1960) Pupil size as related to interest value of visual stimuli. Science 132:349–
    350
500                                                                      U. Ettinger and C. Klein

Hess EH, Polt JM (1964) Pupil size in relation to mental activity during simple problem-solving.
    Science 143:1190–1192
Hoffman JE, Subramanian B (1995) The role of visual attention in saccadic eye movements.
    Percept Psychophys 57:787–795
Holmqvist H, Nyström M, Andersson R, Dewhurst R, Jarodzka H, van de Weijer J (2011) Eye
    tracking: a comprehensive guide to methods and measures. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Hutton SB (2008) Cognitive control of saccadic eye movements. Brain Cogn 68(3):327–340
Hutton SB, Ettinger U (2006) The antisaccade task as a research tool in psychopathology, a critical
    review. Psychophysiology 43:302–313
Ilg UJ, Thier P (2008) The neural basis of smooth pursuit eye movements in the rhesus monkey
    brain. Brain Cogn 68:229–240
Jepma M, Nieuwenhius S (2011) Pupil diameter predicts changes in the exploration-exploitation
    trade-off, evidence for the adaptive gain theory. J Cogn Neurosci 23:1587–1596
Johnson MG, Muday JA, Schirillo JA (2010) When viewing variations in paintings by Mondrian,
    aesthetic preferences correlate with pupil size. Psychol Aesthet Creativity Arts 4:161–167
Johnston K, Everling S (2008) Neurophysiology and neuroanatomy of reflexive and voluntary
    saccades in non-human primates. Brain Cogn 68:271–283
Joiner WM, Shelhamer M (2006) An internal clock generates repetitive predictive saccades. Exp
    Brain Res 175:305–320
Kahneman D, Beatty J (1966) Pupil diameter and load on memory. Science 154:218–219
Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessell TM (2000) Principles of neural science, 3rd edn. Prentice Hall,
    London
Klein C, Ettinger U (2008) A hundred years of eye movement research in psychiatry. Brain Cogn
    68:215–218
Koch C, Ullman S (1985) Shifts in selective visual attention, towards the underlying neural
    circuitry. Hum Neurobiol 4:219–227
Kowler E (2011) Eye movements: the past 25 years. Vis Res 51:1457–1483
Krajbich I, Armel C, Rangel A (2010) Visual ﬁxations and the computation and comparison of
    value in simple choice. Nat Neurosci 13(10):1292–1298
Land MF, Tatler BW (2009) Looking and acting: vision and eye movements in natural behaviour.
    Oxford University Press, Oxford
Leathers ML, Olson CR (2012) In monkeys making value-based decisions, LIP neurons encode
    cue salience and not action value. Science 338(6103):132–135
Leigh RJ, Zee DS (2006) The neurology of eye movements, 4th edn. Oxford University Press,
    Oxford
Lencer R, Trillenberg P (2008) Neurophysiology and neuroanatomy of smooth pursuit in humans.
    Brain Cogn 68:219–228
Lichtstein KL, Johnson RS, Gupta S, O’Laughlin DL, Dykstra TA (1992) Are insomniacs sleepy
    during the day? A pupillometric assessment. Behav Res Ther 30(3):283–292
Liechty J, Pieters R, Wedel M (2003) Global and local covert visual attention: evidence from a
    Bayesian Hidden Markov Model. Psychometrika 68:519–541
Liversedge SP, Gilchrist I, Everling S (2011) The Oxford handbook of eye movements. Oxford
    University Press, Oxford
Lohse GL, Johnson EJ (1996) A comparison of two process tracing methods for choice tasks.
    Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 68(1):28–43
Martinez-Conde S, Otero-Millan J, Macknik SL (2013) The impact of microsaccades on vision:
    towards a uniﬁed theory of saccadic function. Nat Rev Neurosci 14(2):83–96
McDowell JE, Dyckman KA, Austin BP, Clementz BA (2008) Neurophysiology and
    neuroanatomy of reflexive and volitional saccades, evidence from studies of humans. Brain
    Cogn 68:255–270
McLaren JW, Erie JC, Brubaker RF (1992) Computerized analysis of pupillograms in studies of
    alertness. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 33(3):671–676
Metalis SA, Hess EH (2013) Pupillary response/semantic differential scale relationships. J Res
    Pers 16:201–216
25   Eye Movements                                                                              501

Middlebrooks PG, Sommer MA (2011) Metacognition in monkeys during an oculomotor task.
    J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 37(2):325–337
Moresi S, Adam JJ, Rijken J, Van Gerven PWM, Kuipers H, Jolles J (2008) Pupil dilation in
    response preparation. Int J Psychophysiol 67:124–130
Munoz DP, Everling S (2004) Look away, the anti-saccade task and the voluntary control of eye
    movement. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:218–228
Muri RM, Nyffeler T (2008) Neurophysiology and neuroanatomy of reflexive and volitional
    saccades as revealed by lesion studies with neurological patients and transcranial magnetic
    stimulation (TMS). Brain Cogn 68:284–292
Najemnik J, Geisler WS (2005) Optimal eye movement strategies in visual search. Nature
    434:387–391
Newsome WT, Glimcher PW, Gottlieb J, Lee D, Platt ML (2013) Comment on “In monkeys
    making value-based decisions, LIP neurons encode cue salience and not action value”. Science
    340(6131):430
Noton D, Stark L (1971) Scanpaths in saccadic eye movements while viewing and recognizing
    patterns. Vis Res 11:929–942
Parker AJ, Newsome WT (1998) Sense and the single neuron: probing the physiology of
    perception. Annu Rev Neurosci 21:227–277
Partala T, Surakka V (2003) Pupil size variation as an indication of affective processing. Int J Hum
    Comput Stud 59:185–198
Platt ML, Glimcher PW (1999) Neural correlates of decision variables in parietal cortex. Nature
    400(6741):233–238
Poock GK, Noel CE (1975) Effects of layout of workplace on pupillary diameter. Percept Motor
    Skill
Rayner K (1998) Eye movements in reading and information processing: 20 years of research.
    Psychol Bull 124:372–422
Reinhard G, Lachnit H (2002) The effect of stimulus probability on pupillary response as an
    indicator of cognitive processing in human learning and categorization. Biol Psychol 60:199–
    215
Reulen JP, Marcus JT, Koops D, de Vries FR, Tiesinga G, Boshuizen K, Bos JE (1988) Precise
    recording of eye movement: the IRIS technique. Part 1. Med Biol Eng Comput 26(1):20–26
Reutskaja E, Nagel R, Camerer CF, Rangel A (2011) Search dynamics in consumer choice under
    time pressure: an eye-tracking study. Am Econ Rev 101:900–926
Ross M, Lanyon LJ, Viswanathan J, Manoach DS, Barton JJ (2011) Human prosaccades and
    antisaccades under risk: effects of penalties and rewards on visual selection and the value of
    actions. Neuroscience 196:168–177
Russo EJ, Rosen LD (1975) An eye ﬁxation analysis of multialternative choice. Memory Cogn
    3:267–276
Sawaguchi T, Goldman-Rakic PS (1991) D1 dopamine receptors in prefrontal cortex: involvement
    in working memory. Science 251(4996):947–950
Schall JD, Thompson KG (1999) Neural selection and control of visually guided eye movements.
    Annu Rev Neurosci 22:241–259
Schluroff M, Zimmermann T, Freeman RB, Hofmeister K, Lorscheid T, Weber A (1986) Pupillary
    responses to syntactic ambiguity of sentences. Brain Lang 27:322–344
Schultz W, Dayan P, Montague PR (1997) A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science
    275:1593–1599
Sharpe JA (2008) Neurophysiology and neuroanatomy of smooth pursuit, lesion studies. Brain
    Cogn 68:241–254
Shelhamer M, Roberts DC (2010) Magnetic scleral search coil. Handb Clin Neurophysiol 9:80–87
Steinhauer SR, Siegle GJ, Condray R, Pless M (2004) Sympathetic and parasympathetic
    innervation of pupillary dilation during sustained processing. Int J Psychophysiol 52:77–86
Stern JA, Dunham DN (1990) The ocular system. In: Cacioppo JT, Tassinary LG (eds) Principles
    of psychophysiology: physical, social, and inferential elements. Cambridge University Press,
    Cambridge, pp 513–553
502                                                                     U. Ettinger and C. Klein

Stritzke M, Trommershäuser J, Gegenfurtner KR (2009) Effects of salience and reward
    information during saccadic decisions under risk. J Opt Soc Am A: Opt Image Sci Vis 26
    (11):B1–13
Sutton R, Barto A (1998) Reinforcement learning. MIT Press, Cambridge
Sweeney JA, Mintun MA, Kwee S, Wiseman MB, Brown DL, Rosenberg DR, Carl JR (1996)
    Positron emission tomography study of voluntary saccadic eye movements and spatial working
    memory. J Neurophysiol 75:454–468
Tatler BW (2007) The central ﬁxation bias in scene viewing, selecting an optimal viewing position
    independently of motor biases and image feature distributions. J Vis 7:1–17
von Weizsäcker V (1996) Gestaltkreis - Theorie der Einheit von Wahrnehmen und Bewegen
    (Bearb. v. Peter Achilles). Suhrkamp Verlag, Berlin
Wade NJ, Tatler BW (2005) The moving tablet of the eye: the origins of modern eye movement
    research. Oxford University Press, Oxford
White GL, Maltzman I (1978) Pupillary activity while listening to verbal passages. J Res Pers
    12:361–369
Wilder J (1958) Modern psychophysiology and the law of initial value. Am J Psychother
    12:199–221
Yarbus AL (1967) Eye movements and vision. Plenum Press, New York
Young LR, Sheena D (1975) Eye-movement measurement techniques. Am Psychol 30:315–330
Appendix A
Neuroanatomy




See Figs. A.1, A.2, A.3, A.4, A.5, A.6, A.7, A.8 and A.9.




Fig. A.1 Explanation of the orientation in the human brain




© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                   503
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1
504                                                  Appendix A: Neuroanatomy




Fig. A.2 Different perspectives on the human brain
Appendix A: Neuroanatomy                                                                     505




Fig. A.3 Medial sagittal section through the brain. a Midsagittal section. b MRI image (mid-
sagittal section). 1 Corpus callosum (callosal commissure), 2 Gyrus cinguli (cingulate cortex), 3
Fornix, 4 Thalamus, 5 Chiasma opticum, 6 Infundibulum hypophysis, 7 Hypophysis, 8 Corpus
mamillare, 9 Epiphysis, 10 Mesencephalon (midbrain), 11 Aqueductus mesencephali (only in a),
12 Lamina tecti, 13 Ventriculus quartus, 14 Pons, 15 Medulla oblongata, 16 Velum medullare
superius (MRI image from the University clinic in Freiburg, by Dr. J. Klisch, Department of
Neuroradiology)
506                                                                      Appendix A: Neuroanatomy




Fig. A.4 Lateral view of the cerebrum. Frontal lobe in red, parietal lobe in blue, occipital lobe in
green, temporal lobe in purple. 1 Parasagittal cortical zone, 2 Sulcus frontalis superior, 3 Sulcus
frontalis inferior, 4 Gyrus frontalis superior, 5 Gyrus frontalis medius, 6 Gyrus frontalis inferior, 7
Pars orbitalis, 8 Pars triangularis, 9 Pars opercularis, 10 Frontal pole, 11 Sulcus centralis, 12 Sulcus
precentralis, 13 Gyrus precentralis, 14 Sulcus postcentralis, 15 Gyrus postcentralis, 16 Sulcus
lateralis, 17 Gyrus supramarginalis, 18 Gyrus temporalis superior, 19 Gyrus temporalis medius, 20
Gyrus temporalis inferior, 21 Sulcus temporalis superior, 22 Sulcus temporalis inferior, 23 Gyrus
angularis, 24 Lobulus parientalis superior, 25 Lobulus parientalis inferior, 26 Occipital pole, 27
Temporal pole (modiﬁed according to Spitzer, in Duus: Neurologisch-topische Diagnostik,
Thieme 1990)
Appendix A: Neuroanatomy                                                                       507




Fig. A.5 Medial view of the cerebrum. Frontal lobe in red, parietal lobe in blue, occipital lobe in
green, temporal lobe in purple, Cyrus cinguli in yellow. 1 Corpus callosum, 2 Gyrus cinguli, 3
Sulcus centralis, 4 Lobulus paracentralis, 5 Sulcus pararietooccipitalis, 6 Sulcus calcarinus, 7
Precuneus, 8 Cuneus, 9 Visual cortex, 10 Gyrus parahippocampalis, 11 Uncus, 12 Fornix, 13 Tela
choroidea, 14 Commissura anterior, 15 Septum pellucidum, 16 Isthmus gyri cinguli, 17 Gyrus
dentatus, 18 Thalamus, 19 Adhesio interthalamica (modiﬁed according to Spitzer, in Duus:
Neurologisch-topische Diagnostik, Thieme 1990)
508                                                                  Appendix A: Neuroanatomy




Fig. A.6 Basal view of the cerebrum. Frontal lobe in red, occipital lobe in green, temporal lobe in
purple. 1 Fissura longitudinalis cerebri, 2 Gyri orbitales, 3 Gyrus rectus, 4 Bulbus olfactorius, 5
Tractus olfactorius, 6 Sulcus olfactorius, 7 Substantia perforata anterior, 8 Gyrus temporalis
inferior, 9 Gyrus parahippocampalis, 10 Uncus, 11 Chiasma opticum, 12 Corpora mamillaria, 13
Midbrain (modiﬁed according to Spitzer, in Duus: Neurologisch-topische Diagnostik, Thieme
1990)
Appendix A: Neuroanatomy                                                                           509




Fig. A.7 The most important inner structures of the cerebrum (frontal section). 1 Cerebral cortex,
2 Corpus callosum, 3 Ncl. caudatus, 4 Putamen, 5 Globus pallidus, 6 Thalamus, 7 Claustrum of
insula, 8 Capsula interna, 9 Lateral ventricles, 10 Third ventricle, 11 Fissura longitudinalis cerebri,
12 Sulcus lateralis, 13 Fossa lateralis, 14 Insular cortex
510                                  Appendix A: Neuroanatomy




Fig. A.8 View on the limbic system
Appendix A: Neuroanatomy                    511




Fig. A.9 Projections of the limbic system
