Chapter 3
Hormones and Economic Decisions

Amos Nadler and Paul J. Zak




Abstract Hormones are chemical messengers released into the body that change
the probability of behavior. Because hormones are both measurable and manipu-
lable they lend themselves to experimental methodology that can establish causal
relationships. Neuroeconomics studies have shown hormones’ influence on
decision-making using quantiﬁable treatment and outcome variables in economic
and social contexts. This chapter provides background and methodology for hor-
monal research in neuroeconomics and reviews signiﬁcant studies on how oxytocin,
testosterone, arginine vasopressin, dopamine, serotonin, and stress hormones
impact decisions, and how research can be used to improve decisions and the
business of life.



3.1    Introduction

The traditional approach to economic research employs a set of simplifying
assumptions on human behavior from which to describe and predict choices. These
assumptions provide a rigid framework for analyzing decision-making and facilitate
models that generate predictions that can be empirically tested. For the second half
of the twentieth century, theoretical modeling of people as ‘rational agents’ was
economics’ state-of-the-art methodology. However, as much as simplifying
assumptions make questions analytically tractable, they also obviate the richness in
behavior from the very element under analysis: human beings (Vercoe and Zak
2010).



A. Nadler
Ivey Business School, Western University, 1255 Western Road, London, ON N6G 0N1,
Canada
e-mail: anadler@ivey.ca
P.J. Zak (&)
Claremont Graduate University, 150 E 10th St, Claremont, CA 91711, USA
e-mail: paul@neuroeconomicstudies.org; paul.zak@cgu.edu

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                           41
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_3
42                                                             A. Nadler and P.J. Zak

    Neoclassical economic models of decision-making involve rational and pre-
dictable economic agents who have speciﬁc and well-deﬁned utility functions based
on ordered, transitive preferences. Yet observation of actual people shows the
opposite—rapid, heuristic-driven decisions, and decades of psychological and
neuroscientiﬁc studies show that memories, cues, primes, and emotions affect
decisions (Camerer et al. 2005). Fortunately, economics has continued to evolve by
producing richer and more accurate models of human behavior, with more realistic
assumptions, greater conformability with empirical data, and deviations from
rationality. Models have advanced and new tools have been (cautiously) adopted,
such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), neurophysiology, genetics,
and direct manipulation of hormones. While ignored until recently, hormones have
been shown to initiate and mediate changes in the central and peripheral nervous
systems and affect economic decisions (Zak 2013; Kandasamy et al. 2014; Camerer
et al. 2005).
    Economists have traditionally been constrained by the type of data at their
disposal and relied on archival (i.e., secondary) data to generate ﬁndings. In con-
trast, the natural sciences produce models largely based on primary data from which
causal relationships are identiﬁed—data informs the model, not the other way
around. Instead of the formation of a multitude of models bearing similar
explanatory power, this inductive method offers what Francis Bacon called a “se-
lective process of elimination among a number of alternative possibilities’’ (1895,
III, p. 340). The experimental approach to studying economic behavior produces
primary data from which to draw conclusions. In particular, hormonal and physi-
ologic research offers a robust inductive method to study biological influence on
economic decision-making and produce neurally informed models of human
behavior (Zak 2010). Most importantly, direct manipulation of hormones and
physiologic states has begun to identify biological mechanisms motivating speciﬁc
behaviors.
    Over the course of evolution mammals developed two integrated communication
systems—one faster, and one slower—to respond to changing environments and
regulate homeostasis (i.e., physiologic stability). The nervous system communicates
rapidly through neurotransmitters and neuromodulators while the hormonal system
uses molecular messengers which cause both temporary and permanent changes in
the body . In essence, hormones are chemical messengers that change the proba-
bility of a behavior or biological function and are the focus of this chapter.
    Hormones have long been known to influence physiologic states, physical
development, and genetic transcription in humans and animals yet recent devel-
opments show hormones impact cognition, mood, and, most recently, economic
decision-making. Neuropeptides, such as oxytocin and arginine vasopressin, and
steroid hormones, such as testosterone and estradiol, play a central role in humans
in a variety of behavioral and social domains (McCall and Singer 2012).
Economics’ founding father, Adam Smith, connected emotions and morality to
prosperity; Thorstein Veblen stated that economics should be thought of as a ﬁeld
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                             43

of biology and that only social science shaped by biology could be considered
‘scientiﬁc’ (Hodgeson 1998). Alfred Marshall, one of the exponents of mathe-
matical rigor within economics, wrote that, “the Mecca of the economist lies in
economic biology rather than in economic dynamics” (1890). By putting human
beings back at the center of economic analysis, neuroeconomics returns economics
to its roots.



3.2    Hormones Deﬁned

Hormones are chemical messengers that circulate in biofluids (e.g., blood) to reg-
ulate physiologic activity and maintain homeostasis (the ability to maintain and
regulate internal physical equilibrium regardless of external changes) by acting on
targets organs. Hormone production is regulated by the brain and mostly produced
by organs in the periphery of the body, such as the kidneys, pancreas, and gonads
(although some hormones and their precursors are made in the brain itself). Most
hormones have receptors in the brain that allow them directly affect neural activity.
    For example, in men, testosterone (T) is produced primarily by the Leydig cells
in the testes in response to hormonal signaling from the brain (Midzaka et al. 2009).
T is synthesized from cholesterol and released into the bloodstream. Further, it
crosses the blood-brain barrier in small quantities due to high lipid solubility,
modulating neural activity in the brain that changes, for instance, the threshold for
aggression (Schwartz and Pohl 1992). T is also made by women, though at 5–10 %
the levels in men, and has similar effects (Carré et al. 2010). For those interested in
the assessment of hormones and related methodological issues we recommend
Chap. 24, “Hormones” by Robert Miller and Clemens Kirschbaum in this book.



3.3    Mechanisms of Action

Once produced and attached to cell receptors, hormones initiate changes in the body
at two levels: genomic1 and non-genomic (also called classical and nonclassical,
respectively). Genomic action occurs when a hormone attaches to a target cell
receptor and initiates genetic transcription; this occurs on a time scale of hours to
years (Falkenstein et al. 2000). For example, testosterone influences transcription of
genes by interacting with receptors on the outside of the cell, initiating muscle
growth and secondary sexual characteristics in males (Beato 1996). Non-genomic
action, on the other hand, occurs by changing characteristics of cells themselves,

1
 Hormones differ in their endogenous release patterns and active half-lives (Santen and Bardin
1973). Genetic factors mediate receptor availability and molecular metabolism, meaning that no
two people are precisely the same in the way they respond to the same hormone; this aspect can be
measured in some studies (Crabbe et al. 2007).
44                                                               A. Nadler and P.J. Zak

and acts much more rapidly, on the scale of seconds to minutes (Lösel et al. 2003;
McEwen 1991; Falkenstein et al. 2000). Evidence of this has been demonstrated
experimentally with T, whereby infusion reduces anxiety in many animals,
including humans (van Honk et al. 2005; Frye and Seliga 2001).
    Studying hormonal influences on decision-making requires a comprehensive,
multi-pronged approach. The ‘basal model’ proposed by Mazur and Booth (1998),
uses endogenous (‘within the body’), or basal levels as predictors of behavior,
whereby participants’ unaltered hormone levels are measured and used as
explanatory variables. This model assumes that measurements over time represent
short-term fluctuations near characteristic levels. For example, Sapienza et al.
(2009) study basal levels among MBA students to predict risk aversion and career
choice.
    An approach better suited to identifying causation, is the exogenous (‘outside the
body’) manipulation method, whereby participants are given a speciﬁc amount of a
drug to increase their levels of a hormone (or block the action of a hormone or
neurotransmitter on receptors). This methodology tests ‘activational’ properties of a
hormone, provides a clear treatment that can be compared to placebo, and lends
itself to rigorous manipulation veriﬁcation through biofluid assay. For example,
Kandasamy et al. (2013) test the influence of cortisol (a stress hormone) on risk
preferences by increasing participants’ stress hormone levels through hydrocorti-
sone dosing and measuring changes in risk preferences over time.
    A related method is through precursor manipulation, which can enhance or
impair availability of the speciﬁed molecule. For example, a study tested the effects
of dopamine (abbreviated ‘DA’) inhibition by administering participants naltrexone
(a DA receptor blocker) in an asset trading experiment to test how impaired DA will
affect behavior and market bubbles (Efremidze and Zak, in press). Also, modulation
of chemical precursors are also used in experiments, such as tryptophan depletion or
enhancement (Crockett and Fehr 2013).
    Another approach evaluates changes in levels as predictors of behavior. This can
be applied to both endogenous and exogenous contexts, where instead of using
basal levels, percent change or absolute change from baseline is used as an
explanatory variable. Apicella et al. (2014) test the influence of changes in T on
willingness to compete and ﬁnd a positive relationship.
    In addition to explaining behavior, changes in hormones are used to measure
physiologic response to an event, such as competition, winning, and losing (Booth
et al. 1989). Understanding the process fully—the hormonal response to an event
and the subsequent change in behavior motivated by a change in hormones—
clariﬁes the hormonal role in dynamic human decision-making.
    Findings are generally not as strong for basal levels relative to exogenous
methods (Schipper 2015; Apicella et al. 2008; Cueva et al. 2015). Also, matching
endogenous range with exogenous amounts can be challenging due to difﬁculties in
measurement of endogenous amounts and clear understanding of receptor sensi-
tivity and regulation under various conditions.
    Experimentally manipulating a single hormone can produce changes in behavior,
yet behavior is jointly driven by downstream interactions between hormones,
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                           45

neurotransmitters (chemical messengers in the brain), neural activity, and physio-
logic tone. Thus, conclusions drawn from pharmacologic manipulations are con-
ditional on basal physiologic states and interactions with other biological factors
(Zak 2004, 2005, 2011; Breedlove et al. 2007, p. 123). As a result, a thorough assay
of basal physiology is necessary, which can also be assessed using electroen-
cephalograms (EEGs), electrocardiograms (ECGs), and galvanic skin response
(GSR). Unfortunately, neurotransmitters are difﬁcult to measure directly without
invasive and risky approaches (such as lumbar punctures to harvest spinal fluid) and
are therefore typically indirectly assessed in human studies through, for example,
urine collection to measure breakdown products.
    A convergent approach is necessary to fully understand how hormones affect
human decision-making. The ﬁrst step is to assess basal physiologic state. Step two
measures endogenous hormonal response to stimuli. The ﬁnal step establishes
causation by exogenously administering or inhibiting a hormone and measuring
changes in behavior. This comprehensive approach is necessary because all
physiologic systems are noisy and this approach helps avoid false-positive results.
In this way, endogenous effects are demonstrated as well as causal relationships
established. This method is summarized in Fig. 3.1.




Fig. 3.1 A complete assessment of the role of hormones on decisions requires showing that
(1) the endogenous hormones affect a particular behavior, and (2) that manipulating the hormone
changes the behavior
46                                                             A. Nadler and P.J. Zak


3.4     Laboratory Experiments

Despite the abundance and history of hormone research in medicine and biology,
the literature on hormones and economic decision-making is in early stages (Zak
2004). Hormonal neuroeconomics experiments were pioneered after animal
research suggested related hormonal roles in human behavior. Findings have been
both mixed and consistent in terms of convergence and replicability—some studies
show contradicting results and non-replicability for the same hormones, while other
hormones show corroborating patterns. In addition to testing for behavioral effect,
hormone research requires understanding the precise pathways, half-lives, inhibit-
ing and promoting qualities, and effect on other hormones, all of which are an
ongoing scientiﬁc endeavor. Among the multitude of hormones produced in the
human body, a subset is studied most closely and the majority of behavioral
research has focused on oxytocin, testosterone, estrogen, glucocorticoids (stress
hormones), arginine vasopressin, serotonin, and dopamine.
   Tasks commonly used in neuroeconomics research include the trust game
(TG) that measures trust and reciprocity, the ultimatum game (UG) that measures
generosity or selﬁshness and theory of mind, the dictator game (DG) that measures
unilateral altruism, and double auctions of assets (DAA) where participants trade an
asset of known value. The TG, UG, and DG measure by the amount of money
people choose to share with others under various experimental situations. The
participant who makes the ﬁrst decision is called Decision Maker 1 (DM1), and the
person receiving the transfer or responding is called Decision Maker 2 (DM2).
DAA experiments allow participants to buy and sell ﬁnancial assets in simpliﬁed
dynamic markets which simulate trading in ﬁnancial markets by allowing one to
make real-time decisions that respond to prices determined by the traders them-
selves (Smith et al. 1988). For a detailed overview on economic games we rec-
ommend reading of Chap. 2 “Games in Experimental Economics” by Claudia Civai
and Daniel R. Hawes in this book.



3.5     Speciﬁc Hormones

3.5.1    Oxytocin

Oxytocin (abbreviated ‘OT’) is a hormone named for its role in mammalian
reproduction (oxytocin means quick birth in Greek). In 1909, the English phar-
macologist and neurophysiologist Sir Henry Hallett Dale showed it causes uterine
contractions and isolated it, earning him the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
in 1936. Produced by the hypothalamus and secreted by the posterior pituitary
gland, OT is one of the few hormones that are directly synthesized in the brain and
released in the brain, peripheral circulation, and various organs including gas-
trointestinal tract and heart (Zak 2011; Kiss and Mikkelsen 2011).
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                 47

    Starting in the late 1970s animal research showed OT release was associated
with positive social behaviors and a groundbreaking study showed OT injection
initiated maternal behavior in rats toward biologically unrelated offspring (Pederson
and Prange 1979; Gimpl and Fahrenholz 2001). Convergent evidence pointed
toward likely analogous influences on human behavior, leading to incorporation in
economic decision tasks that provide active, measurable, and meaningful measures
of greed, prosociality, trust, and proﬁt maximization. By measuring and manipu-
lating hormones in these tasks, an understanding the role of OT in human social
behaviors has begun to emerge.
    The ﬁrst neuroeconomics study measuring and endogenously manipulating OT
in relation to economic decisions is by Zak et al. (2004) who show that the receipt
of trust signal is associated with higher peripheral OT. This study indicates
intentional trust in the TG was associated with higher OT levels as measured in
blood compared to individuals who received the same amount of money determined
by random draw. Further, the level of OT predicted the amount of money that was
reciprocated to the person who had shown trust. An analysis that extended the
sample size using the same protocol corroborated the ﬁndings (Zak et al. 2005a).
    A subsequent study was designed to causally connect OT to trusting behaviors
by manipulating intranasal administration. In a double-blind protocol, 24
International Units (IU) of synthetic OT or an equal quantity of placebo were
administered to participants who made decisions in four rounds of the TG with
random rematching with other participants each round (Kosfeld et al. 2005). Those
who received OT exhibited more than double the trust (as measured by monetary
transfers) compared to those who received the placebo. Decisions in control tasks,
such as choices among lotteries, as well as assessments of cognitive function were
unchanged between conditions. It is important to point out that OT infusion did not
increase allocations of money when the return on investment was determined by
chance, showing that administration affected only social decision-making.
    In similar studies, Baumgartner et al. (2008) found that the OT group did not
send more money to DM2, although they did send more money after being given
feedback about others’ monetary transfers. Klackl et al. (2012) and Ebert et al.
(2013) ﬁnd that OT infusion did not increase trust in the TG and the latter propose
OT acts as a modulator of social interaction rather than a prosocial neuropeptide.
Yao et al. (2014) show no main effect of OT trust restoration, yet the design and
objectives differ markedly, making the study incomparable to Kosfeld et al. (2005).
In a study of basal OT (i.e., without exogenous manipulation) Christensen et al.
(2014) test whether endogenous OT affects trust in an iterated DG and found no
association between repeated sampling and trusting decisions.
    Subsequent research found that 40 IU of intranasal OT increased generosity in
the UG, complementing ﬁndings regarding its effects on the TG (Zak et al. 2007).
In this study, OT did not affect decisions in unilateral DG. The authors included the
DG as a control task because it does not require an understanding of another’s
intentions to make a decision. This ﬁnding shows the importance of context and
structure to hormonal neuromodulation. A study by Mikolajczak (2010) showed
that OT does not affect people indiscriminately—participants in the OT condition
48                                                                A. Nadler and P.J. Zak

made larger monetary transfers but only to others who had trustworthy character-
istics. This suggests that multiple brain systems are involved in decisions and OT
interacts with neural inputs that influence choice, and extensive work shows OT
plays an influential role in proximal and distal prosocial behaviors.
    Endogenous OT release was stimulated using a video featuring a child with
terminal brain cancer and a change in OT correlated with the subjective experience
of empathy for the characters in the video (after controlling for distress) (Barraza
and Zak 2009). High levels of empathic concern predicted larger donations to the
charity that produced the video. This study identiﬁed a psychological mechanism
behind the effect of OT on behavior, and connected its ﬁndings to large literatures
in psychology and moral philosophy regarding the role of empathy in prosocial
behaviors (see Zak 2011). The causal effect of OT on distal prosocial behaviors was
demonstrated by Barraza et al. (2011) who show a causal yet conditional effect of
OT of increased donations to known charities among those who donated. Other
studies show exogenous OT increases gaze to the eyes (Guastella et al. 2010),
enhances social memory (Guastella et al. 2010), as well as improving emotional
recognition among youth with autism (Guastella et al. 2010).
    The mechanism by which hormones are released throughout the body and, most
importantly, pass the blood-brain-barrier and reach the brain, is central to this area
of research (McEwan 2004). Carson et al. (2015) show that plasma OT concen-
trations signiﬁcantly and positively predict cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) OT concen-
trations while Kagerbauer et al. (2013) show no correlation. In a small study,
Striepens et al. (2013) tested the effects of exogenous OT on CSF and plasma and
show differential time-courses following administration: plasma concentrations
peaked 15 min after administration and CSF levels were signiﬁcantly higher
75 min later with no signiﬁcant correlation between the two biofluids. Relatedly,
OT half-life is between 3 and 4.5 min (Rydén and Sjöholm 1969). Given the broad
distribution of OT receptors throughout the body it is likely that release between
brain and other organs is related but not necessarily coupled. The mechanism by
which exogenous administration increases physiologic levels is still under inves-
tigation with several feasible explanations.
    Further studies have brought closer attention to measurement methodology in
hormone research. The extraction method long used in biomedical research was
eschewed in the early 2000s, which complicates clear interpretation of data from
those studies. Extraction is the process of removing distinct physical products prior
to assay extraction by separation of OT from its biological matrix (e.g., saliva). This
facilitates avoiding measuring compounds resembling the substance of interest as
unextracted samples contain molecules similar to OT and can drastically distort its
measurement—extracted and unextracted OT measurements differ by orders of
magnitude. McCullough et al. (2014) discuss the evolution of measurement stan-
dards and the incommensurate results stemming from lack of standardization and
distortions in measurement caused by measuring unextracted samples. Christensen
et al. (2014) test differential sensitivity between ELISA (enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays) and RIA (radioimmunoassay) to extraction as part of
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                   49

their experimental paper and, although both methods show signiﬁcant sensitivity,
the former has higher sensitivity to extraction.
   The path of oxytocin research is exciting and exempliﬁes the importance of
assessing if, why, and how endocrinological mechanisms impact decisions. In
addition to understanding the basic biology underlying OT release, half-life, and
physiologic distribution, researchers need reliable behavior paradigms for testing
the effects of OT on decision-making. As with any type of biological research, OT
studies require adaptation and inclusion of new technology and a movement toward
standardization to advance research to fully understand its function.



3.5.2    Testosterone

Testosterone (abbreviated ‘T’) is a gonadal hormone present in both sexes, with a
receptor for it in every cell in the body. T varies seasonally as well as daily,
producing a diurnal cycle that peaks in the early morning and declines throughout
the day (Brambilla et al. 2009). Gonadal hormones can be both slow and fast acting,
causing both long- and short-term effects. Long-term effects are caused by passive
diffusion into cells where they bind to steroid-receptor complex, then DNA, and
change gene transcription; fast action is caused by direct action on neurons with
corresponding receptor cells. T affects not only the path of neuroanatomic and
physiologic development (organizational effects) in mammals but also behavior
throughout the lifespan (Thilers et al. 2006). Men’s T levels peak around age 20 and
decrease with age.
    T has been extensively studied in medicine in relation to physical development,
puberty, fertility, and pathology. It has been shown to affect mood, aggression,
sexuality, and more recently, ﬁnancial behavior (Nadler et al. 2016; Cueva et al.
2015). In addition to affecting—and being affected by—aggressive behavior,
gonadal hormones are related to competition, spatial tasks, memory, certain sen-
sation seeking scales, and risk preferences (Cherek et al. 1996; Roberti 2004;
Apicella et al. 2008; Sapienza et al. 2009; Goudriaan et al. 2010).



3.5.3    Basic Biology of Testosterone

Steroid hormones are synthesized from precursors in the smooth endoplasmic
reticulum, processed further in the mitochondria, and returned to the smooth
endoplasmic reticulum for completion. Both steroid and steroid-like hormones are
not stored in vesicles and simply diffuse out of cells after synthesis at a rate
governed by production. Leydig cells produce T in response to hormonal signaling
from the pituitary gonadotropin luteinizing hormone (LH) (Midzaka et al. 2009;
Haider 2004; Mendis-Handagam 1997). Adult Leydig cell production depends on
the pulsatile secretion of LH into peripheral circulation by the pituitary gland (Ellis
50                                                                      A. Nadler and P.J. Zak

et al. 1983). T (which is produced in the ovaries in women) is a precursor to
estrogen, and estrogen is a metabolite of T (the testes produce some estrogen).
Despite the stereotype, T is not an exclusively male hormone, as estrogen is not
exclusively female, and their proportions vary by gender and (wildly) by species.



3.5.4     Types of Testosterone

There are three types of T frequently analyzed in medical and behavioral literature:
total T, Free T, and DHT (androstenedione is discussed primarily in medical lit-
erature2). T circulates in the body primarily bound (98 %) to serum proteins, mostly
sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin; only 1–2 % of serum T is not
protein-bound (Dunn et al. 1981). Due to the fact that SHBG binds T with high
afﬁnity and the off time of T bound to SHBG is remarkably slow, SHBG-bound T is
considered unavailable for dissociation to act onto target tissues via classical
androgen receptor mechanisms (Pardridge et al. 1979). Albumin-bound T is
low-afﬁnity and dissociation is rapid (Manni et al. 1985). Consequently, both
albumin-bound T and free T are considered available for androgen action, and are
called ‘bioavailable’ or ‘non-SHBG-bound’ T (Matsumoto and Bremner 1984).



3.5.5     Total T

Serum T, also known as Total T (TT), plays an important role in the clinical evaluation
of numerous common endocrine disorders, such as hypogonadism, and delayed or
precocious puberty in males, as well as a variety of conditions in females. Routine
assays began approximately 40 years ago and required chromatographic separation.
Today, assays are more precise, speciﬁc, require less blood, and nonradioactive
methods (Stanczyk and Clarke 2010; Matsumoto and Bremner 1984).



3.5.6     Free T

Forty-four percent of circulating T is bound to sex hormone-binding globulin
(SHBG), 50 % to albumin, and 3–5 % to cortisol binding globulin, leaving about


2
 Androstenedione (A), also known as ‘Andro’, is a steroid hormone produced in the gonads and
adrenal glands in men and women. Androstenedione an intermediate step in the biochemical
pathway that produces T and estrone and estradiol. This hormone was at the center of controversy
of baseball players and androgen use in the 1990s. Leder et al. ﬁnd that sufﬁciently high doses
(300 mg) oral A increase serum T and estradiol in some healthy men, supporting the rationale of
the ban issued by the World Anti-Doping Agency (2000).
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                  51

2–3 % T free (FT). Bioavailable T is the free circulating in addition to the
albumin-bound portion. Salivary T represents the portion of plasma T that diffuses
passively across salivary glands (Arregger et al. 2007). It is from this small percent
of total T that FT can be aromatized via 5-alpha reductase to dihydrotestosterone.



3.5.7    Dihydrotestosterone

Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) is converted from T through the action of 5-alpha
reductase in peripheral tissue. Both T and A are precursors of DHT (Ito and Horton
1971). As mentioned above, of total T, there is but a small amount of free T
available for conversion. As discussed earlier, androgens act at transcriptional
levels of gene expression via classical androgenic processes by passively diffusing
through cell membranes and ‘locking’ into their respective receptors. Yet evidence
has accumulated that some steroids may also alter neuronal excitability through
interactions with speciﬁc neurotransmitter receptors at the scale of milliseconds to
seconds (Rupprecht and Holsboer 1999). DHT binds faster (Hemat 2004) and
remains in the cell longer (Grino et al. 1990) than TT due to higher receptor afﬁnity,
thereby likely to have more signiﬁcant behavioral effects.



3.5.8    T in Behavioral Experiments

Behavioral studies involving T include basal levels, changes in endogenous levels,
and exogenous administration. Burnham (2007) found that DM2 males with higher
T rejected low offers more than their lower T counterparts in the UG. Endogenous
variations in T have been shown to increase patience for monetary rewards for
non-impulsive participants, while reducing discount rates for impulsive partici-
pants, showing an inverted-U-shape (Takahashi et al. 2006). Higher T males were
also more likely to make utilitarian decisions in ‘trolley car’ problems (lives sac-
riﬁced to save other lives) compared to lower T males (Carney and Mason 2010).
   Apicella et al. (2014) ﬁnd that participants who showed an increase in T were
more willing to compete. These ﬁndings may suggest ‘hormonal typology’ among
individuals, making behavior partly explainable by baseline levels and reactivity to
particular hormones. Zak et al. (2005b) showed that men had a rise in DHT when
distrusted by receiving small amounts of money as DM2 in the TG. High DHT
levels were associated with little or no reciprocation, and partially explain the
gender gap in reciprocity in the TG in which women reciprocate more money on
average than men.
   The challenge with relying on endogenous levels or changes is that hormone
release is noisy and subject to interindividual heterogeneity, thereby yielding
unreliable control and identiﬁcation. Using extensively studied exogenous treat-
ments helps solve these problems as their pharmacokinetics and associated risks
52                                                                         A. Nadler and P.J. Zak

have been extensively studied in medical research (Swerdloff et al. 2000).3 For
example, typical starting dosage is 50 mg of T (and often increased to 100 mg),
providing researchers with a basis for administering quantities with a predictable
effect on circulating levels. Providing insight about immediate changes of exoge-
nous T, Eisenegger et al. (2013) test the effects of T (and estradiol) administration in
young men and demonstrate a rapid rise with a peak in serum T reached at 3 hours
post-administration. Tuiten et al. (2000) show sublingual T caused sharp rise in
serum T within 15 min (with a return to baseline after 90 min) and lagged increases
in genital arousal in women. In another pharmacokinetics study of females, van
Rooij et al. (2011) show sublingual T showed dose-dependence and peak levels
reached in 15 min and return to baseline within 2.5 h. Yet despite vast medical
literature on androgens, behavioral studies with exogenous T are limited.
    Zak et al. (2009) manipulated T pharmacologically in male participants playing
the UG. In this within-subject s study, participants received 10 g of Androgel®
(1 % testosterone gel) on one visit and a placebo gel on another. Blood samples
were obtained before and after substance administration to quantify the rise in T as
well as to assess parametric effects of T on behavior. The authors showed that T
decreased DM1 offers as well as increased the minimum acceptable offers by
DM2 s. Both these effects scaled positively with three measures of T (T, free T,
DHT). This ﬁnding is consistent with a known physiologic mechanism in which
high levels of T inhibit the release of OT (Insel et al. 1993). A similar paper with
females only by Eisenegger et al. (2010) purported to show the opposite effect. In
the study, 0.5 mg of sublingual T or placebo was administered to women in a
between-subjects study, absent an assessment of the rise in T (baseline T was
measured). The authors found no main effect of T on UG offers or rejections when
compared to placebo, yet found that T increased UG offers if one controls for the
substance participants believed they received (Eisenegger et al. 2010, online sup-
plementary material).
    Additional manipulation studies include Bos et al. (2010), who tested the rela-
tionship between T and distrust among women in a placebo-controlled
within-subject design and found that T reduced ratings of trustworthiness when
viewing pictures of men’s faces. Boksem et al. (2013) study the effects of exoge-
nous on trust and reciprocity and show it inhibits trust and promotes reciprocity.
Hermans et al. and Goetz et al.’s fMRI studies show that T increases neural
reactivity to threat. Wibral et al. (2012) study lying and ﬁnd that T reduces it
relative to placebo. The role of T in asset trading behavior was assessed using a
DAA paradigm (Nadler et al. under review) who found the sessions with high T
traders resulted in larger asset bubbles compared to placebo sessions due to higher
T participants bidding higher prices. Cueva et al. (2015) show that participants who

3
 Due to the rise of easily obtainable drugs and associated advertising to remedy “low testosterone
syndrome” or “andropause”, a large and growing proportion of men is currently using Androgel®
(and similar generics), and many inject even higher doses (Baillargeon et al. 2013; Handelsman
2013). In fact, the proliferation of these drugs among ﬁnancial professionals allows our experiment
to mimic the “testosterone shock” in real-world asset markets such as the NYSE.
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                 53

received exogenous testosterone had a higher willingness to invest in high-variance
stocks. Nave et al. (under review) show exogenous T reduced men’s ability to
inhibit instinctive and incorrect responses in the Cognitive Reflection Task while
having no impact on mathematical skills, task engagement, or motivation in a large
(n = 243) sample of young men. This result, supported by previous evidence of T
increasing impulsivity, suggests T ‘nudges’ decision-making toward rapid and
intuitive processing.
   A related mechanism for these ﬁndings is that T correlates with willingness to
engage in competition and decrease risk aversion via allosteric modulation of
GABAA receptors (Reddy and Jian 2010; Carré and McCormick 2008). In addition,
dopamine, which is associated with risk-taking, positively co-varies with T and may
contribute to the sensation seeking aspect of ﬁnancial trading though further work is
needed to identify T’s effect on risk per se (Szczypka et al. 1998).



3.5.9    2D-4D Ratio

The ratio of second to fourth ﬁnger (2D:4D) has been (inconsistently) shown to
negatively correlate with prenatal T exposure and that men have a lower 2D:4D
ratio than women (Manning et al. 2004, 1998). Apicella et al. (2008) found that
2D:4D does not signiﬁcantly correlate with economic risk-taking and Apicella et al.
(2015) show males displaying higher ratios than women among Hadza tribe
members. Contrarily, Sapienza et al. (2009) reported that 2D:4D ratio and salivary
T negatively correlated with risk aversion and that high T individuals chose higher
risk professions (ﬁnance, broadly deﬁned). Coates (2012) found that 2D:4D ratio
predicted high-frequency traders’ long-term proﬁtability as well as duration of
employment in the profession. Brañas-Garza and Rustichini (2011) ﬁnd that lower
2D:4D ratios are associated with greater risk-taking and higher abstract reasoning
scores among females (188 participants, 72 female).



3.5.10 Arginine Vasopressin

Arginine vasopressin (abbreviated AVP’) is a hormone synthesized in the
hypothalamus and stored in vesicles in the posterior pituitary. One of its primary
functions is water regulation in the body and has been shown to have behavioral
influences. Despite being molecularly similar to OT and lends itself to the same
endogenous and exogenous approaches to being studied, AVP has different
behavioral influences. Whereas OT facilitates bonding and trust, AVP is associated
with reactive aggression, stress-responses, and mate- and nest- guarding
(Bester-Meredith et al. 2005; Young and Wang 2004; Young et al. 1999). Coccaro
et al. (1998) show that AVP is positively associated with aggressive behavior for
men with personality disorders. AVP administration increases physical arousal,
54                                                             A. Nadler and P.J. Zak

biasing individuals to respond aggressively to neutral stimuli (Shalev et al. 2011;
Ebstein et al. 2009; Thompson et al. 2004). In regard to social perception,
Uzefovsky et al. (2012) show AvP administration leads to signiﬁcant decrease in
men’s recognition of others’ emotional states, while Kenyon et al. (2013) showed
no signiﬁcant effect of AVP in the same task.
   Rilling et al. (2011) found that AVP increased reciprocation after cooperation
with human partners as well as functional connectivity between the amygdala and
the anterior insula. Israel et al. (2012) found no influence of AVP on cooperative
behavior in a public goods game. Similarly, blood levels of AVP were unrelated to
distrust in the TG (Zak unpublished data). In addition, an AVP infusion study
produced no differences when compared to a placebo for a variety of economic
decisions (Zak 2011). Determining how AVP affects economic decisions will
require additional studies.



3.5.11 Dopamine

Dopamine (abbreviated ‘DA’) is a neurotransmitter (a chemical released by nerve
cells to communicate with other nerve cells) with a central role in human func-
tioning considered the ‘gas pedal’ to pursuing reward. Cell bodies of DA neurons
are mostly in the midbrain and release DA with nerve impulses (Moore and Bloom
1978). The DA system broadly encodes abstract information about reward. The
majority of midbrain dopamine neurons respond in unison to unpredicted rewards,
with remaining neurons unresponsive to stimuli (Tobler et al. 2005).
    The DA system encodes value and provides a signal of ‘pure reward’ vis-à-vis
its expectation. Put differently, it responds not to absolute rewards, but to their
reward relative to its expectation—the difference between them is known as reward
prediction error (RPE). Delivery of unexpected rewards increases phasic midbrain
activity while its absence decreases it (Schultz 2004). Together, the DA system
forms a reinforcement learning system that guides behavior and attention toward
optimal reward guided by experience and predictions of unknowns (For a com-
prehensive review see Schultz 1998). Based on an this extensive literature of animal
studies, neuroeconomics research has successfully shown DA’s role in predicting
and responding to monetary reward (Preuschoff et al. 2007).
    Pharmacological studies include increasing DA as well as blocking its receptors
and precursors. Menon et al. (2007) tested differential effects on BOLD responses
and found amphetamine treatment—which increases DA—caused larger BOLD
reward prediction errors in the midbrain. Efremidze and Zak (in press) test effects
on learning by blocking DA receptors with naltrexone in a DAA experiment and
ﬁnd interrupted reinforcement learning and larger and longer lasting price bubbles.
This result is consistent with Pessiglione et al. (2006) who show that participants
given L-DOPA (DA-promoting drug) performed better than those who received
haloperidol (drug that binds to DA receptors as an agonist but induces the opposite
response). Sevy et al. (2006) showed that tyrosine (a DA precursor) depletion
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                   55

impaired performance of the Iowa Gambling Task by increasing the weight to
temporally proximal outcomes. Thematically similar, Scarná et al. (2005) demon-
strate that participants underweighted magnitude of bad outcomes when given the
same branch chain amino acid (BCAA) mixture.
    Despite the multitudes of studies on this neurotransmitter, Rogers (2011) sum-
marizes the complicating factors associated with interpreting DA studies, which
include; (i) uncertainty about the pre versus postsynaptic actions; (ii) lack of
speciﬁcity of medications between receptor subtypes (pharmacological studies are
hamstrung by limited speciﬁty of agents administrable to humans); and
(iii) uncertainty about interaction of effects with participants’ ‘baseline’ abilities.
Also, ensuring experimental double-blind treatment is difﬁcult given the sometimes
nauseating effects of tryptophan depleting BCAA liquid given to participants
(Crockett and Fehr 2013).
    As mentioned earlier, biological systems are interconnected, and speciﬁc
molecules can promote as well as inhibit other molecules, as illustrated by DA and
serotonin; Daw et al. (2002) provide a summary of their opponency, and Cools
et al. (2011) discuss their complementarity.



3.5.12 Serotonin

In 1948 Maurice Rapport, Arda Green, and Irvine Page at the Cleveland Clinic
discovered a vasoconstrictor substance in blood serum affecting vascular tone and
named it serotonin (Abbreviated ‘5-HT’ due to its chemical formula). About 90 %
of it is in the gastrointestinal tract where it regulates intestinal movements and the
rest is synthesized in serotonogenic neurons where it regulates mood, appetite, and
sleep and plays important roles in cognition and learning (Berger et al. 2009).
    Experiments testing 5-HT on decisions suggests it affects risk-taking with
probabilistic outcomes, time discounting, impulsivity, and cooperation. In a study
of the effects of increasing 5-HT, Murphy et al. (2009) ﬁnd a signiﬁcant three-way
interaction between treatment, size of possible gains, and size of possible losses,
and suggest 5-HT modulates non-normative decision-making under uncertainty.
Doya (2002) proposes that 5-HT controls the time scale of reward prediction in a
theoretical model of integrated neuromodulatory learning, which is experimentally
supported by Crockett et al. (2010) who deplete 5-HT’s amino acid precursor
(tryptophan) and ﬁnd increased impulsive choice in a discounting task. They also
ﬁnd it jointly increased impulsive choice and altruistic punishment (i.e., rejecting an
unfair albeit nonzero offer), suggesting that 5-HT modulates self control and
impulsivity. In the same experiment, Crockett et al. (2008) show the 5-HT depletion
protocol increased rejection rates among unfair offers. Wood et al. (2006) ﬁnd that
5-HT depletion caused signiﬁcant reduction in cooperation in the PD on day 1 of a
cross-over, within-subject study.
56                                                               A. Nadler and P.J. Zak


3.5.13 Stress Hormones

The body responds to physical and psychological demands by releasing hormones,
and virtually all people can attest to their focusing and motivating effects in the
urgency of a deadline or exigency of a crisis. Stress hormones prepare the body to
engage in challenging tasks by focusing attention, increasing cardiovascular tone,
energy availability, and suppressing the immune system (Born et al. 1990; Axelrod
and Reisine 1984). Stress hormones have long been known to affect physiology and
new research shows their impact on economic and social decision-making.
    Mammalian physiology has complex and speciﬁc responses to the multitude of
threats and scenarios organisms are likely to face. Speciﬁc stress hormones are
released as follows: Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the anterior
pituitary, glucocorticoids (GCs) from the adrenal cortex, epinephrine from the
adrenal medulla, and norepinephrine from sympathetic nerves. Instead of a
one-size-ﬁts-all stress response, the body has an evolved ‘set’ of hormonal
responses ranging from fast release and brief influence to slower release with effects
of longer duration. The neural path, known as the sympathetic adrenomudullary
system, acts immediately upon exposure to stress, and releases adrenaline (epi-
nephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinepherine) from the adrenal medulla (Elmadjian
et al. 1957). The sympathetic nervous system reacts by temporarily increasing heart
rate, blood pressure, and perspiration, then returning them to baseline within
approximately 10 min (Het et al. 2009). The slower system involves reactions along
the hypothalamic-pituitary axis (HPA), starting with the release of
corticotrophin-releasing hormone, which stimulates release of hormones from the
adrenal cortex and precipitating changes in physiologic state that last 10–60 min
and sometimes longer (Sapolsky et al. 2010).
    Stress hormones have also recently been shown to affect decision-making and
risk preferences. A study using the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) showed that men
with elevated levels of cortisol, a long-acting stress hormone, performed more
poorly while women show an inverse relationship, performing best with slightly
elevated levels (van den Bos 2009). Putman et al. (2009) showed that elevating
stress hormones pharmacologically increased risky decision-making involving
potentially large rewards as well as risk-seeking choices when probability of loss
was high. A related study using the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) showed
that under high levels of stress, men tended to increase risk-taking while women
reduced it (Lighthall 2012). Kandasamy et al. (2013) also show that chronically
high stress hormones increase risk aversion, though acute elevation of stress hor-
mones does not.
    Stress hormones have been shown to play a role in discounting future gains, with
men showing a negative relationship between discounting and stress hormones, and
women showing a positive relationship (Takahashi 2010). Moral reasoning, too, has
been shown to be sensitive to stress, with higher stress correlating with less utili-
tarian choices among hypothetical personal moral dilemmas such as making a
life-or-death decisions (Youssef et al. 2012).
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                    57

   ACTH in particular has been shown to be a neurochemical signal that sustains
and increases visual attention (Born et al. 1990). Testing this in a consumer neu-
roscience paradigm, Lin et al. (2013) show that attending to a public service
announcement (PSA) causes signiﬁcantly higher ACTH release in both men and
women. The authors posit that ACTH sustains attention to the PSA and is requisite
for preparing action in market decisions.
   Together, these results suggest stress hormones are instrumental to species perpet-
uation by focusing attention on salient and relevant information and new evidence
shows tilting decisions toward outcomes more likely to ensure survival. Further, these
ﬁnding are in line with the proposition that stress hormones have an inverted-U effect
on cognition, affect and behavior—deﬁcient and excessive amounts of stress hinder
cognition while intermediate levels improve it (McEwan and Sapolsky 1995). Future
work will likely explore the interaction between stress and other hormones to better
understand their mutual influences on economic decisions.



3.5.14 Female-Speciﬁc Hormonal Influences

Sex differences exist in the brain, both in morphology and function (Cahill 2006).
For example, receptor afﬁnity for glucocorticoids is half as great in females than
males, which has implications for the direction and magnitude of their influence
between genders (Madeira and Lieberman 1995). Several studies show sex differ-
ences in the serotonin system as well as the analgesic effect of opioid peptides
(Nishizawa 1997; reviewed in Craft 2003). The prefrontal cortex, responsible for
executive function, has sex hormone receptors including the highest concentration
of estrogen receptors in the brain (Bixo et al. 1995). For a review of differences in
gender due to sex hormones see Collaer and Hines (1995).
   In addition to differences in neuroanatomy and function, hormonal variations drive
behavioral differences between men and women in decision-making. Buser (2012)
ﬁnds that women show less trust in the TG than men in menstrual and premenstrual
phases, but have similar trust to men in the middle stages of their cycles. As mentioned
above, Zak et al. (2004) showed that women in the luteal phase of their menstrual cycle
were less trustworthy in the TG than either men or women in the follicular phase.
Women’s satisfaction with life varies over the menstrual cycle through the interaction
of estradiol, progesterone, and OT (Grosberg et al. in review).
   Senior et al. (2007) found that women allocate more resources to
dominant-looking men during the follicular phase of their cycles, and allocate less
to non-dominant men during the luteal phase, suggesting a hormonal role for
resource allocation as a sexual signal. Miller et al. (2007) found that women
working in gentleman’s clubs earned more money during fertile phases of their
cycle. Zethraeus et al.’s (2009) randomized study of postmenopausal women found
no effect of T or estrogen in a modiﬁed DG, UG, TG, and risk aversion. Further
work is needed in ascertaining the hormonal role in gender differences in devel-
opment as well as activational properties of speciﬁc hormones.
58                                                               A. Nadler and P.J. Zak


3.6   Field Studies

Lab work builds the basic science underlying neurobehavioral influences on
decision-making and is the right place to start. However, we cannot faithfully
assume that people’s behavior in the lab will perfectly represent behavior outside
the lab; thus the ﬁeld is next frontier that offers radical improvement in ecological
validity. Fieldwork requires running studies outside tightly controlled environments
as well as learning how to interpret the surviving influences of biological vectors in
complex scenarios. Translating data from lab experiments is an integral aspect of
science and thus further work is needed to bring theory and reality into greater
congruence and be able to improve practice (See Harrison and List (2004) for a
thorough exposition of economic ﬁeld experiments). However, the signiﬁcant
challenge of adapting ﬁeld experiments to lab studies is ethical feasibility of
pharmacologic manipulation. For example, one could not use the same double-blind
T protocol used by Nadler et al. on actual traders at a trading ﬁrm without intro-
ducing substantial risk to the individual traders, employer, and the market.
    In one of the few ﬁeld studies involving hormones and economic behavior,
Coates and Herbert (2007) studied the relationship between T, stress hormones, and
trading performance in professional stock traders. They found that higher morning
T was associated with higher average returns (relative to recent trading perfor-
mance), and that cortisol increased with market volatility. The T ﬁnding is con-
sistent with greater risk-taking producing larger returns (following the security
market line), while the cortisol ﬁnding matches the neurophysiologic measurements
of foreign exchange traders in Lo and Repin (2002). Lo and Repin’s experiment
tested reactivity of securities traders by their quantiﬁable physiologic responses
driven by cognitive-emotional interactions during live trading and found hetero-
geneity in responses based on trading experience.
    Zak (2012) reports that a variety of rituals, such as soldiers marching, rugby
teams’ pre-match warm up, and a war dance by indigenous peoples in Papua New
Guinea are associated with increases in both OT and T. In these studies, OT was
associated with a sense of group afﬁliation, while changes in T appeared to rise due
to potential competition, consistent with the challenge hypothesis of T (Wingﬁeld
et al. 1990). This indicates that such rituals facilitate in-group bonding in response
to out-group aggression, demonstrating the interactive effect of hormones on
behavior.
    More ﬁeldwork is needed to assess the influence of hormones on
decision-making as it occurs in complex environments, and especially to translate
laboratory ﬁndings into problem-solving applications and intelligently inform
policy.
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                  59


3.7   Summary, Conclusions, and Future Directions

Hormones do much more than regulate homeostasis and initiate physiologic and
developmental changes. From moderating trust in strangers, to affecting how much
people pay for ﬁnancial assets, to shifting risk tolerance, hormones play an
important role in our economic and social lives.
    However, modeling hormonal influences on behavior is complicated. Many
hormones assert influence in nonlinear ways, often displaying inverted-U rela-
tionships between the quantity of a hormone and behavior (Zak 2010). Further,
hormones are released in pulses, can respond rapidly to environmental stimuli, and
vary dramatically over time meaning that hormonally based models will be com-
plicated (Santern and Bardin 1973). Finally, hormones vary in their timeframe of
effect and are influenced by and interact with agonist and antagonist hormones
(Breedlove et al. 2007, p. 123; Jackson et al. 1997) further complicating model
building. For example, despite clear results in the asset trading paradigm, T has
been shown to act as an allosteric modulator of GABAA receptors as well as
positively correlating with DA, which complicates simplistic modeling of its
influence through a simple, single channel. Another important question is whether
speciﬁc hormones affect high-level cognition, or whether they modulate lower level
processes and manifest as experimental shift variables (e.g., T increases risk-taking;
OT increasing trust). For these reasons we caution that adopting a mechanistic
perspective linking hormones to decisions that does not consider holistic neural
activity is likely to produce inaccurate predictions.
    Neuroeconomics studies of hormonal influences on decisions follow the
approach in the biological sciences where convergent evidence corroborates
hypotheses using a variety of methods. When studying hormones and
decision-making, we believe it is critical to use the three-stage process outlined
above: establish baselines, measure endogenous hormone changes, and assess the
impact of pharmacologic manipulation on speciﬁc, measurable behavior. Further,
hormones can be radio-tagged to show how they affect neural activity using PET,
and genetic assays can reveal relationships between different alleles and hormone
function, methods that are covered elsewhere in this book.
    An application of hormonal effects on behavior is in the design of institutions.
Institutions can mitigate risk, off-load cognition for difﬁcult decisions, and provide
external resources. Well-functioning institutions can reduce stress, increase OT, and
optimize performance and satisfaction. However, one of the signiﬁcant risks of this
research is simplistic interpretation and direct application to complex situations
without careful translation. For example, one of the most common questions we get
regarding the T and asset trading experiment is, “If testosterone causes men to trade
irrationally, and if women have less testosterone than men, why don’t you just have
women trade along with the men?” There is scientiﬁc (and anecdotal) evidence why
this ‘solution’ is unlikely to effectively reduce risk-taking among men, and actually
more likely to increase it (see Ronay and von Hippel 2010).
60                                                                        A. Nadler and P.J. Zak

    Nobel Prize winner Ronald Coase stated that, “the degree to which economics is
isolated from the ordinary business of life is extraordinary and unfortunate” (2012).
Neuroeconomics provides positive and normative improvements to the business of
life by identifying the mechanisms underlying economic decisions. By judiciously
applying its methods to extant problems, neuroeconomics can improve institutions,
individual happiness and performance, and society.



References

Arregger LNC, Alejandro L, Tumilasci OR, Aquilano DR, Cardoso EML (2007) Salivary
   testosterone: a reliable approach to the diagnosis of male hypogonadism. Clinic Endocrinol
   67:656–662
Apicella C, Dreber A, Campbell B, Hoffman M, Little A (2008) Testosterone and ﬁnancial risk
   preferences. Evol Hum Behav 29:384–390
Apicella C, Dreber A, Mollerstrom J (2014) Salivary testosterone change following monetary wins
   and losses predicts future ﬁnancial risk-taking. Psychoneuroendocrinology 39:58–64
Apicella CL, Tobolsky VA, Marlowe FW, Miller KW (2015) Hadza hunter-gatherer men do not
   have more masculine digit ratios (2D:4D). Am J Phys Anthropol 159: 223–32
Axelrod J, Reisine T (1984) Stress hormones: their interaction and regulation. Science 224:452–
   459
Bacon F, Selby FG (1895). The advancement of learning (Macmillan)
Baillargeon J, Urban R, Ottenbacher KK, Goodwin J (2013) Trends in androgen prescribing in the
   United States, 2001 to 2011. JAMA Intern Med 173(15):1465–1466
Barraza J, Zak P (2009) Empathy toward strangers triggers oxytocin release and subsequent
   generosity. Ann NY Acad Sci 1167:182–189
Barraza J, McCullough M, Zak PJ (2011) Oxytocin infusion increases charitable donations
   regardless of monetary resources. Horm Behav 60:148–151
Baumgartner T, Heinrichs M, Vonlanthen A, Fischbacher U, Fehr E (2008) Oxytocin shapes the
   neural circuitry of trust and trust adaptation in humans. Neuron 58(4):639–650
Beato M, Chavez S, Truss M (1996) Transcriptional regulation by steroid hormones. Steroids 61
   (4):240–251
Berg J, Dickhaut J, McCabe K (1994) Trust, reciprocity, and social history. Games Econ Behav
   10:122–142
Berger M, Gray J, Roth B (2009) The expanded biology of serotonin. Annu Rev Med 60:355–366
Bester-Meredith JM (2005) Manipulations of vasopressin alter aggression differently across testing
   conditions in monogamous and non-monogamous peromyscus mice. Aggressive Behav
   31:189–199
Bixo M, Backstrom T, Winblad B, Andersson A (1995) Estradiol and testosterone in speciﬁc
   regions of the human female brain in different endocrine states. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
   55:297–303
Boksem MA et al. (2013) Testosterone inhibits trust but promotes reciprocity. Psychol
   Sci:0956797613495063
Booth A, Shelley G, Mazur A, Tharp G, Kittok R (1989) Testosterone, and winning and losing in
   human competition. Horm Behav 23:556–571
Born J, Bathelt B, Pietrowsky R, Pauschinger P, Fehm H (1990) The influence of display
   characteristics on visual exploratory search behavior. J Consum Res 101:34–38
Bos P, Terburg D, van Honk J (2010) Testosterone decreases trust in socially naïve humans. PNAS
   107(22):9991–9995
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                                 61

Brambilla D, Matsumoto A, Araujo A, McCinlay J (2009) The effect of diurnal variation on
   clinical measurement of serum testosterone and other sex hormone levels in men. J Clin
   Endocrinol Metab 94(2):907–913
Brañas-Garza P, Rustichini A (2011) Organizing effects of testosterone and economic behavior:
   not just risk taking. PlosOne 6(12):e29842
Breedlove M, Rosenweig M, Watson N (2007) Biological psychology. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA,
   USA
Burham T (2007) High-testosterone men reject low ultimatum game offers. Proc R Soc B 274
   (1623):2327–2330
Buser T (2012) Digit ratios, the menstrual cycle and social preferences. Games Econ Behav
   76:457–470
Cahill L (2006) Why sex matters for neuroscience. Nat Rev Neurosci 7(6):1–8
Camerer C, Loewenstein G, Prelec D (2005) Neuroeconomics: how neuroscience can inform
   economics. J Econ Lit 43(1):9–64
Carney DR, Mason MF (2010) Decision making and testosterone: when the ends justify the
   means. J Exper Social Psychol 46(4):668–671
Carré J, McCormick C (2008) Aggressive behavior and change in salivary testosterone
   concentrations predict willingness to engage in a competitive task. Horm Behav 54:403–409
Carré J, Gilchrist J, Morrissey M, McCormick C (2010) Motivational and situational factors and
   the relationship between testosterone dynamics and human aggression during competition. Biol
   Psychol 84:346–353
Carson D et al. (2015) Cerebrospinal fluid and plasma oxytocin concentrations are positively
   correlated and negatively predict anxiety in children. Mol Psychiat 20(9):1085–1090
Cherek DR, Schnapp W, Moeller FG, Dougherty DM (1996) Laboratory measures of aggressive
   responding in male parolees with violent and nonviolent histories. Aggressive Behav 22(1):27–
   36
Christensen J, Shiyanov P, Estrepp J, Schlager J (2014) Lack of association between human
   plasma oxytocin and interpersonal trust in a prisoner’s dilemma paradigm. PLoS ONE 9(12):
   e116172
Coase R, Wang N (2012) Saving economics from the economists. Harvard Bus Rev 90(12):12–36
Coates J (2012) The hour between dog and wolf: risk-taking, gut feelings and the biology of boom
   and bust. HarperCollins, London, UK
Coates J, Herbert J (2007) Endogenous steroids and ﬁnancial risk taking on a london trading floor.
   PNAS 105(16):6167–6172
Coccaro E, Kavoussi RH, Cooper T, Ferris C (1998) Erebrospinal fluid vasopressin levels:
   correlates with aggression and serotonin function in personality-disordered subjects. Arch Gen
   Psychiatry 55:708–714
Collaer M, Hines M (1995) Human behavioral sex differences: a role for gonadal hormones during
   early development? Psychol Bull 118(1):55–107
Cools R, Nakamura K, Daw N (2011) Serotonin and dopamine: unifying affective, activational,
   and decision functions. Neuropsychopharmacology 36:98–113
Crabbe P, Bogaert V, De Bacquer D, Zmierczak H, Kaufman J (2007) Part of the interindividual
   variation in serum testosterone levels in healthy men reflects differences in androgen sensitivity
   and feedback set point: contribution of the androgen receptor polyglutamine tract polymor-
   phism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92(9):3604–3610
Craft R (2003) Sex differences in opioid analgesia: from mouse to man. Clin J Pain 19:175–186
Crockett M, Fehr E (2013) Social brains on drugs: tools for neuromodulation in social
   neuroscience. SCAN 1(5):nst113
Crockett M, Clark L, Tabibnia G, Lieberman M, Robbins T (2009) Serotonin modulates
   behavioral reactions to unfairness. Science 320(27):1739
Crockett M, Clark L, Tabibnia G, Lieberman M, Robbins T (2010) Impulsive choice and altruistic
   punishment are correlated and increase in tandem with serotonin depletion. Emotion 10
   (6):855–862
62                                                                        A. Nadler and P.J. Zak

Cueva C, Roberts RE, Spencer T, Rani N, Tempest M, Tobler PN, Herbert J, Rustichini A (2015)
    Cortisol and testosterone increase ﬁnancial risk taking and may destabilize markets. Sci Rep
    5:11206
Daw N, Kakade S, Dayan P (2002) Influential exposition of opponency between dopamine and
    serotonin in terms of coding average reward and punishment rates, and prediction errors.
    Neural Netw 15:603–616
Doya K (2002) Metalearning and neuromodulation. Neural Networks 15(4):495–506
Dunn J, Nisula B, Rodbard D (1981) Transport of steroid hormones: binding of 21 endogenous
    steroids to both testosterone-binding globulin and corticosteroid-binding globulin in human
    plasma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 53(1):58–68
Ebert A et al. (2013) Modulation of interpersonal trust in borderline personality disorder by
    intranasal oxytocin and childhood trauma. Soc Neurosci 8(4):305–313
Ebstein R, Israel S, Lerer E, Uzefovsky F, Shalev S, Gritsenko I et al (2009) Arginine vasopressin
    and oxytocin modulate human social behavior. Ann NY Acad Sci 1167:87–102
Efremidze L, Sarraf G, Miotto, K, Zak, PJ (in press) The Neural Inhibition of Learning Increases
    Asset Market Bubbles: Experimental Evidence. Journal of Behavioral Finance.
Eisenegger C, Naef M, Snozzi R, Heinrichs M, Fehr E (2010) Prejudice and truth about the effect
    of testosterone on human bargaining behaviour. Nature 463(21):356–361
Eisenegger C, von Eckardstein A, Fehr E, von Eckardstein S (2013) Pharmacokinetics of
    testosterone and estradiol gel preparations in healthy young men. Psychoneuroendocrinology
    38:171–178
Ellis G, Desjardins C, Fraser H (1983) Control of pulsatile LH release in male rats.
    Neuroendocrinol 37(3):177–183
Elmadjian F, Hope JM, Lamson ET (1957) Excretion of epinephrine and norepinephrine in various
    emotional states. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 17(5):608–620
Falkenstein E, Tillmann H-C, Michael C, Martin F, Martin W (2000) Multiple actions of steroid
    hormones—a focus on rapid, nongenomic effects. Pharmacol Rev 52:513–555
Frye C, Seliga A (2001) Testosterone increases analgesia, anxiolysis, and cognitive performance
    of male rats. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 1(4):371–381
Gimpl G, Fahrenholz F (2001) The oxytocin receptor system: structure, function, and regulation.
    Physiol Rev 81(2):629–683
Grino B, Grifﬁn J, Wilson J (1990) Testosterone at High Concentrations Interacts with the Human
    Androgen Receptor Similarly to Dihydrotestosterone*. Endocrinology 126:1165–1172
Grosberg D, Merlin R, Zak P (n.d.) What makes women happy: oxytocin release correlates with
    life satisfaction (in review)
Goudriaan AE et al. (2010) The influence of high-normal testosterone levels on risk-taking in
    healthy males in a 1-week letrozole administration study. Psychoneuroendocrinol 35(9):1416–
    1421
Guastella AJ et al. (2010) Intranasal Oxytocin Improves Emotion Recognition for Youth with
    Autism Spectrum Disorders. Biol Psychiat 67(7):692–694
Haider SG (2004) Cell biology of Leydig cells in the testis. Int Rev Cytol 233:181–241
Harrison G, List J (2004) Field experiments. J Econ Lit 1009–1055
Hemat RAS (2004) Principles Of Orthomolecularism
Het S, Rohleder N, Schoofs D, Kirschbaum C, Wolf O (2009) Neuroendocrine and psychometric
    evaluation of a placebo version of the trier social stress test. Psychoneuroendocrinology
    34:1075–1086
Hodgeson G (1998) On the evolution of Thornstein Veblen’s evolutionary economics. Camb J
    Econ 22:415–431
Holdcraft RW, Braun RE (2004) Hormonal regulation of spermatogenesis. Inter J Androl 27
    (6):335–342
Insel T, Young L, Witt D, Crews D (1993) Gonadal-steroids have paradoxical effects on brain
    oxytocin receptors. J Neuroendocrinol 5:619–628
Israel S, Weisel O, Ebstein R, Bornstein G (2012) Oxytocin, but not vasopressin, increases both
    parochial and universal altruism. Psychoneuroendocrinology 37:1341–1344
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                             63

Ito T, Horton R (1971) The source of plasma dihydrotestosterone in man. J Clinic Invest 50
    (8):1621
Jackson T, Richer J, Bain D, Takimoto G, Tung L, Horwitz K (1997) The partial agonist activity
    of antagonist-occupied steroid receptors is controlled by a novel hinge domain-binding
    coactivator L7/SPA and the corepressors N-CoR or SMRT. Mol Endocrinol 11(6):693–705
Kagerbauer SM et al. (2013) Plasma oxytocin and vasopressin do not predict neuropeptide
    concentrations in human cerebrospinal fluid. J Neuroendocrinol 25(7):668–673
Kandasamy N, Hardy B, Coates J (2013) Cortisol shifts ﬁnancial risk preferences. PNAS
Kandasamy N et al. (2014) Cortisol shifts ﬁnancial risk preferences. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111
    (9):3608–3613
Kenyon A, Alvares G, Hickie I, Guastella A (2013) The effects of acute arginine vasopressin
    administration on social cognition in healthy males. J Horm
Kiss A, Mikkelsen J (2011) Oxytocin-anatomy and functional assignments: a minireview. Endocr
    Regul 39(3):97–105
Klackl J, Pfundmair M, Agroskin D, Jonas E (2013) Who is to blame? Oxytocin promotes
    nonpersonalistic attributions in response to a trust betrayal. Biol Psychol 92(2):387–394
Kosfeld M, Heinrichs M, Zak P, Fischbacher U, Fehr E (2005) Oxytocin increases trust in humans.
    Nature 435(2):673–676
Lighthall N, Sakaki M, Vasunilashorn S, Nga L, Somayajula S, Chen E et al (2012) Gender
    differences in reward-related decision processing under stress. SCAN 476–484
Lin P-Y, Grewal NS, Morin C, Johnson WD, Zak PJ (2013) Oxytocin increases the influence of
    public service advertisements. PloS one 8(2):e56934
Lo W, Repin D (2002) The psychophysiology of real-time ﬁnancial risk processing. J Cogn
    Neurosci 14(3):323–339
Losel R, Wehling M (2003) Nongenomic actions of hormones. Nature 4:46–56
Madeira M, Lieberman A (1995) Sexual dimorphism in the mammalian limbic system. Prog
    Neurobiol 45:275–333
Manni A, Pardridge W, Cefalu W, Nisula B, Bardin C, Santner S et al (1985) Bioavailability of
    albumin-bound testosterone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 61(4):705
Manning J, Scutt D, Wilson J, Lewis-Jones D (1998) The ratio of 2nd to 4th digit length: a
    predictor of sperm numbers and concentrations of testosterone lutenizing hormone and
    oestrogen. Hum Reprod 13(11):3000–3004
Manning J, Stewart A, Bundred P, Trivers R (2004) Sex and ethnic differences in 2nd to 4th digit
    ratio of children. Early Hum Dev 80(2):161–168
Marshall A (1890) Principles of economics. Prometheus
Matsumoto AM, Bremner WJ (1984) Modulation of pulsatile gonadotropin secretion by
    testosterone in man*. J Clinic Endocrinol Metabol 58(4):609–614
Mazur A, Booth A (1998) Testosterone and dominance in men. Behav Brain Sci 21:353–397
McCall C, Singer T (2012) The animal and human neuroendocrinology of social cognition,
    motivation and behavior. Nat Neurosci 15(5):681–688
McCullough M, Churchland P, Mendez A (2013) Problems with measuring peripheral oxytocin:
    Can the data on oxytocin and human behavior be trusted? 37:1485–1492
McEwen B (1991) Genomic and non-genomic effects of steroïds on neuronal activity. Trends
    Pharmacol Sci 12:141–147
McEwan B (2004) Brain-fluid barriers: relevance for theoretical controversies regarding
    vasopressin and oxytocin memory research. Adv Pharmacol 50:531–592
McEwan B, Sapolsky R (1995) Stress and cognitive function. Curr Opin Neurobiol 5(2):205–216
Mendis-Handagama S (1997) Luteinizing hormone on Leydig cell structure and function. Histol
    Histopathol 12(3):869–882
Menon M, Jensen J, Vitcu I, Graff-Guerrero A, Crawley A, Smith M (2007) Temporal difference
    modeling of the blood-oxygen level dependent response during aversive conditioning in
    humans: effects of dopaminergic modulation. Biol Psychiatry 62:765–772
Midzaka A, Chena H, Papadopoulos V, Zirkina B (2009) Leydig cell aging and the mechanisms of
    reduced testosterone synthesis. Mol Cell Endocrinol 23:23–31
64                                                                         A. Nadler and P.J. Zak

Mikolajczak M, Gross J, Lane A, Corneille O, de Timary P, Luminet O (2010) Oxytocin makes
    people trusting. Not Gullible. Psychol Sci 21(8):1072–1074
Miller G, Tybur J, Jordan B (2007) Ovulatory cycle effects on tip earnings by lap dancers:
    economic evidence for human estrus? Evol Hum Behav 28:375–381
Moore R, Bloom F (1976) Central catecholamine neuron system: anatomy and physiology of the
    dopamine system. Ann Rev Neurosci 1:129–169
Murphy SE et al. (2009) The role of serotonin in nonnormative risky choice: the effects of
    tryptophan supplements on the “reflection effect” in healthy adult volunteers. J Cognitive
    Neurosci 21(9):1709–1719
Nadler A, Jiao P, Johnson C, Alexander V, Zak P (2016) The bull of Wall street: experimental
    analysis of testosterone and asset trading, under review
Nishizawa S et al (1997) Differences between males and females in rates of serotonin synthesis in
    human brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci 5308–5313
Pardridge W, Moeller T, Mietus L, Oldendorf W (1980) Blood-brain barrier transport and brain
    sequestration of steroid hormones. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab E96–E102
Pederson C, Prange JA (1979) Induction of maternal behavior in virgin rats after intracere-
    broventricular administration of oxytocin. PNAS 76(12):6661–6665
Pessiglione M, Seymour B, Flandin G, Dolan R, Frith D (2006) Dopaminedependent prediction
    errors underpin reward-seeking behaviour in humans. Nature 442:1042–1045
Preuschoff K, Bossaerts P, Quartz S (2006) Neural differentiation of expected reward and risk in
    human subcortical structures. Neuron 381–390
Putman P, Antypa N, Crysovergi P, van der Does J, Does W (2009) Exogenous cortisol acutely
    influences motivated decision making in healthy young men. Psychopharmacology 298:257–
    263
Rapport M, Green A, Page I (1948) Serum vasoconstrictor (serotonin) IV. Isolation and
    characterization. J Biol Chem 176(3):1243–1251
Reddy DS, Jian K (2010) The testosterone-derived neurosteroid androstanediol is a positive
    allosteric modulator of GABAA receptors. J Pharmacol Exper Therapeut 334(3):1031–1041
Rilling JK et al. (2012) Effects of intranasal oxytocin and vasopressin on cooperative behavior and
    associated brain activity in men. Psychoneuroendocrinol 37(4):447–461
Roberti JW (2004) A review of behavioral and biological correlates of sensation seeking. J Res
    Pers 38(3):256–279
Rogers RD (2011) The roles of dopamine and serotonin in decision making: evidence from
    pharmacological experiments in humans. Neuropsychopharmacol 36(1):114–132
Ronay R, von Hippel W (2010) The presence of an attractive woman elevates testosterone and
    physical risk taking in young men. Soc Psychol Pers Sci 1(57):57–64
Rupprecht R, Holsboer F (1999) Neuroactive steroids: mechanisms of action and neuropsy-
    chopharmacological perspectives. Trends Neurosci 22(9):410–416
Rydén G, Sjöholm I (1969) Half-life of oxytocin in blood of pregnant and non-pregnant women.
    Acta Endocrinol 61(3):425–431
Santen R, Bardin C (1973) Episodic analysis, clinical interpretation, physiologic mechanisms.
    J Clin Invest 52:2617–2628
Santern R, Bardin C (1973) Episodic luteinizing hormone secretion in man. J Clin Investig
    52:2617–2628
Sapienza P, Zingales L, Maestripieri D (2009) Gender differences in ﬁnancial risk aversion and
    career choices are affected by testosterone. PNAS 106(36):15268–15273
Sapolsky R, Romero M, Munck A (2010) How do glucocorticoids influence stress responses?
    Integrating permissive, suppressive, stimulatory, and preparative actions. Endocr Rev 2(1):55–
    89
Scarná A, McTavish S, Cowen P, Goodwin G, Rogers R (2005) The effects of a branched chain
    amino acid mixture supplemented with tryptophan on biochemical indices of neurotransmitter
    function and decision-making. Psychopharmacology 179:761–768
Schipper BC (2015) Sex Hormones and Competitive Bidding. Manage Sci 61:249–266
Schultz W (1998) Predictive reward signal of dopamine neurons. J Neurophysiol 25(1):236–245
3 Hormones and Economic Decisions                                                             65

Schultz W (2004) Neural coding of basic reward terms of animal learning theory, game theory,
    microeconomics and behavioural ecology. Curr Opin Neurobiol 14:139–147
Schwarz S, Pohl P (1992) Steroid hormones and steroid hormone binding globulins in
    cerebrospinal fluid studied in individuals with intact and with disturbed blood-cerebrospinal
    fluid barrier. Neuroendocrinology 55(2):174–182
Senior C, Lau A, Butler MJ (2007) The effects of the menstrual cycle on social decision making.
    Int J Psychophysiol 63(2):186–191
Sevy S, Hassoun Y, Bechara A, Yechiam E, Napolitano B, Burdick K et al (2006) Emotion-based
    decision-making in healthy subjects: short-term effects of reducing dopamine levels.
    Psychopharmacology 188:228–235
Shalev II (2011) Vasopressin needs an audience: neuropeptide elicited stress responses are
    contingent upon perceived social evaluative threats. Horm Behav 60:121–127
Smith V, Suchanek G, Williams A (1988) Bubbles, crashes, and endogenous expectations in
    experimental spot asset markets. Econometrica 56(6):1119–1151
Stanczyk F, Clarke N (2010) Advantages and challenges of mass spectrometry assays for steroid
    hormones. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 121:491–495
Striepens N et al. (2013) Elevated cerebrospinal fluid and blood concentrations of oxytocin
    following its intranasal administration in humans. Sci Rep 3:3440
Swerdloff R, Wang C, Cunningham G, Dobs A, Iranmanesh A, Matsumoto A et al (2000)
    Long-term pharmacokinetics of transdermal testosterone gel in hypogonadal men. J Clin
    Endocrinol Metab 85(12):4500–4510
Szczypka M, Zhou Q, Palmiter R (1998) Dopamine-stimulated sexual behavior is testosterone
    dependent in mice. Behav Neurosci 112(5):1229–1235
Takahashi T, Shinada M (2010) Stress hormones predict hyperbolic time-discount rates six months
    later in adults. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 31(5):616–721
Takahashi T, Sakaguchi K, Oki M, Homma S, Hasegawa T (2006) Testosterone levels and
    discounting delayed monetary gains and losses in male humans. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 27
    (4):439–444
The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (n.d.) Retrieved 27 Jan 2013, from Library of Economics
    and Liberty: http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/bios/Marshall.html
Thilers PP, Macdonald SW, Herlitz A (2006) The association between endogenous free
    testosterone and cognitive performance: a population-based study in 35 to 90 year-old men and
    women. Psychoneuroendocrinology 31(5):565–576
Thompson R, Gupta S, Miller K, Mills S, Orr S (2004) The effects of vasopressin on human facial
    responses related to social communication. Psychoendocrinology 29:35–48
Tobler P, Fiorillio C, Schultz W (2005) Adaptive coding of reward value by dopamine neurons.
    Science 307(5715):1642–1645
Tuiten A, van Honk J, Koppeschaar H, Bernaards C, Thijssen J, Verbaten R (2000) Time course of
    effects of testosterone administration on sexual arousal in women. Arch Gen Psychiatry
    57:149–153
Uzefovsky F, Shalev I, Israel S, Knafo A, Ebstein R (2012) Vasopressin selectively impairs
    emotion recognition in men. Psychoneuroendocrinology 37:570–576
van den Bos R, Harteveld M, Stoop H (2009) Stress and decision-making in humans: performance
    is related to cortisol reactivity, albeit differently in men and women.
    Psychoneuroendocrinology 34:1449–1458
van Honk J, Peper JS, Schutter DJ (2005) Testosterone reduces unconscious fear but not
    consciously experienced anxiety: implications for the disorders of fear and anxiety. Biol
    Psychiatry 58:218–225
van Rooij K et al. (2012) Pharmacokinetics of three doses of sublingual testosterone in healthy
    premenopausal women. Psychoneuroendocrinol 37(6):773–781
Vercoe M, Zak P (2010) Inductive modeling using causal studies in neuroeconomics: brains on
    drugs. J Econ Method 2:123–137
Wibral M, Dohmen T, Klingmüller D, Weber B, Falk A (2012) Testosterone administration
    reduces lying in men. PloS one 7(10):e46774
66                                                                         A. Nadler and P.J. Zak

Wingﬁeld JC, Hegner RE, Dufty AM, Ball GF (1990) The challenge hypothesis: theoretical
   implications for patterns of testosterone secretion, mating systems, and breeding strategies. Am
   Nat 829–846
Wood R, Rilling J, Sanfey A, Bhagwager Z, Rogers R (2006) Effects of tryptophan depletion on
   the performance of an iterated prisoner’s dilemma game in healthy adults.
   Neuropsychopharmacology 31:1075–1084
Yao S, Zhao W (2014) Oxytocin makes females, but not males, less forgiving following betrayal
   of trust. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 17:1785–1792
Young L, Wang Z (2004) The neurobiology of pair bonding. Nat Neurosci 7:1048–1054
Young L, Nilsen R, Waymire G, MacGregor G, Insel T (1999) Increased afﬁliative response to
   vasopressin in mice expressing the V1a receptor from a monogamous vole. Nature 400:766–
   768
Youssef F, Dookeeram K (2012) Stress alters personal moral decision making.
   Psychoneuroendocrinology 37:491–498
Zak P, Matzner W, Matzner W (2004) The neurobiology of trust. Ann NY Acad Sci 1032:224–227
Zak P, Borja K, Matzner W, Kurtzban R (2005a) The neuroeconomics of distrust: sex differences
   in behavior and physiology. Am Econ Rev Papers Proc 95(2):360–363
Zak PJ, Stanton AA, Ahmadi S (2007) Oxytocin increases generosity in humans. PloS one 2(11):
   e1128
Zak P (2011) Moral markets. J Econ Behav Organ 77(2):212–233
Zak P (2012) The moral molecule: the source of love and prosperity. Penguin New York
Zak P (2005) Trust: a temporary human attachment facilitated by oxytocin. Behav Brain Sci 28
   (3):368–369
Zak P, Kurtzban R, Matzner W (2005b) Oxytocin is associated with human trustworthiness. Horm
   Behav 48:522–527
Zak P, Kurzban R, Ahmad S, Swerdloff S, Park J (2009) Testosterone administration decreases
   generosity in the ultimatum game. PLOSone
Zethraeus N et al. (2009) A randomized trial of the effect of estrogen and testosterone on economic
   behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106(16):6535–6538
