Chapter 7
Emotion Regulation and Economic
Decision-Making

Renata M. Heilman, Andrei C. Miu and Daniel Houser




Abstract Emotion plays an important role in human social and economic
decision-making. Only in the last few decades has this view been accepted in
mainstream research by economists and psychologists studying decisional pro-
cesses. Many studies now provide compelling evidence that the experience of
various different emotions influence changes in decisional outcomes. Emerging
research on emotion regulation, however, highlights that humans typically make
efforts to control emotion experiences. This leaves open the possibility that decision
effects attributed to acute emotions may be affected by regulatory strategies. If so,
this raises the additional possibility that different regulation strategies could have
different implications for economic decisions. Researchers have recently begun to
study these possibilities and discovered that emotion regulation can indeed mod-
ulate effects that task-related and incidental emotions have on decisions. In this
chapter, we provide a review of the empirical studies that have investigated the
effects of regulatory strategies on social and economic decisions. We present an
overview of the concept of emotion regulation by referring to the different types of
regulatory strategies and their cognitive and behavioral effects. We proceed to
review empirical studies relevant for various types of decision-making, such as risk
and ambiguity, susceptibility to framing, and economic bargaining. We conclude by
discussing practical implications of this rapidly evolving research topic.




R.M. Heilman  A.C. Miu
Department of Psychology, Babes-Bolyai University,
37 Republicii, 400015 Cluj-Napoca, CJ, Romania
D. Houser (&)
Department of Economics and Interdisciplinary Center for Economic Science,
George Mason University, 4400 University Drive, MSN 1B2,
Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
e-mail: dhouser@gmu.edu

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                          113
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_7
114                                                                   R.M. Heilman et al.


7.1    Introduction1

Emotion plays an important role in human social and economic decision-making
(see, e.g., Elster 1998; Loewenstein 2000; Peters et al. 2006). People evaluate
objective features of alternatives in a subjective way (Edwards 1962; Kahneman and
Tversky 1979), and emotions influence these subjective evaluations (Loewenstein
and O’Donoghue 2004; Naqvi et al. 2006; Slovic et al. 2007). Emerging research on
emotion regulation (henceforth, ER), however, highlights that humans typically
make efforts to control emotion experiences (Gross 2002). This leaves open the
possibility that decision effects attributed to acute emotions may be affected by ER
strategies. If so, this raises the additional possibility that different regulation
strategies could have different implications for economic decisions. Only very
recently, however, have scholars begun to investigate these possibilities, and in
doing so have discovered that ER can indeed mediate effects that task-related and
incidental emotions have on decisions (Crockett et al. 2008; Kahneman and
Frederick 2007; Miu and Crişan 2011; Heilman et al. in preparation).
    The intrinsic role of emotion in decision holds greater importance when the value
of prospects (i.e., actions with uncertain rewards) is computed in “emotion-cognition
brain hubs” (Pessoa 2008) thought to include midbrain dopaminergic regions and
their targets (e.g., ventral and dorsal striatum, ventromedial and ventrolateral pre-
frontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex). For this reason, neuroeconomists have
emphasized that the interaction of emotion and decision-making is proﬁtably studied
in environments that include risk (where the decision-maker has perfect information
regarding the stochastic relationship between actions and outcomes) and uncertainty
(where the decision-maker does not have full information about the stochastic
environment; see, e.g., Rangel et al. 2008).
    When a human anticipates or experiences an emotion, s/he will often use
strategies to control that experience. It follows that ER, a concept subsuming the
processes controlling which emotions we have, when we have them, and how we
experience and express them (Gross 2002), could be crucial to decision-making as
well as other cognitive processes (e.g., memory; Richards and Gross 1999, 2000).
This chapter discusses the impact of ER on a variety of behaviors of particular
interest to economists, including environments that involve strategic and
non-strategic risk. Despite the fact that research in ER is relatively new, our chapter
cannot begin to cover the rapidly expanding literature in this area. Our approach has
been to include reviews of key ﬁndings connected to economic decision-making.
    Economists, and especially cognitive economists, will be especially interested in
understanding ER. A reason is that ER can be trained, manipulated, and controlled.
Moreover, different ER strategies generate predictable systematic differences in
people’s decisions in the face of the same emotion. An implication is that one might
be able to design decision support tools, or more generally economic institutions,
that encourage speciﬁc types of ER. This would seem to carry particular value when

1
This section draws in part from Heilman et al. (2010, pp. 257–258).
7 Emotion Regulation and Economic Decision-Making                                   115

decisions must be made in high-stress situations that create acute emotional
responses.
   The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In the next section we
discuss in greater detail the concept of emotion regulation. Following this is a broad
overview of ER’s impact on cognition and decision. The next section proceeds to
explain why and how ER can confound our inferences about the impact of emotion
on decision. The subsequent three sections discuss what we know about the impact
of ER in three speciﬁc contexts: choice under risk, choice under different frames,
and choices in bargaining environments. The ﬁnal section is a concluding
discussion.



7.2    What Is Emotion Regulation?

Obviously, people are not at the whim of their emotions. They can use a number of
regulation strategies designed to alter their emotional reactions. One of the most
influential current approaches in the study of emotion and emotion regulation
(ER) is the process model of emotions (Gross 1998a, b, 2002). The starting point of
Gross’s process model of ER is a concept of emotion that is shared with a number
of prior theorists (Ekman 1972; Frijda 1988). According to this model, it is the way
that we interpret or appraise external or internal events that mediates the emotional
impact that such events have on us. Such appraisals can be very rapid and do not
necessarily require our conscious awareness. An emotional response is triggered
whenever a situation is interpreted as presenting important opportunities or chal-
lenges. In the following phase, a biologically based emotion program is started and
its nature depends upon how the situation has been appraised (Lazarus 1991). As
soon as an emotional program has been triggered, changes at the behavioral, sub-
jective, or physiological levels prepare the individual for an adaptive response to the
situation that s/he has perceived (Ekman 1992). Although these response tendencies
help people respond quickly and adaptively, they can not enforce any given action
(Frijda 1988) due to the fact that emotional response tendencies can be modulated
(e.g., exaggerated, diminished, or even entirely inhibited) before they are expressed
as observable behaviors, emotion self-reports, or physiological changes (Gross and
Munoz 1995).
    ER is a construct that subsumes all the actions that people take in order to control
which emotions they have, when they have them and how they experience or
express those emotions (Gross 2002). Although the line of research on ER was
initially related to the developmental literature (Campos et al. 1983, 1989;
Thompson 1990, 1991), the adult literature on ER has rapidly expanded in the last
decade (e.g., Gross and Levenson 1993; Izard 1990; Ochsner and Gross 2005;
Gross and Thompson 2007).
    Because emotion unfolds over time, regulatory strategies can be distinguished in
terms of when they have their primary impact on the emotion-generative process
(Gross and John 2003). Generally, it is assumed that an emotion increases in
116                                                                 R.M. Heilman et al.

intensity over time and that the sooner one starts downregulating that emotion, the
more effective that intervention would be. Therefore, according to a generic timing
hypothesis of ER, early interventions would be more effective than late interven-
tions (Sheppes and Gross 2011). More speciﬁcally, the process model of ER dis-
tinguishes between antecedent-focused ER and consequence-focused ER strategies.
The antecedent-focused strategies occur before appraisals give rise to full-blown
emotional response tendencies and involve modifying the inputs to the emotional
system—that is, changing the external or internal environment, whereas
response-focused ER occurs after the responses are generated and refers to altering
the behavioral manifestations associated with the emotional response (Gross and
Munoz 1995).
    Within these two broad classes of ER, more ﬁne-grained distinctions can be
made (Frijda 1988; Gross 1998b; Gross and Thompson 2007). On one hand,
antecedent-focused ER includes situation selection, in which one avoids people or
situations that might trigger an emotional reaction; situation modiﬁcation, in which
one modiﬁes the environment so as to alter its emotional impact; attention
deployment, associated with turning the attention away or toward something in
order to influence emotions; and cognitive change, that means the re-evaluation of
the situation one is in or one’s capacity to manage the situation to the purpose of
altering the emotional response. On the other hand, response-focused ER includes
strategies that intensify, diminish, prolong, or curtail ongoing emotional experience,
expression, or physiological responding (Gross 1998b). In the context of the gen-
eric timing hypothesis, it is thought that antecedent-focused ER strategies are more
effective in changing an emotional outcome than response-focused strategies due to
the fact that the former ER strategies come into act much sooner than the latter,
when the emotional response has not yet reached it’s highest intensity levels.
    A recent alternative to the generic timing hypothesis is the process-speciﬁc
timing hypothesis (Sheppes and Gross 2011). This hypothesis has the following
main ideas: (a) time of the initiation of a regulatory process is essential for some of
the ER strategies and not so important for others; and (b) higher levels of emotional
intensity reduce the effectiveness of late ER strategies. Based on this perspective, it
is possible to further distinguish between the costs and beneﬁts of different ER
strategies among the antecedent-focused category. More speciﬁcally, recent
investigations were aimed at comparing distraction, as an early selection strategy
and reappraisal, as a late selection strategy (Sheppes and Gross 2011; McRae et al.
2010; Ochsner and Gross 2005). So far, the main results indicate that early selection
regulation strategies are relatively uninfluenced by the intensity of the emotion,
whereas the effectiveness of late selection strategies is reduced for intense emotions,
although the impact of intense emotions is moderated by the relative strength of the
ER strategy that is being used (Sheppes and Gross 2011). In the following section
we will present empirical results most relevant to economics that compare the
effectiveness of distraction, reappraisal, and suppression.
7 Emotion Regulation and Economic Decision-Making                                 117


7.3   Cognitive and Behavioral Effects of Emotion
      Regulation

Until recently, most of the research done in this area was focused on comparing the
cost and beneﬁts of antecedent and response-focused ER. One form of
antecedent-focused ER that has received particular attention is cognitive reappraisal
(Gross 2002; John and Gross 2007; Ochsner and Gross 2007; Siemer et al. 2007).
This strategy implies changing the situation’s meaning so that it alters its emotional
impact. From the response-focused ER strategies category, expressive suppression
is the most studied, which involves inhibiting ongoing emotion-expressive
behaviors (Gross 1998a, b; John and Gross 2007; Ochsner and Gross 2007).
   Individual differences in ER (e.g., the habitual use of expressive suppression or
cognitive reappraisal) have been shown to impact affect, social functioning,
well-being, cognitive functioning, and physiological activation (John and Gross
2004). Habitual suppressors experience more negative than positive emotions, they
have poorer interpersonal functioning, and report reduced well-being in comparison
to habitual reappraisers (Gross and John 2003). Suppressing negative emotions is
associated with decreased emotion expression and unchanged emotional experi-
ence, whereas reappraisal decreases both the emotional experience and expression
of negative emotions (Gross 1998b). In contrast, suppression of positive emotions
diminishes both their expression and experience (Gross 1998b; Gross and Levenson
1997; Stepper and Strack 1993; Strack et al. 1988). Neuroimaging data indicates
that suppression increases activation in the emotion-generative brain regions, such
as the insula and the amygdala, whereas reappraisal is associated with increased
early prefrontal cortex responses, frequently activated in executive cognitive control
tasks (Goldin et al. 2008).
   In a study that investigated the cognitive demands of reappraisal and suppres-
sion, Richards and Gross (2000) concluded that suppression, as opposed to reap-
praisal, resulted in memory impairment for social information presented while
participants were regulating their emotions. Academic performance was shown to
be decreased in suppressors, but not cognitive reappraisal, through a mechanism
that involved working memory decrements (Johns et al. 2008). The cognitive costs
of suppression are accompanied by social and physiological costs as well, for it was
experimentally shown that interacting with a partner who used suppression was
more stressful than interacting with a partner who used reappraisal, as indexed by
increases in blood pressure (Butler et al. 2003). Moreover, a series of studies (Gross
and Levenson 1993, 1997) indicated that suppression produces a mixed pattern of
physiological responses, including decreased somatic activity and heart rate, but
increased signs of sympathetic activation of the electrodermal and cardiovascular
systems.
   Motivated by the theoretical support of the process-speciﬁc timing hypothesis,
several studies also contrasted reappraisal and distraction. Distraction is an early
selection regulatory strategy that involves diverting attention away from an
emotional situation by loading working memory with independent neutral contents
118                                                                 R.M. Heilman et al.

(Van Dillen and Koole 2007). In consequence, distraction acts like a very powerful
ﬁlter that prevents the processing of an emotional stimulus.
   The upside effects of using distraction compared to reappraisal include down-
regulating both high-and low-intensity negative emotions (Sheppes and Meiran
2007), and minimal cognitive resources requirements even under high levels of
emotional intensity (Sheppes et al. 2009; Sheppes and Meiran 2008). In contrast,
reappraisal can successfully reduce only the impact of low-intensity negative
emotions, whereas the reappraisal of high intensity negative affect might result in
counterintentional increases in negative emotional states and a resulting inability of
further regulating these escalating emotional states (Sheppes and Meiran 2007).
Nevertheless, when reappraisal was given more time to operate, it successfully
reduced high-intensity negative emotions (Sheppes et al. 2009; Sheppes and Meiran
2007, 2008).
   The use of distraction to downregulate negative emotions might also have some
downside effects. For instance, participants who were instructed to distract them-
selves while watching a sad movie demonstrated impaired memory for the emo-
tional details of the movie; meanwhile, reappraisers had intact memory both for the
emotional and neutral details of the movie (Sheppes and Meiran 2007, 2008).
Another possible problem with distraction might stem from its long-term use: even
though distraction is highly effective in reducing participants’ sadness on the short
run, it does not change the way participants evaluate and respond to negative
emotional experiences in the long run (Kross and Ayduk 2008).



7.4   Emotion Regulation: Confound in the Effect
      of Emotions on Economic Decision-Making?

Because ER is widespread in our daily lives, it is possible that it might actually
mediate the involvement of emotion in economic decision-making. Most of the
previous studies on emotion and decision-making have not controlled for ER.
Therefore, effects on economic decision-making, ranging from “coloring” the
content of thoughts to interfering with information processing, which have been
previously attributed to acute emotions might actually be mediated by ER strategies
such as cognitive reappraisal or expressive suppression.
    The important role of ER in decision-making is supported by at least four lines
of evidence: (1) emotions are frequently regulated, in a spontaneous or incidental
manner; the ubiquity of ER in situations that trigger emotions makes difﬁcult the
isolation of the direct and speciﬁc effects of emotion; (2) the distinct effects of
speciﬁc emotions on decision-making are explained by differences in the under-
lying pattern of appraisals, particularly on the certainty and control dimensions
(Lerner and Keltner 2000; also see the next paragraph); by effectively downregu-
lating emotion experience, ER contributes to an increased sense of emotional
control that might influence decision-making; (3) recent neuropsychological studies
7 Emotion Regulation and Economic Decision-Making                                119

indicated that certain brain lesions (e.g., ventromedial prefrontal cortex) have
detrimental effects on both economic behavior (e.g., bargaining behavior) and
emotion regulation (e.g., Koenigs and Tranel 2007); at the same time, pharmaco-
logical manipulations of serotonin signaling, which very likely affect prefrontal
functioning, influence both inequity aversion in economic bargaining, and ER (e.g.,
Crockett, Clark, Tabibnia, Lieberman, and Robbins 2008); and (4) both ER, and
decision-making dimensions that are critically influenced by emotions (e.g.,
risk-taking, susceptibility to framing, bargaining behavior) depend on similar
emotion-cognition brain hubs (Pessoa 2008), such as increased functional coupling
prefrontal-amygdala circuits (e.g., Goldin et al. 2008; De Martino et al. 2006).
A recent review documented the common neural mechanisms that underlie ER and
decision-making, by focusing on the involvement of ventrolateral, medial, dorso-
medial, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in both ER strategies and reversal
learning (i.e., the capacity to alter choice behavior when the value of response
options change) (see Mitchell 2011).
    There are at least two mechanisms by which ER can influence economic
decision-making. One, an “emotional” route, stems from differences between
reappraisal and suppression in their effectiveness in mitigating the experience of
negative and positive emotions (Gross 2002). The second, a “nonemotional” route,
stems from differences in the level of effort (cognitive load) required to implement
reappraisal or suppression, which could perhaps be related to differences between
their respective contributions to ego depletion (Baumeister 2003; Richards and
Gross 1999). For instance, in comparison to cognitive reappraisal that diminishes
emotion at an early stage and without the need of sustained effort over time,
expressive suppression instead involves increased efforts to actively inhibit prepo-
tent emotional responses (Gross and Thompson 2007). Richards and Gross (1999,
2000) have invoked the “nonemotional route” (i.e., differences in computational
resources taken away by ER from online information processing) for explaining why
expressive suppression, but not cognitive reappraisal, impairs declarative memory.
In one of our studies (Heilman et al. 2010), we tested the influence of two ER
strategies (i.e., cognitive reappraisal and expressive suppression) on the effects of
negative and positive emotions on economic decision-making under uncertainty and
risk. The regulation of negative affect allowed us to contrast cognitive reappraisal,
which effectively reduced the experience of emotion, and the ineffective expressive
suppression. Cognitive reappraisal, but not expressive suppression reduced the effect
of negative emotions on economic decision-making. The regulation of positive affect
offered a situation in which both cognitive reappraisal and expressive suppression
are effective in reducing the experience of emotion, so the only difference that
remained was in the cognitive load associated with each of these ER strategies. In
this condition, both reappraisal and suppression influenced the effects of positive
emotions on decision-making. Therefore, this study suggests that ER impacts
economic decision-making by its effects on reducing the experience of emotions
(the emotional route), rather than ego depletion.
120                                                                 R.M. Heilman et al.


7.5    Emotion Regulation and Economic Risk-Taking

Risk is deﬁned as the probability, size or subjective “negative utility” of a potential
loss (Vlek and Stallen 1980). Although scientists have distinguished
decision-making under uncertainty or risk based on the completeness of informa-
tion about the prospects (i.e., probabilities of costs and beneﬁts associated with the
alternatives), most decisions involve some degree of risk in the sense that
action-outcome associations are probabilistic (Rangel et al. 2008). Various mea-
sures of economic risk-taking exist, ranging from questionnaires such as the
Domain-Speciﬁc Risk-Taking questionnaire (Blais and Weber 2006) to behavioral
tasks such as the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) (Lejuez et al. 2002) or
gambling tasks that allow the estimation of utility functions that drive choices (e.g.,
Tom et al. 2007). These and other similar measures are the workhorses of a growing
literature that investigates the effects of emotion, and more recently emotion reg-
ulation on economic decision under risk.
    Studies ﬁrst focused on the effects of a single emotion on economic risk-taking,
or contrasted emotions of different valence (i.e., pleasant vs. unpleasant). For
instance, Gaul (1977) was probably the ﬁrst to report that anxiety biased attention to
losses in a task that involved choosing between different lotteries (see also Lauriola
and Levin 2001; Miu et al. 2008). It was suggested that valence is the crucial
dimension that determines the direction of the effects of emotion on economic
decision-making. Therefore, distinct emotions of the same valence (e.g., sadness,
anger, fear) were assumed to have similar effects of decision-making. Based on the
cognitive-appraisal theories of emotion, Lerner and Keltner (2000) argued that
emotions of the same valence, which differ in their underlying appraisals of the
target stimulus, would exert different effects on decision-making. Particularly, the
appraisal dimensions of certainty and control would influence risk perception
because they map onto the factors of “unknown risk” and “dread risk” that deter-
mine risk assessments (see Slovic et al. 1986). Therefore, fear and anger would
influence risk-taking in opposing directions because the former is supported by
appraisals of low certainty over an outcome and low control over a situation,
whereas the latter is supported by appraisals of high certainty and high individual
control (Lerner and Keltner 2000; see also Smith and Ellsworth 1985). In a similar
vein, Raghunathan and Pham (1999) argued that emotions of the same valence, but
differing in their underlying appraisal pattern, would have distinct effects on
decision-making because they may activate different implicit goals. They tested the
effects of anxiety and sadness on performance in a task that involved choosing
between a gamble associated with a lower risk and a lower reward, and one
associated with a higher risk and a higher reward. They hypothesized that anxiety
would bias preferences toward low-risk/low-reward options because the appraisal
pattern underlying this emotion may activate an implicit goal of uncertainty
reduction and risk avoidance. In contrast, sadness would bias preferences toward
high-risk/high-reward options because this emotion activates an implicit goal of
reward substitution (since sadness is based on the perceived loss or absence of a
7 Emotion Regulation and Economic Decision-Making                                  121

cherished object or person). Their results conﬁrmed these predictions, and further
showed that anxiety and sadness influenced economic risk-taking only when the
participants evaluated the gambles from their own perspective, and not when they
evaluated the gambles as if they were making the decision for someone else
(Raghunathan and Pham 1999). Therefore, anxiety and sadness seem to impact
risk-taking by a consciously controlled monitoring of feelings, when people use a
“What would I feel better about…?” heuristic to assess the implications of decisions
that would affect themselves—presumably, feelings are less relevant when one
makes decisions on behalf of someone else. These results, together with those of
Lerner and Keltner (2000, 2001), indicated that appraisal dimensions and their
motivational influences explain the distinct effects that emotions of the same
valence may have on economic risk-taking, and emphasized the need to examine
the effects of speciﬁc emotions on decision-making.
    By modulating emotional experience, ER strategies contribute to an increased
sense of emotional control that might influence risk-taking. Considering that people
typically make efforts to control their emotions (Gross 2002), it is thus possible that
ER dampens effects of acute emotions on decision making. This possibility was
extensively tested by our group in a couple of studies that directly investigated the
influence of two of the most commonly used ER strategies on the effects of
emotions on economic risk-taking (Heilman et al. 2010). The ﬁrst experiment
compared the influence of cognitive reappraisal and expressive suppression that the
participants were instructed to use in order to regulate the fear and disgust induced
by two ﬁlm clips. In line with Lerner and Keltner’s approach (Lerner and Keltner
2000), we were interested in fear and disgust because they fall at opposite ends of
the certainty dimension of appraisal. After viewing the emotion-inducing ﬁlms, the
participants played BART, a measure of risk-taking in which ﬁnancial rewards are
earned by pumping balloons with variable explosion thresholds, presented on a
computer screen. Risk-taking is deﬁned in terms of mean pumps per unexploded
balloon. The main ﬁnding from this study was that the use of cognitive reappraisal,
which effectively downregulated fear and disgust, also mitigated against the risk
aversion associated with these negative emotions. In a second study, we tested
whether this effect also held for the incidental use of cognitive reappraisal in a
natural situation that triggered positive and negative affect. The results conﬁrmed
that cognitive reappraisal effectively reduced the negative affect induced by learning
the previously overestimated results of an exam, and consequently decreased risk
aversion in a BART that was played immediately after learning the exam result. In
summary, these studies showed that by downregulating the experience of negative
emotions, cognitive reappraisal reduces economic risk aversion. Based on previous
functional neuroimaging studies on cognitive reappraisal (Goldin et al. 2008) and
BART performance (Rao et al. 2008), we suggested that the effects of cognitive
reappraisal on economic risk-taking might be supported by increased functional
coupling between frontal and mesolimbic brain regions (Heilman et al. 2010).
    Several recent studies have investigated emotion regulation strategies that are
similar to cognitive reappraisal. Two of these studies focused on the regulation of
122                                                                    R.M. Heilman et al.

reward expectancy, by relaxing imagery (Delgado et al. 2008; Martin and Delgado
2011). This approach is based on the assumption that ER of reward-related emotions
such as anticipation or excitement could prevent approach-related behaviors asso-
ciated with such positive emotions from becoming maladaptive (e.g., drug seeking,
compulsive gambling) in the long-term. Down-regulating the emotional response to
a conditioned stimulus that predicted a monetary reward, by thinking of an image
that helped calming down, effectively decreased physiological arousal (i.e., skin
conductance responses) linked to the anticipation of rewards (Delgado et al. 2008).
This imagery-focused regulation strategy also attenuated the cerebral activation in
the striatum that was triggered by reward-predicting conditioned stimuli. Building
on this study, Martin and Delgado (2011) examined whether a similar
imagery-focused strategy during the presentation of a cue that preceded a ﬁnancial
decision-making phase affected economic risk-taking. Briefly, participants were
presented with one of two cues: the image of a slot machine, which predicted that a
monetary decision between a safe and a risky lottery followed, or the image of a
stamp machine, which predicted a non-monetary choice between stamps. During the
presentation of the cues, each participant was prompted to imagine a calming (e.g., a
sunny day in the park) or exciting scene (e.g., a roller coaster ride), and think of the
same image each time the word “relax” was presented above the picture. In the
control condition, the participants just thought about the decision that followed,
either ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial. The main ﬁndings from this study (Martin and
Delgado 2011) were that the imagery-focused strategy that downregulated the
response to the anticipation of monetary gambles reduced the number of risky
choices in the decision phase, and attenuated the activation of the striatum to risky
choices. Therefore, regulating the emotional response by means of relaxing imagery
modulated the neural response (i.e., striatum activation) to the anticipation of
monetary rewards, and promoted goal-directed behaviors (i.e., less risky choices).
   A third study (Sokol-Hessner et al. 2009) investigated a different regulation strategy
that involved taking the perspective of a trader who would treat each monetary
decision, even those associated with losses, as one of many decisions, which will be
summed together to produce a portfolio. This type of perspective taking resembles
cognitive reappraisal in that it involves an intentional reinterpretation of the stimulus.
Using an economic game in which participants made forced choices between a binary
gamble (i.e., mixed valence gambles with positive or negative outcomes, and
gain-only gambles with positive or zero outcomes) and a guaranteed amount (i.e., zero
or positive amounts), Sokol-Hessner et al. (2009) found that taking the perspective of a
trader reduces behavioral loss aversion, and the physiological arousal to losses.


7.6    Emotion Regulation and Susceptibility to Framing

For centuries, economists referred to the normative models when judging whether a
decision is rational or not. Although the deﬁnition of rationality has been largely
debated, there is a general agreement that rational choices should, among others,
7 Emotion Regulation and Economic Decision-Making                                 123

satisfy an invariance requirement (Tversky and Kahneman 1981). According to the
invariance principle, the preference between options should be independent of their
description (Tversky and Kahneman 1986). In other words, when the options of the
same situation are presented in different frames, this presentation should not
influence people’s preference for one option or another. However, an extensive
body of evidence piles against the rationality of the decision-maker by proving that
people do not act according to this principle and they are, in fact, predisposed to
persistent decisional biases.
    One of the most studied violations of the invariance principle is the framing
effect, where extensionally equivalent descriptions lead to different choices by
altering the relative salience of different aspects of the problem (Kahneman 2003).
This effect was ﬁrst demonstrated using the Asian Disease Problem (Tversky and
Kahneman 1981), which showed that people display risk aversion when alternatives
are framed as gains, and risk seeking when objectively equivalent alternatives are
framed as losses (Tversky and Kahneman 1981). Ever since the ﬁrst appearance of
this classic problem, hundreds of studies have been published that provide further
support for this general decisional bias.
    Among the task-related aspects that were invoked to explain this decisional
preference, in the last decade scholars have turned their attention to the role that
emotions might play in the evaluation of the options (Kahneman 2003) and even
more recently ER became part of the explanation. A study conducted by De
Martino et al. (2006) supported the role of emotions in the framing effect, by
showing that this decisional bias was associated with increased amygdala activity
and was negatively predicted by orbital and medial prefrontal cortex activity. Thus,
the authors conclude that the framing effect might be the consequence of an affect
heuristic by which individuals incorporate emotional information in their decisional
process (De Martino et al. 2006). However, this interpretation was recently chal-
lenged by another study (Talmi et al. 2010). These recent results showed that
patients with selective amygdala lesions resulting from Urbach-Wiethe disease
display the same framing effect as neurologically intact controls, with the sole
difference that the patient group manifested a higher frequency of risk-taking in
both frames. Other studies provide further support for the ER-decisional processes
interaction by implying that ER impairments due to ventromedial prefrontal cortex
lesions (Koenings and Tranel 2007), dysfunctional serotonin signaling (Crokett
et al. 2008), or a common genetic polymorphism of the human serotonin transporter
gene (Crisan et al. 2009; Roiser et al. 2009) might account for irrational economic
decisions.
    Miu and Crişan (2011) conducted the ﬁrst study that directly tested the effects of
ER on the susceptibility to framing in a gambling task (see De Martino et al. 2006).
These results indicated that the use of cognitive reappraisal, but not expressive
suppression during the gambling task reduced the susceptibility to framing
(i.e., it increased decision invariance). Building on these results, we further
investigated the effects of individual differences in ER on risk attitudes in framing
problems that addressed aspects related to health, ﬁnancial, and nature issues
(Heilman and Miclea 2016). In accordance with the large majority of studies that
124                                                                  R.M. Heilman et al.

have observed a framing effect, we also found that participants showed a signiﬁcant
preference for risky choices in the loss frame and a reduced preference for these
choices in the gain frame, for all the three problem domains. More importantly, our
results indicated a major impact of ER on risk preference, with ER strategies
accounting for up to 46.9 % of the total variance. By analyzing each category of
framing problems, we found that regulatory strategies were more relevant for
domains related to human life, such as ﬁnancial or health related issues, than
nature-related aspects (Heilman and Miclea 2016). To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst study to have investigated the complex interaction between ER and
framing effects in problems that mimic various real life situations.



7.7    Emotion Regulation and Economic Bargaining

Cooperation between genetically unrelated people has evolved as an adaptive
mechanism for the survival of the species, since many objectives are achieved more
efﬁciently if people cooperate. However, successful cooperation requires compli-
cated decisions on how resources should be divided among collaborators (Van den
Bergh and Dewitte 2006). For this purpose, fairness norms are particularly
important. The Ultimatum Game (UG) illustrates the tension between self-interest
and reciprocity and equity motives in a social decision situation (Guth et al. 1982).
    The standard form of the UG involves two players. One of them, known as the
proposer, has to make a monetary offer to the second player, the responder, con-
cerning an amount of money that the two must split between them. The responder
can either accept or reject the offer. If the offer is accepted, then the money is split
as proposed. But if the responder rejects the offer, then neither player receives
anything. Both players are fully aware of the rules and consequences of the game.
The UG is typically played with real money, provided by the experimenter. Based
on the two major economic assumptions regarding human nature, namely, the
decision-maker’s rationality and his/her self-regarding preferences (Camerer and
Fehr 2006), the normative solution for this decision-making task would be for the
proposer to offer as little money as possible and for the responder to accept any
nonzero offer. Nevertheless, the large majority of the proposers offer about 50 % of
the pot to the responders, and responders accept roughly only half of the unfair
offers, deﬁned as 30 % or less of the total amount of money (Camerer 2003).
    Numerous scholars advanced theories in attempt to explain these violations of
the economic predictions. Some of the most influential theories of UG behavior
focus on inequity aversion (Bergh 2008; Bolton and Ockenfels 2000; Fehr and
Schmidt 1999). An UG player displays inequity aversion if s/he dislikes and
sanctions outcomes that are inequitable, particularly when they are to his/her dis-
advantage (Fehr and Schmidt 1999). The original models of inequity aversion and
UG behavior neglected “non-consequentialist” reasons for reciprocally fair action
(Falk et al. 2003, 2008; Falk and Fischbacher 2006). They have thus been modiﬁed
to include essential aspects such as the consequences of actions and the underlying
7 Emotion Regulation and Economic Decision-Making                                    125

intentions (Falk and Fischbacher 2006). Nonetheless, even these expanded models
fail to a certain degree to describe and predict decision-making accurately. The
impact of a number of variables (e.g., property rights, social sharing, emotions, and
biological influences) has been investigated and we will review some of the major
ﬁndings in the following paragraphs.
    When facing an unfair offer, the cognitive goal of gaining money and the affective
goal of resisting unfairness are in conflict (Sanfey et al. 2003). As a consequence,
negative emotional reactions to ultimatum offers might prevail over self-interest
motives and result in higher rejection rates. For instance, previous studies found that
the probability of rejection is positively correlated with the intensity of self-reported
negative emotions (Pillutla and Murnighan 1996; Bosman et al. 2001; Oechssler
et al. 2008). In particular, incidental sadness results in lower acceptance rates (Harle
and Sanfey 2007), whereas another study found that clinical depression is associated
with increased responders’ rationality, by accepting more frequently unfair offers
(Harle et al. 2010). Furthermore, Xiao and Houser (2005) found that rejection rates
fall when responders can express their negative emotions directly to proposers. Other
scholars have investigated various biological correlates of behavioral responses in
the UG. For instance, emotional responses at the physiological level have also been
associated with offer acceptance, indicating that the rejection of unfair offers from
human proposers triggers a higher skin conductance response, compared to the
electrodermal activation in response to unfair offers randomly generated by a
computer (van’t Wout et al. 2006). High rejection of unfair offers is also associated
with lower serotonin levels (Crockett et al. 2008; Emanuele et al. 2008), lower levels
of serum omega-3 fatty acids (Emanuele et al. 2009) and it also seems to have a
genetic component (Wallace et al. 2007). So far, the studies revealed that sex hor-
mones have mixed effects for men and women. While high levels of testosterone or
estrogen have no effects on women’s acceptance rates (Zethraeus et al. 2009), men
who reject low offers have signiﬁcantly higher testosterone levels than those who
accept (Burnham 2007), and lower 2D:4D digit ratio, known as an index of prenatal
exposure to androgens (Van den Bergh and Dewitte 2006). Neuroimaging studies
highlighted several brain areas relevant for responders’ behavior. A study conducted
by Sanfey et al. (2003) indicated that rejection of unfair offers is associated with
activation in the anterior insula, which scholars have linked to the experience of
anger and disgust, Koenigs and Tranel (2007) found that patients with ventromedial
prefrontal cortex lesions rejected more unfair offers compared to the control group,
whereas another research group showed that temporary inhibition of the right dor-
solateral prefrontal cortex reduces responders’ willingness to reject their partners’
intentionally unfair offers Knoch et al. (2006, 2008).
    While extensive research has been conducted on responders’ behavior, affective
aspects of the proposers’ behavior have been almost entirely disregarded
(Cappelletti et al. 2008). For instance, whether or not a proposer is relying on
his/her personal emotions affects his/her offer to the responder (Stephen and Pham
2008). Other factors were also investigated in relation to proposers’ offers. More
speciﬁcally, a higher frequency of unfair offers was correlated with low levels of
126                                                                  R.M. Heilman et al.

serum omega-3 fatty acids (Emanuele et al. 2009) and low serotonin levels
(Emanuele et al. 2008).
    Since numerous studies in behavioral economics and neuroeconomics demon-
strate that emotions have an impact on UG behavior, it is reasonable to assume that
ER might also influence decision-making. Even though this line of research is still
in its infancy, scholars have already acknowledged that ER might mediate the
effects that task-related and incidental emotions have on UG and other types of
decision-making (Kahneman and Frederick 2007; Crockett et al. 2008). For
instance, one study found that individual differences in ER explain 55 % of the
variance in negotiators’ proﬁt in a simulated negotiation (Yurtsever 2008).
However, only recently was directly addressed a possible mediating effect of ER on
the complex relation between emotion and decision-making. In a recent study we
used an experimental manipulation that allowed us to test the impact of ER
strategies on ultimatum decisions under an anxiety condition. We discovered that
habitual suppressors accept more unfair offers than non-habitual suppressors. In
addition, the habitual use of expressive suppression and anxiety seem to interact,
with the result that habitual suppressors make more unfair offers when they are
anxious, and accept more unfair offers when they are not anxious (Heilman et al. in
preparation). Therefore, efﬁcient ER strategies might be the key to enabling one to
accept unfair offers (Crockett et al. 2008).



7.8    Conclusion

Humans routinely use ER strategies to alter their emotional reactions. This chapter
described and discussed several of these strategies. We reviewed a substantial liter-
ature showing that the effect of any particular emotion on economic decision-making
varies systematically with the type of ER it triggers. For example, we reviewed
research showing that ER moderates the impact of fear and disgust on risky decisions,
as well as the impact of anxiety on decisions in bargaining. The import of these results
to economists derives in part from the fact that ER can be controlled, and even trained.
This may have implications for the design of economic institutions to promote
improved economic decision-making and so enhance social welfare.
    There are a large number of economic environments where ER might be
expected to be especially important, but where to the best of our knowledge
research has not yet been conducted. Consider, for example, situations that involve
temptation. These are important because tempting desires can interfere with the
ability to attain one’s long-term goals. Consequently, the ability to resist temptation
is a necessary skill. Unfortunately, self-control is difﬁcult. It seems of particular
interest, and of especially high social value, to understand how different ER
strategies might impact the ability to successfully implement self-control in order to
avoid succumbing to temptation.
    Temptation is one among many economic domains where continued research in
ER is sure to be proﬁtably conducted. All such research is fundamentally
7 Emotion Regulation and Economic Decision-Making                                            127

interdisciplinary in nature, bringing together leading scholars in economics, psy-
chology, and neuroscience. We look forward to the results of these synergistic
interactions, and share an optimistic excitement for the many discoveries that lie
ahead.

Acknowledgments Writing this paper was supported by grant grant number
PCE-ID-2012-4-0498 from the Romanian National Authority for Scientiﬁc Research, CNCS–
UEFISCDI to A.C.M. and by CNCSIS—UEFISCDI, project number PNII—IDEI, 2440/2008.




References

Baumeister RF (2003) Ego depletion and self-regulation failure: a resource model of self-control.
    Alcohol Clin Exp Res 27(2):281–284
Bergh A (2008) A critical note on the theory of inequity aversion. J Soc Econ 37:1789–1796
Blais AR, Weber EU (2006) A domain-speciﬁc risk-taking (DOSPERT) scale for adult
    populations. Judgm Decis Making 1:33–47
Bolton G, Ockenfels A (2000) A theory of equity, reciprocity and competition. Am Econ Rev
    90:166–193
Bosman R, Sonnemans J, Zeelenberg M (2001) Emotions, rejections, and cooling off in the
    ultimatum game. Unpublished working paper. University of Amsterdam
Burnham TC (2007) High-testosterone men reject low ultimatum game offers. Proc Biol Sci 274
    (1623):2327–2330
Butler EA, Egloff B, Wilhelm FH, Smith NC, Erickson EA, Gross JJ (2003) The social
    consequences of expressive suppression. Emotion 3(1):48–67
Camerer CF (2003) Behavioral game theory—experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton
    University Press, Princeton
Camerer CF, Fehr E (2006) When does “economic man” dominate social behavior? Science 311
    (5757):47–52
Campos JJ, Barrett KC, Lamb ME, Goldsmith MH, Stenberg C (1983) Socioemotional
    development. In: Haith M, Campos JJ (eds) Handbook of child psychology: vol. 2. Infancy
    and developmental psychology. Wiley, New York, pp 783–915
Campos JJ, Campos RG, Barrett KC (1989) Emergent themes in the study of emotional
    development and emotion regulation. Dev Psychol 25:394–402
Cappelletti D, Guth W, Ploner M (2008) Being of two minds: an ultimatum experiment
    investigating affective processes. Unpublished manuscript. Jena Economic Research Papers
Crisan LG, Pana S, Vulturar R, Heilman RM, Szekely R, Druga B et al (2009) Genetic
    contributions of the serotonin transporter to social learning of fear and economic decision
    making. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 4(4):399–408
Crockett MJ, Clark L, Tabibnia G, Lieberman MD, Robbins TW (2008) Serotonin modulates
    behavioral reactions to unfairness. Science 320:1739
De Martino B, Kumaran D, Seymour B, Dolan RJ (2006) Frames, biases, and rational
    decision-making in the human brain. Science 313(5787):684–687
Delgado MR, Gillis MM, Phelps EA (2008) Regulating the expectation of reward via cognitive
    strategies. Nat Neurosci 11(8):880–881
Edwards W (1962) Subjective probabilities inferred from decisions. Psychol Rev 69:109–135
Ekman P (1972) Universal and cultural differences in facial expression of emotion. In: Cole J
    (ed) Nebraska symposium in motivation. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, pp 207–283
Ekman P (1992) An argument for basic emotions. Cogn Emot 6:169–200
Elster J (1998) Emotions and economic theory. J Econ Lit Am Econ Assoc 36(1):47–74
128                                                                         R.M. Heilman et al.

Emanuele E, Brondino N, Bertona M, Re S, Geroldi D (2008) Relationship between platelet
    serotonin content and rejections of unfair offers in the ultimatum game. Neurosci Lett 437
    (2):158–161
Emanuele E, Brondino N, Re S, Bertona M, Geroldi D (2009) Serum omega-3 fatty acids are
    associated with ultimatum bargaining behavior. Physiol Behav 96(1):180–183
Falk A, Fischbacher U (2006) A theory of reciprocity. Game Econ Behav 54:293–315
Falk A, Fehr E, Fischbacher U (2003) On the nature of fair behavior. Econ Inq 41:20–26
Falk A, Fehr E, Fischbacher U (2008) Testing theories of fairness-intentions matter. Game Econ
    Behav 62:287–303
Fehr E, Schmidt KM (1999) A theory of fairness, competition and cooperation. Q J Econ
    14:815–848
Frijda NH (1988) The laws of emotion. Am Psychol 43(5):349–358
Gaul M (1977) Influences of anxiety level on evaluation of dimensional importance in risky tasks.
    Pol Psychol Bull 8:165–170
Goldin PR, McRae K, Ramel W, Gross JJ (2008) The neural bases of emotion regulation:
    reappraisal and suppression of negative emotion. Biol Psychiatry 63(6):577–586
Gross JJ (1998a) Antecedent- and response-focused emotion regulation: divergent consequences
    for experience, expression, and physiology. J Pers Soc Psychol 74(1):224–237
Gross JJ (1998b) The emerging ﬁeld of emotion regulation: an integrative review. Rev Gen
    Psychol 2:271–299
Gross JJ (2002) Emotion regulation: affective, cognitive, and social consequences.
    Psychophysiology 39(3):281–291
Gross JJ, John OP (2003) Individual differences in two emotion regulation processes: implications
    for affect, relationships, and well-being. J Pers Soc Psychol 85(2):348–362
Gross JJ, Levenson RW (1993) Emotional suppression: physiology, self-report, and expressive
    behavior. J Pers Soc Psychol 64(6):970–986
Gross JJ, Levenson RW (1997) Hiding feelings: the acute effects of inhibiting negative and
    positive emotion. J Abnorm Psychol 106(1):95–103
Gross JJ, Munoz RF (1995) Emotion regulation and mental health. Clin Psychol Sci Pract
    2:151–164
Gross JJ, Thompson RA (2007) Emotion regulation: conceptual foundations. In: Gross JJ
    (ed) Handbook of emotion regulation. The Guilforg Press, New York, pp 3–26
Guth W, Schmittberger R, Schwarze B (1982) An experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining.
    J Econ Behav Organ 75:367–388
Harle KM, Sanfey AG (2007) Incidental sadness biases social economic decisions in the
    ultimatum game. Emotion 7(4):876–881
Harle KM, Allen JJ, Sanfey AG (2010) The impact of depression on social economic decision
    making. J Abnorm Psychol 119(2):440–446
Heilman RM, Miclea M (2016) Risk seeking preferences: an investigation of framing effects across
    decisional domains. Cogn, Brain, Behav: Interdisc J 20:1–17
Heilman RM, Miu AC, Houser D Emotion regulation modulates inequity aversion in an ultimatum
    game. (in preparation)
Heilman RM, Crisan LG, Houser D, Miclea M, Miu AC (2010) Emotion regulation and decision
    making under risk and uncertainty. Emotion 10(2):257–265
Izard CE (1990) Facial expressions and the regulation of emotions. J Pers Soc Psychol 58
    (3):487–498
John OP, Gross JJ (2004) Healthy and unhealthy emotion regulation: personality processes,
    individual differences, and life span development. J Pers 72(6):1301–1333
John OP, Gross JJ (2007) Individual differences in emotion regulation. In: Gross JJ (ed) Handbook
    of emotion regulation. The Guilford Press, New York, pp 351–372
Johns M, Inzlicht M, Schmader T (2008) Stereotype threat and executive resource depletion:
    examining the influence of emotion regulation. J Exp Psychol Gen 137(4):691–705
Kahneman D (2003) A perspective on judgment and choice: mapping bounded rationality. Am
    Psychol 58(9):697–720
7 Emotion Regulation and Economic Decision-Making                                              129

Kahneman D, Frederick S (2007) Frames and brains: elicitation and control of response
    tendencies. Trends Cogn Sci 11(2):45–46
Kahneman D, Tversky A (1979) Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica
    47(2):263–292
Knoch D, Pascual-Leone A, Meyer K, Treyer V, Fehr E (2006) Diminishing reciprocal fairness by
    disrupting the right prefrontal cortex. Science 314(5800):829–832
Knoch D, Nitsche MA, Fischbacher U, Eisenegger C, Pascual-Leone A, Fehr E (2008) Studying
    the neurobiology of social interaction with transcranial direct current stimulation—the example
    of punishing unfairness. Cereb Cortex 18(9):1987–1990
Koenigs M, Tranel D (2007) Irrational economic decision-making after ventromedial prefrontal
    damage: evidence from the ultimatum game. J Neurosci 27(4):951–956
Kross E, Ayduk O (2008) Facilitating adaptive emotional analysis: distinguishing
    distanced-analysis of depressive experiences from immersed-analysis and distraction. Pers
    Soc Psychol Bull 34(7):924–938
Lauriola M, Levin IP (2001) Personality traits and risky decision making in a controlled
    experimental task: an exploratory study. Personality Individ Differ 31:215–226
Lazarus RS (1991) Emotion and adaptation. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Lejuez CW, Read JP, Kahler CW, Richards JB, Ramsey SE, Stuart GL et al (2002) Evaluation of a
    behavioral measure of risk taking: the balloon analogue risk task (BART). J Exp Psychol Appl
    8(2):75–84
Lerner JS, Keltner D (2000) Beyond valence: toward a model of emotion-speciﬁc influences on
    judgement and choice. Cogn Emot 14(4):473–493
Lerner JS, Keltner D (2001) Fear, anger, and risk. J Pers Soc Psychol 81(1):146–159
Loewenstein G (2000) Emotions in economic theory and economic behavior. Am Econ Rev Pap
    Proc 90:426–432
Loewenstein G, O’Donoghue T (2004) Animal spirits: affective and deliberative processes in
    economic behavior (Electronic version). Retrieved 9 Jan 2008 from http://cbdr.cmu.edu/
    seminar/Loewenstein.pdf
Martin LN, Delgado MR (2011) The influence of emotion regulation on decision making under
    risk. J Cogn Neurosci 23:2569–2581
McRae K, Hughes B, Chopra S, Gabrieli JJD, Gross JJ, Ochsner KN (2010) The neural correlates
    of cognitive reappraisal and distraction: an fMRI study of emotion regulation. J Cogn Neurosci
    22:248–262
Mitchell DG (2011) The nexus between decision making and emotion regulation: a review of
    convergent neurocognitive substrates. Behav Brain Res 217(1):215–231
Miu AC, Crişan LG (2011) Cognitive reappraisal reduces the susceptibility to the framing effect in
    economic decision making. Personality Individ Differ 51(4):478–482
Miu AC, Miclea M, Houser D (2008) Anxiety and decision-making: toward a neuroeconomics
    perspective. Adv Health Econ Health Serv Res 20:55–84
Naqvi N, Shiv B, Bechara A (2006) The role of emotion in decision making. a cognitive
    neuroscience perspective. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 15(5):260–264
Ochsner KN, Gross JJ (2005) The cognitive control of emotion. Trends Cogn Sci 9(5):242–249
Ochsner KN, Gross JJ (2007) The neural architecture of emotion regulation. In: Gross JJ
    (ed) Handbook of emotion regulation. The Guilford Press, New York, pp 87–109
Oechssler J, Roider A, Schmitz P (2008) Cooling-off in negotiations—does it work? Unpublished
    working paper. University of Bonn
Pessoa L (2008) On the relationship between emotion and cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci 9
    (2):148–158
Peters E, Västfjäll D, Gärling T, Slovic P (2006) Affect and decision making: A “hot” topic.
    J Behav Decis Making 19:79–85
Pillutla MM, Murnighan JK (1996) Unfairness, anger, and spite: emotional rejections of ultimatum
    offers. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 68:208–224
Raghunathan R, Pham MT (1999) All negative moods are not equal: motivational influences of
    anxiety and sadness on decision making. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 79(1):56–77
130                                                                          R.M. Heilman et al.

Rangel A, Camerer C, Montague PR (2008) A framework for studying the neurobiology of
    value-based decision making. Nat Rev Neurosci 9(7):545–556
Rao H, Korczykowski M, Pluta J, Hoang A, Detre JA (2008) Neural correlates of voluntary and
    involuntary risk taking in the human brain: an fMRI study of the balloon analog risk task
    (BART). Neuroimage 42(2):902–910
Richards JM, Gross JJ (1999) Composure at any cost? The cognitive consequences of emotion
    suppression. Pers Soc Psychol Bull 25(8):1033–1044
Richards JM, Gross JJ (2000) Emotion regulation and memory: the cognitive costs of keeping
    one’s cool. J Pers Soc Psychol 79(3):410–424
Roiser JP, de Martino B, Tan GC, Kumaran D, Seymour B, Wood NW et al (2009) A genetically
    mediated bias in decision making driven by failure of amygdala control. J Neurosci 29
    (18):5985–5991
Sanfey AG, Rilling JK, Aronson JA, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD (2003) The neural basis of economic
    decision-making in the ultimatum game. Science 300(5626):1755–1758
Sheppes G, Gross JJ (2011) Is timing everything? Temporal considerations in emotion regulation.
    Pers Soc Psychol Rev 15:319–331
Sheppes G, Meiran N (2007) Better late than never? On the dynamics of online regulation of
    sadness using distraction and cognitive reappraisal. Pers Soc Psychol Bull 33(11):1518–1532
Sheppes G, Meiran N (2008) Divergent cognitive costs for online forms of reappraisal and
    distraction. Emotion 8(6):870–874
Sheppes G, Catran E, Meiran N (2009) Reappraisal (but not distraction) is going to make you
    sweat: physiological evidence for self-control effort. Int J Psychophysiol 71(2):91–96
Siemer M, Mauss I, Gross JJ (2007) Same situation—different emotions: how appraisals shape our
    emotions. Emotion 7:592–600
Slovic P, Fischhoff B, Lichtenstein S (1986) The psychometric study of risk perception. In:
    Covello VT, Menkes J, Mumpower J (eds) Risk evaluation and measurement. Plenum, New
    York, pp 3–24
Slovic P, Finucane ML, Peters E, MacGregor DG (2007) The affect heuristic. Eur J Oper Res
    177:1333–1352
Smith CA, Ellsworth PC (1985) Patterns of cognitive appraisal in emotion. J Pers Soc Psychol 48
    (4):813–838
Sokol-Hessner P, Hsu M, Curley NG, Delgado MR, Camerer CF, Phelps EA (2009) Thinking like
    a trader selectively reduces individuals’ loss aversion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106(13):5035–
    5040
Stephen AT, Pham MT (2008) On feelings as a heuristic for making offers in ultimatum
    negotiations. Psychol Sci 19(10):1051–1058
Stepper S, Strack F (1993) Proprioceptive determinants of emotional and nonemotional feelings.
    J Pers Soc Psychol 64:211–220
Strack F, Martin LL, Stepper S (1988) Inhibiting and facilitating conditions of the human smile: a
    nonobtrusive test of the facial feed-back hypothesis. J Pers Soc Psychol 54:768–777
Talmi D, Hurlemann R, Patin A, Dolan RJ (2010) Framing effect following bilateral amygdala
    lesion. Neuropsychologia 48(6):1823–1827
Thompson RA (1990) Emotion and self-regulation. In: Thompson RA (ed) Socioemotional
    development. Nebraska symposium on motivation, vol 36. University of Nebraska Press,
    Lincoln, pp 367–467
Thompson RA (1991) Emotional regulation and emotional development. Educ Psychol Rev
    3:269–307
Tom SM, Fox CR, Trepel C, Poldrack RA (2007) The neural basis of loss aversion in
    decision-making under risk. Science 315(5811):515–518
Tversky A, Kahneman D (1981) The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science
    211(4481):453–458
Tversky A, Kahneman D (1986) Rational choice and the framing of decisions. J Bus 59
    (4):251–278
7 Emotion Regulation and Economic Decision-Making                                        131

Van den Bergh B, Dewitte S (2006) Digit ratio (2D:4D) moderates the impact of sexual cues on
   men’s decisions in ultimatum games. Proc Biol Sci 273(1597):2091–2095
Van Dillen LF, Koole SL (2007) Clearing the mind: a working memory model of distraction from
   negative mood. Emotion 7(4):715–723
van’t Wout M, Kahn RS, Sanfey AG, Aleman A (2006) Affective state and decision-making in the
   ultimatum game. Exp Brain Res 169(4):564–568
Vlek C, Stallen PJ (1980) Rational and personal aspects of risk. Acta Psychol 45:273–300
Wallace B, Cesarini D, Lichtenstein P, Johannesson M (2007) Heritability of ultimatum game
   responder behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104(40):15631–15634
Xiao E, Houser D (2005) Emotion expression in human punishment behavior. Proc Natl Acad
   Sci USA 102(20):7398–7401
Yurtsever G (2008) Negotiators’ proﬁt predicted by cognitive reappraisal, suppression of
   emotions, misrepresentation of information, and tolerance of ambiguity. Percept Mot Skills
   106:590–608
Zethraeus N, Kocoska-Maras L, Ellingsen T, von Schoultz B, Hirschberg AL, Johannesson M
   (2009) A randomized trial of the effect of estrogen and testosterone on economic behavior.
   Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106(16):6535–6538
