Chapter 9
Framing Effects: Behavioral Dynamics
and Neural Basis

Xiao-Tian Wang, Lilin Rao and Hongming Zheng




Abstract Research on framing effects has been one of few multidisciplinary
endeavors joined by psychologists, economists, political scientists, and manage-
ment and marketing researchers. Framing effects epitomize the power of linguistic
subtlety in regulating decision-making, showing that different ways of framing,
phrasing, or presenting virtually identical choice options systematically affect risk
preference, evaluation of experience, and persuasiveness of messages. Given its
central role in the studies of decision biases, the framing effect has been used as an
experimental probe for understanding general mechanisms of human judgment and
decision-making. Researchers have proposed various models explaining the fram-
ing effect. However, it was not until recently that research of framing effects started
to focus more on psychological mechanisms above and beyond phenomenology.
We conducted a meta-analysis of neural correlates of framing effects. The topo-
graphic convergences from a total of 26 foci found in the fMRI studies of framing
effects revealed two key brain areas underlying framing effects: the left anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) and the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). Together with
behavioral ﬁndings, these results suggest that valence framing as a secondary cue
becomes most salient and effective when primary contextual or social cues are
absent or incongruent. The processing of choice problems under these conditions
call for an ambiguity-reducing and conflict-monitoring function, which would result
in the ACC activation. Second, the right IFG activation suggests that the nature of
valence framing is both semantic and hedonic, involving not only verbatim lin-
guistic analysis, but also interpretation of its affective tones and metaphorical
implications.

X.-T. Wang (&)
Psychology Department, University of South Dakota,
Vermillion, SD 57069, USA
e-mail: xtwang@used.edu
L. Rao
Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China
H. Zheng
Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016                                           145
M. Reuter and C. Montag (eds.), Neuroeconomics, Studies in Neuroscience,
Psychology and Behavioral Economics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-35923-1_9
146                                                                    X.-T. Wang et al.


9.1     Behavioral Studies of Framing Effects

9.1.1    Framing and Framing Effects: Deﬁnition
         and Typology

Since the seminal work by Kahneman and Tversky (1979), Tversky and Kahneman
(1981), framing effects have been widely studied by researchers from across the
social sciences for over 30 years. Research on framing effects has been one of few
multidisciplinary endeavors joined by psychologists, economists, political scien-
tists, and management and marketing researchers. Framing effects epitomize the
power of linguistic subtlety in regulating decision-making, oftentimes without
awareness of the decision-maker. Different ways of framing, phrasing or presenting
virtually identical choice options systematically affect risk preference, evaluation of
experience, products or job candidates, and persuasiveness of arguments in nego-
tiation and communication. A meta-analysis has shown that among some primary
predictors of risky choice, framing condition was the top predictor (partial r = 0.44)
followed by the value of risky payoff (partial r = 0.14), and type of good at stake
(partial r = 0.13) while gain or loss condition and probability of payoff were not
signiﬁcant in predicting choice preference (Kühberger et al. 1999, p. 213).
    Tversky and Kahneman (1981) used the term ‘decision frame’ broadly to refer to
“the decision-maker’s conception of the acts, outcomes, and contingencies asso-
ciated with a particular choice” (p. 453). Later deﬁnitions of framing effects, despite
the differences in their connotations and coverage, pinpoint two typical features:
equivalency in choice outcomes and opposing valences in presentations of the
choice outcomes. That is, framing effects occur when frames that cast “the same
critical information in either a positive or a negative light” cause individuals to have
different choice preferences (Chong and Druckman 2007; Druckman 2001; Levin
et al. 1998, p. 150).
    Consider the well-known Asian disease problem demonstrated ﬁrst by Tversky
and Kahneman (1981). In the cover story of the problem, the respondents were
asked to imagine that “the US is preparing for the outbreak of an unusual Asian
disease, which is expected to kill 600 people. Two alternative programs to combat
the disease have been proposed.” The outcomes of the disease-combating plans
were then framed (phrased) differently. In the positive frame the respondents were
told: “If Plan A is adopted, 200 people will be saved. If Plan B is adopted, there is a
one-third probability that all 600 people will be saved, and two-thirds probability
that none of them will be saved.” Given a binary choice between the two alternative
plans, the majority of the respondents (72 %) were risk averse, preferring the sure
option (Plan A) over its gamble equivalent (Plan B). However, when the same
outcomes were ‘negatively framed’ in terms of lives lost (“If Plan A is adopted, 400
people will die. If Plan B is adopted, there is a one-third probability that none of
them will die, and two-thirds probability that all 600 people will die.”), the majority
of the respondents (78 %) were risk-taking, preferring the gamble option (Plan B)
over its sure-thing equivalent. This classic framing effect has been reliably
9 Framing Effects: Behavioral Dynamics and Neural Basis                               147

replicated with different samples and across cultures and disciplines (e.g., see
Kühberger 1998; Kühberger et al. 1999).
    Such risk preference reversal due to valence framing of virtually equivalent
choice outcomes raises radical doubts about basic assumptions in economic theories
of rationality. How can decision agents make consistent and rational choices when
empirical evidence of choice preference appears to be so malleable, so vulnerable to
framing effects? The classic framing effect is thus viewed as an irrational decision
bias and a cognitive illusion because it violates the invariance axiom of expected
utility theory, which requires a rational decision-maker to have a consistent pref-
erence order among identical choice prospects independent of the way the prospects
are presented or framed.
    As illustrated in the Asian disease problem, equivalent choice outcomes can be
framed with either positive valence or negative valence (e.g., lives saved vs. lives
killed, survival rate vs. mortality rate, gain vs. loss, opportunity vs. threat, success
vs. failure, beneﬁts vs. costs). A cumulative body of evidence has shown a wide
range of behavioral consequences due to framing of decision problems (Chong and
Druckman 2007; Kühberger 1998; Levin et al. 1998). Based on their meta-analysis
of different kinds of framing effects, Levin et al. (1998) proposed a well-adopted
typology. They proposed three types of framing effects: (1) Risky choice framing,
as illustrated by the Asian disease problem where framing of choice outcomes
affects risk preference (risk averse or risk seeking) of the decision-maker;
(2) Attribute framing, where framing of attributes or characteristics of an object
or event affects the evaluation of the object (e.g., a sample of ground beef was rated
as better tasting when it was labeled as ‘75 % lean’ rather than ‘25 % fat’, see Levin
and Gaeth 1988); and (3) Goal framing, where framing of either the positive
consequences of performing an act or the negative consequences of not performing
the act affects implicit goals an individual adopts and persuasiveness of a message.
A well-known example of goal framing effects has been documented by
Meyerowitz and Chaiken (1987), showing that women were more apt to engage in
breast self-examination when presented with information stressing the negative
consequences of not engaging in this action than when presented with information
stressing the positive consequences of engaging in this action.
    As stated in the title of the paper by Levin et al. (1998), all frames are not created
equally. Similarly, not all framing effects are the same. Some involve irrational
preference reversals (e.g., the opposite choice preferences under different framings)
while others involve a shift in choice preference (e.g., making one option even more
attractive than another). A choice shift differs from a choice reversal in that the
proportion of risky choices differs across framing conditions but is not signiﬁcantly
greater than 0.5 under one framing condition and signiﬁcantly less than 0.5 in an
alternative framing condition. Wang (1996a) makes the distinction between bidi-
rectional framing effects which involve a reversal in risk preference and unidi-
rectional framing effects which involve a preference shift (e.g., from risk seeking to
even more risk seeking under negative framing, or from risk averse to even more
risk averse under positive framing).
148                                                                     X.-T. Wang et al.


9.1.2    Theories of Framing Effects

Given its central role in the studies of decision biases, the framing effect has been
used as an experimental probe for understanding general mechanisms of human
judgment and decision-making. Researchers have proposed various models
explaining framing effects.
1. Prospect Theory
An initial and prevalent explanation of framing effects is based on the prospect
theory’s (Kahneman and Tversky 1979) S-shaped value function which is separated
by a zero point (status quo) with a gain region above the status quo and a loss
region below the status quo. Tversky and Kahneman (1981) theorized that framing
manipulation determines whether outcomes are encoded as gains or losses and that
this encoding determines which portion of the S-shaped value function would
contribute to the risk preference of the decision-maker. For gains implicated in the
positive framing condition, the subjective value function is concave and promotes
risk aversion, whereas for losses implicated in the negative framing condition, the
value function is convex and promotes risk seeking. However, this prospect of
theoretical account of framing effects is limited to risky choice framing. In case of
attribute framing where the presence of risk is not essential, valence of framing
(e.g., success rate vs. failure rate) may either evoke favorable or unfavorable
associations in memory (Levin and Gaeth 1988) or evoke different reference points
(goal or minimum requirement rather than status quo, Wang and Johnson 2012).
2. Fuzzy-Trace Theory
Another famous account of framing effects is derived from fuzzy-trace theory pro-
posed by Reyna and Brainerd (1991, 1995, 2011). The theory posits that people form
two types of mental representations about a past event, called verbatim and gist traces.
Gist traces are fuzzy representations of a past event (e.g., its bottom-line meaning),
whereas verbatim traces are detailed representations of a past event. Although people
(adults) are capable of processing both verbatim and gist information, they prefer to
reason with gist traces rather than verbatim traces. In the case of encoding choice
outcomes of a sure thing and a gamble of equal expected value in the Asian disease
problem, the gist translations boil down to choosing between (a) saving some people,
(b) saving some people or saving no one under the positive (gain) frame, and choosing
between (c) some people die, and (d) some people die or none die under the negative
(loss) framing. Reyna and Brainerd (1991, 1995) showed that relational gist of
quantities (e.g., some, all, none) was sufﬁcient to replicate the classic framing effect.
Thus, framing effects can be seen as a result of translating expected choice outcomes
to gist representations of quantities with positive or negative connotations. These
nonnumerical framing effects demonstrated that numbers, which are essential to
predictions of prospect theory and all other utility theories, were not necessary to
observe the framing effect. Moreover, according to prospect theory or other expected
utility theories, the outcome of zero in the gamble option literally contributes nothing
9 Framing Effects: Behavioral Dynamics and Neural Basis                             149

to predictions of choice behavior because the value of zero, based on the S-shaped
value function, is also set at zero. However, when the information about the zero
outcomes was removed from the classic Asian disease problem, framing effects
disappeared (see Reyna and Brainerd 2011).
3. Asymmetry in Dual Processing
Another approach to theorizing framing effects emphasizes the interplay between
two distinct processing systems or asymmetry in affective or cognitive processing.
Dunegan (1993), for example, proposed that framing may act as a catalyst for
different modes of cognitive processing. Characteristics of controlled cognitive
modes were found when information was negatively framed; characteristics of more
automatic processing were found when information was positively framed, sug-
gesting that positive framing may be perceived as a default with a lower cognitive
processing load. Kuo et al. (2009) employed eye tracking to measure cognitive
effort in a framing study. Their results suggest an asymmetry in cognitive effort, as
indicated by eye ﬁxation and eye-movement time per word, due to positive and
negative frames. More effort was observed in the negative framing condition than in
the positive framing condition. However, a study by Whitney et al. (2008) found
that working memory load slightly reduced risk-seeking tendency but not framing
effects, suggesting that valence framings did not have differential effects on cog-
nitive processing effort.
    Another account of framing effects proposed by McElroy and Seta (2003, 2004)
focuses on the asymmetry between analytic processing and holistic processing. This
model assumes that analytic processing is insensitive to the influence of framing,
whereas holistic processing is more susceptible to framing. By behaviorally
inducing selective hemispheric activation, framing effects were found when the
right hemisphere was selectively activated, whereas they were not observed when
the left hemisphere was selectively activated.
4. Ambiguity-Ambivalence Hypothesis
There are other limits and constraints to framing effects in addition to hemispheric
dominance. Meta-analyses (Levin et al. 1998; Kühberger 1998) show that the effect
of framing is overall signiﬁcant but not as ‘pervasive’ or ‘robust’ as previously
believed. Many researchers have explored the premise and moderators of framing
effects. Some examples of the moderators are sex of the decision-maker (Fagley and
Miller 1990, 1997), cognitive ability (Stanovich and West 1998), personal
involvement (Levin et al. 1998, p. 160), reflection on and rationale for the decision
(Takemura 1994; Fagley and Miller 1987; Miller and Fagley 1991; Sieck and Yates
1997), personal knowledge about risks involved (e.g., Bohm and Lind 1992; Levin
and Chapman 1990), perceived ambiguity of the values presented in the problem
descriptions (Kühberger 1995), task context (e.g., medical vs. statistical, Bless et al.
1998), need for cognition (LeBoeuf and Shaﬁr 2003), perceived interdependence
between individuals at risk (Bloomﬁeld et al. 2006; Wang et al. 2001), and social
group size and composition (Bloomﬁeld 2006; Shimizu and Udagawa 2011a;
Wang 1996a, b; Zhang and Miao 2008).
150                                                                   X.-T. Wang et al.

    The aforementioned studies focusing on the variables that can enhance, limit, or
even eliminate a framing effect have taken into consideration individual as well as
situational factors that determine the magnitude as well as process of framing
effects. This line of research calls for an overarching theory of framing effects that
addresses these ecological, social, and dispositional constraints on and premises of
framing effects. This led to the development of an ambiguity-ambivalence
(AA) hypothesis of framing effects and decision biases (Wang 2008). The AA
hypothesis assumes that (1) decision cues are selected and used in accordance to
their priorities. (2) Cue priority reflects ecological and social validity of a cue in
predicting speciﬁc risks, beyond the stated values and probabilities of outcomes in a
choice task. Primary cues are valid ecological, social, and life-history variables
(such as kith-and-kin relations, social group size, sex, age, health, socioeconomic
status, and mating/reproductive cues, etc.). Secondary cues in decision-making are
mainly communicational, such as verbal framing, facial expression, tone of voice,
etc. (3) Primary cues determine the settings of decision reference points (e.g., goals
and bottom lines) and anchor decision preference while secondary cues (and
individual dispositional factors) ﬁne tune the settings of reference points and choice
preference. (4) Decision biases, such as framing effects, tend to occur as a result of
secondary cue use when primary cues are either absent in risk communication (i.e.,
an ambiguity condition) or when primary cues elicit conflicting preferences (i.e., an
ambivalence condition).
    From this perspective, framing effects would occur as a result of ambiguity and
ambivalence in decision cues and preferences. Similar ideas can be seen in
fuzzy-trace theory (Reyna and Brainerd 1991) and the discussion on the use of
probabilistic mental models (Gigerenzer et al. 1991) to deal with informational
ambiguity as a premise of framing effects (Chang et al. 2002; Kühberger 1995).
    As predicted from the AA hypothesis, framing effects occurred when making
life–death decisions in evolutionarily novel and socially unfamiliar large group
contexts but disappeared when the same problems were scaled down to a small
group context with a handful of people (Bloomﬁeld 2006; Shimizu and Udagawa
2011a; Zhang and Miao 2008; Wang and Johnston 1995; Wang 1996a, b).
Moreover, work experience in large organizations reduced sensitivity to framing
manipulation in large group contexts (Shimizu and Udagawa 2011b). Interestingly,
framing effects in a small group reappeared when the small group included both
strangers and kin relatives, thus creating ambivalence in risk preference between a
“we all live or die together” risk-seeking preference for kith-and-kin and a more
risk-averse preference for strangers (Wang et al. 2001).
9 Framing Effects: Behavioral Dynamics and Neural Basis                          151


9.2     A Neuroscience Approach to Understanding Framing
        Effects

The discussion so far summarizes behavioral studies of framing effects. These
studies leave open the possibility for more theoretical development and better
understanding of underlying processes that produce or inhibit framing effects. It
was not until recently that research on framing effects started to focus more on the
underlying psychological mechanisms above and beyond phenomenology, owing
to rapid development in neuroimaging technology. Neuroscience and neuroimaging
can help forward our understanding of framing effects in at least four different yet
coherent ways.
    First, the neuroscience approach would allow us to evaluate framing theories by
mapping the framing-related brain activations against the key brain areas implicated
by different theories of framing effects. Second, many hypothetical mechanisms and
post-hoc explanations based on behavioral effects can be better understood, veri-
ﬁed, or disproved by using the brain imaging technique. Third, neuroimaging
studies often shed light into puzzling or conflicting ﬁndings from behavioral studies
of framing effects. Fourth, brain imaging studies capture online neural activities of
the entire brain during the decision-making. This brain map of activation or
deactivation may highlight uncharted brain areas and provide insights and new
leads for future investigations.
    In the following sections of the chapter, we illustrate the use and usefulness of
the neuroscience approach to framing effects by generating predictions about neural
correlates of framing effects based on different theoretical viewpoints, and by
conducting a meta-analysis of the fMRI studies of framing effects. We end the
chapter with a summary and conclusions regarding the status quo of behavioral and
neuroimaging studies of framing effects.



9.2.1    Contrasting and Evaluating Theories of Framing
         Effects

As illustrated in Table 9.1, theories of framing effects make overlapping but dis-
tinctive predictions about brain regions underpinning the proposed functions. The
predictions presented in Table 9.1 are by no means meant to be thorough or
systematic.
   Table 9.1 is only a sketchy outline to exemplify how theories of framing effects
can be tested with neuroimaging studies. For a more speciﬁc example, consider an
fMRI study of framing effects by Gonzalez et al. (2005). The authors proposed a
cognitive–affective tradeoff model which can be classiﬁed as one of the ‘asymmetry
in dual processing models’ as listed in Table 9.1.
   The cognitive–affective tradeoff model assumes that the framing effect occurs
due to a tradeoff between the cognitive effort required to calculate expected values
Table 9.1 Theories of framing effects and predicted brain activations
                                                                                                                                                                                               152


Theory                       Assumptions                                              Behavioral effects                                 Predicted key brain areas associated with
                                                                                                                                         valence framing
Prospect theory (Kahneman    S-shaped value function separated by a zero point        Risk averse in a positive frame and risk seeking   Brain areas associated with gains/rewards and
and Tversky 1979)            (status quo) indicates risk aversion in gains or under   in a negative frame                                losses/punishments (e.g., the nucleus
                             positive framing and risk seeking in losses or under                                                        accumbens, the ventral striatum, and the orbital
                             negative framing                                                                                            frontal cortex, see, e.g., Breiter et al. 2001;
                                                                                                                                         O’Doherty et al. 2001; Tom et al. 2007) are
                                                                                                                                         expected to be differentially activated by
                                                                                                                                         valance framing
Fuzzy-trace theory (Reyna    Framing effects are a result of translating expected     Classic framing effects can be replicated or       Activation levels in the prefrontal cortex, the
and Brainerd 1991, 1995,     choice outcomes to gist representations of quantities    reversed by replacing numerical information by     site of working memory and the regions of the
2011)                        (e.g., some, many, all, none)                            relational gist of quantities                      parietal lobe for numerical processing, including
                                                                                                                                         the intraparietal sulcus and the inferior parietal
                                                                                                                                         lobule (Honey et al. 2002; Owen 1997; Piazza
                                                                                                                                         et al. 2004; Pinel et al. 2004) would reflect the
                                                                                                                                         appearance and disappearance of framing effects
Asymmetry in dual            Valence framing catalyzes different modes of             More cognitive effort was observed in the          Framing effects are expected to be associated
processing models (Dunegan   processing. Framing effects are strengthened by          negative framing condition than in the positive    with right hemispheric activation and
1993; Kuo et al. 2009;       holistic processing and attenuated by analytical         framing condition. Selective right hemisphere      differential activations in the brain areas related
McElroy and Seta 2003,       processing                                               activation promoted framing effects                to loss aversion (e.g., the ventral striatum) and a
2004)                                                                                                                                    tradeoff between cognitive/analytical processing
                                                                                                                                         in the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC)
                                                                                                                                         and affective/holistic processing in the ventral
                                                                                                                                         medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) (e.g., Cendri
                                                                                                                                         et al. 2012; Montague and Berns 2002;
                                                                                                                                         Sokol-Hessner et al. 2012; Tom et al. 2007)
Ambiguity-Ambivalence        Framing effects tend to occur when primary choice        Framing effects occurred in large anonymous        Ambiguity and ambivalence in risk preference
Hypothesis (Wang 2008)       cues are either absent or incongruent, thus inducing     group contexts when primary social cues were       may be reflected in differential activations in the
                             ambiguity or ambivalence in choice preference and        absent, but disappeared in small face-to-face      brain regions associated with linguistic
                             making secondary cues of framing more salient and        group contexts. However, framing effects           processing and the regions responsible for
                             decisive                                                 reappeared when the same life–death problem        conflict monitoring and resolution (e.g., anterior
                                                                                      was presented in a small group context             cingulate cortex (ACC), Botvinick et al. 2004;
                                                                                      involving both strangers and kin                   Holroyd et al. 2004)
                                                                                                                                                                                               X.-T. Wang et al.
9 Framing Effects: Behavioral Dynamics and Neural Basis                             153

of an alternative and the affective value of the alternative. The model predicts that
decision-makers prefer choice options that are cognitively less effortful to process
or/and affectively more pleasant. In a positive frame, the compromise between
maximizing hedonic feeling and minimizing cognitive effort is easier to achieve.
For instance, selecting the option in which “200 people will be saved” feels more
positive in an emotional sense and is less effortful (i.e., no calculations are nec-
essary). In contrast, such a compromise is more difﬁcult to attain in the negative
frame. Although the option in which “400 people will die” requires little calcula-
tion, the relatively bad outcome makes it less attractive due to a stronger feeling of
displeasure. Thus when selecting among options presented in a negative frame,
individuals are more willing to undertake the cognitive effort demanded to assess
the more risky option in order to get the hedonically less unpleasant outcome.
   Previous studies have shown that individuals take longer to make decisions
when the options are framed as losses rather than gains (Payne et al. 1993).
However, it is still unknown whether it is a result of a greater cognitive effort in the
negative than in the positive frame or a result of a larger affective cost. To answer
these questions derived from the cognitive-affective tradeoff model, the authors
conducted an fMRI study which revealed that the cognitive effort required to select
a sure gain was considerably lower than the cognitive effort required to choose a
risky gain. The fMRI results, although not directly correlated with the behavioral
framing effects, showed signiﬁcantly higher activation levels in the frontal and
parietal lobes when making risky rather than certain choices under positive frames.
This ﬁnding is consistent with their theoretical view that the sure gain is a default
choice over its gamble equivalent when considering cognitive processing effort.



9.2.2    Neuroimaging Tests of Alternative Behavioral
         Accounts of Framing Effects

Behavioral studies of framing effects have yielded interesting results that are often
open to alternative explanations. These alternative accounts of behavioral ﬁndings
can be further evaluated in neuroimaging studies. A recent fMRI study by Zheng
et al. (2010) on group- size-dependent framing effects illustrates such a value of the
neuroimaging approach.
    In a series of studies (Wang 1996a, b; Wang et al. 2001), we examined the
appearance and disappearance of framing effects when the size of the group (the
total number of lives at stake) was systematically manipulated. The same life–death
problem was framed either in terms of lives saved or in terms of lives lost. The
framing effect was evident, but it occurred only when the problem was presented in
a large, anonymous, and thus ambiguous group context involving 600 lives or
more. The framing effect disappeared when the size of the endangered group was
within a two-digit number (<100), and the majority of the participants
154                                                                           X.-T. Wang et al.

unambiguously preferred the gamble option under both the saving lives and losing
lives framing conditions.
    These ﬁndings suggest that the small size of a social group signals a higher
interdependence between group members and evokes a kith-and-kin rationality that
guides a live-or-die together risk preference. In contrast, risk preference of a
decision-maker becomes erratic when prioritized group cues are absent in a large
anonymous group context. When risk preference is ambiguous, secondary cues
such as verbal framing are attended and used to direct choices. However, an
alternative hypothesis of group size-dependent framing effects based on a utility
theory would posit that people are more competent in calculating small numbers
than large numbers when evaluating risky outcomes, and thus are less ambiguous in
their choice preference and less susceptible to framing manipulation.
    To evaluate these rival accounts of group size-dependent framing effects, Zheng
et al. (2010) conducted an fMRI study. The results of this study, as shown in
Table 9.2, help to evaluate the two alternative hypotheses.
    Group size difference was captured by activation in the middle frontal gyrus.
Verbal framing in the large group context was associated with activation of the right
inferior frontal gyrus while the same valence framing in the small group context
was associated with activation of different brain structures, including the insula and
an area in the parietal lobe. These differential activations were all located in the
right hemisphere. Note that the right inferior frontal gyrus includes the homologue
of the Broca’s area.
    These results support the group size account rather than the numerical size
account of framing effects. First, behavioral framing effects only occurred in the
large group context and were associated with the right IFG activation. In contrast,
the disappearance of the framing effect in the small group context was associated
with activation of different brain structures (e.g., the right insular). Second, the
group size-dependent framing effect was restricted in the right hemisphere, thus was
unlikely an explicit numerical processing effect. If numerical processing played a
major role in determining appearance or disappearance of framing effects, the left
hemisphere and the brain structures related to numerical processing should be


Table 9.2 Brain activation by framing in large and small group contexts (from Zheng et al. 2010)
Brain Area Experimental          Hemisphere      Cluster size      Z        MNI coordinates
Condition                                        (voxels)          max      x    y       z
 IFG P600 minus N600              Right             9                3.35      33      29 −8
 Insula P6 minus N6               Right            12                3.61      33    −13  13
 Parietal lobe P6 minus N6        Right            17                3.42      33    −31  52
 MFG 600 minus 6                  Right            23                3.70      24      32  -8
Note: IFG Inferior frontal gyrus, MFG Middle frontal gyrus. P denotes positive frame, and
N denotes negative frame. The number (600 or 6) represents the number of people at stake. The
montreal neurological institute (MNI) coordinates are used to map images. The activation under
positive framing was larger than that under negative framing condition in both 600 and 6 group
size conditions. The differences were all detected at the level of uncorrected p < 0.001
9 Framing Effects: Behavioral Dynamics and Neural Basis                            155

differentially activated (e.g., Piazza et al. 2004; Pinel et al. 2004). Additional
behavioral results further exclude the ‘large-number’ account of framing effects.
Wang (1996a) demonstrated that framing effects occurred in large groups of 6000
as well as 600 people, and disappeared in small groups of 60 as well as 6 people.
The tenfold difference between the two large groups and between the two small
groups did not make a difference in choice preference. Further evidence comes from
the Wang, et al. (2001) study, where the classic framing effect occurred in the
context of 6 billion human lives but disappeared in the context of 6 billion ET
(extraterrestrial) lives. Thus, the framing effect is not likely a large number effect,
but is human group size sensitive.
    Our ﬁndings overall are consistent with the predictions of the AA hypothesis:
distinct brain areas are recruited for solving ambiguity or ambivalence caused by
the lack of primary social or relational cues in a large anonymous group context. In
contrast, framing effects diminished in a small group context while the insula and
parietal lobe in the right hemisphere were distinctively activated, suggesting an
important role of emotion in switching choice preference from an indecisive mode
to a more consistent risk-taking inclination.
    The brain imaging ﬁndings are interesting in that they suggest that the framing
effect is both linguistic and implicit. The affective component of valence framing
may direct a holistic, right hemispheric process while the cognitive connotation of
framing activates implicit linguistic processing in the right hemisphere in addition
to activation of the common linguistic processing regions in the left hemisphere.
Previous studies show that the right IFG is involved in response inhibition and
impulse control (Aron et al. 2003, 2004; Asahi et al. 2004). Thus, the higher
activation found in the right IFG under positive framing suggests a greater control
effort induced by using positive framing than negative framing in making hypo-
thetical life–death choices.



9.2.3    Gaining New Insights from Brain Imaging Studies
         of Framing Effects

The ﬁndings from neuroimaging studies of framing effects often provide new
insights and new research directions. In this section, we report several new ﬁndings
derived from a current analysis of an fMRI study of framing effects, in which we
examined brain activations when making hypothetical risky choices.
   The risky choice problems, adopted from those used in the study by Wang
(1996a), involved monetary investment (either 600 or 60,000 Chinese Yuan) and
property (either 6 or 600 precious oil paintings) at stake. The structure of the choice
problems used in this study was identical to that of the Asian disease problem. The
156                                                                            X.-T. Wang et al.

participants were asked to make a binary choice between a sure outcome (framed
either as saving one-third of a total amount or losing two-thirds of the total amount)
and a gamble of equal expected value. Twenty-one participants (8 males) took part
in this study. The procedure was the same as that used in Zheng et al. (2010).
    The behavioral effects of valence framing were signiﬁcant in the painting sce-
nario (risk-seeking choices increased from 47.8 % under positive framing to
57.6 % under negative framing), χ2(1) = 7.617, p = 0.0058. The framing effect was
not signiﬁcant in the money investment scenario (the risk-seeking choice = 55.7 %
under positive framing and 62.2 % under negative framing; χ2(1) = 0.246,
p = 0.620).
    The results of the fMRI data analysis are shown in Table 9.3 and Fig. 9.1. The
left inferior frontal gyrus and the left superior frontal gyrus were identiﬁed to have a
higher activation level under negative framing than positive framing while the left
medial temporal cortex showed a higher activation under the positive framing than
negative framing. These results are consistent with some previous ﬁndings. The
inferior frontal gyrus is also found to be associated with framing effects in our
previous study (Zheng et al. 2010). In addition, the left medial temporal cortex and
the left superior frontal gyrus identiﬁed in the present analysis are geographically
close to two of the activation regions reported by De Martino et al.’ (2006): the left
medial temporal gyrus and the left superior frontal sulcus, respectively.
    Human neuropsychological studies have highlighted the importance of both
frontal cortex and the medial temporal cortex, including the hippocampus in
memory encoding and retrieval (e.g., Cohen and Eichenbaum 1993; Tulving et al.
1994). Previous studies also suggest that effortful and strategic memory processes
are mainly mediated by the frontal lobes, whereas automatic associative memory
processes are mainly mediated by the medial temporal lobes and hippocampus
(MTL/H) (e.g., Moscovitch 1994). Thus, our results suggest a differential activation
pattern by framing where the negative framing involves more elaborative encoding
in the frontal lobe and the positive framing elicits more holistic encoding in the
medial temporal cortex.


Table 9.3 Brain regions associated with framing effects
Cluster size    Region                        BAs         Peak T value   MNI coordinates
Frame: positive > negative
122            Left medial temporal cortex    20           4.61          −39      −21     −21
Frame: negative > positive
120            Left superior frontal gyrus      6         −2.85          −15      −21       75
41             Left inferior frontal gyrus                −2.89          −57       21        9
9 Framing Effects: Behavioral Dynamics and Neural Basis                                     157




Fig. 9.1 Brain regions showing the effect of frame. Abbreviation IFG Inferior frontal gyrus; MTC
Medial temporal cortex; SFG Superior frontal gyrus. Error bars denote standard errors. The
statistical signiﬁcance was determined by Monte Carlo simulations to obtain a P-corrected value
<0.05, after correcting for whole brain comparisons. The corrected threshold corresponds to a
P-uncorrected value <0.005 with a minimum cluster size of 1080 mm3 (a gray mask with 55,342
voxels was used)


9.2.4     A Meta-Analysis of Neuroimaging Studies of Framing
          Effects—Toward a Better Understanding of Framing
          Effects

In the ﬁeld of neuroscience, there have not been many neuroimaging studies on
framing effect so far. We carried out a systematic search using the keywords
‘framing effect’ and ‘MRI’ to identify relevant studies included in the PubMed and
PsycINFO databases; the search was conducted in December 2012, and no time
span was speciﬁed for date of publication. Our inclusion criteria were that: (1) the
studies presented coordinate-based analyses of the data; (2) all or most of the brain
158                                                                            X.-T. Wang et al.

was imaged; and (3) participants were asked to choose in different frames. The
fMRI studies obtained from this search are summarized below in Table 9.4.
   As shown in Table 9.4, the choice tasks involved both life–death and monetary
and other types of problems. The behavioral framing effects were all signiﬁcant,
either bidirectional or unidirectional. Non-verbal valence framing had similar
behavioral effects. Guitart-Masip et al. (2010) adopted a unique valence framing by


Table 9.4 Functional MRI studies of framing effects
Study             Behavioral framing effects     Main neural correlates            n      Foci
                  inside the scanner
De Martino        Used monetary problems.        The framing effect was            20     6
et al. (2006)     The percentage of              associated with amygdala
                  risk-seeking choices           activity; but reduced by
                  =42.9 % in positive frame      ACC, OMPFC, and right
                  =61.6 % in negative frame      OFC activity
Gonzalez          Used life–death, monetary,     Higher activation in              15     7
et al. (2005)     and other problems. The        positive–gamble choices
                  percentage of risk-seeking     than in positive–certain
                  choices                        choices in the right
                  =33 % in positive frame        DLPFC, posterior
                  =59 % in negative frame        precentral sulcus, and
                                                 multiple areas in the
                                                 parietal cortex
Guitart-Masip     Used monetary problems         The framing effect was            24     3
et al. (2010)     with visual (conditioned       associated with activation of
                  stimuli) valence frames. The   the left amygdala, right
                  risk-seeking choices           caudate, and right insula
                  (in the last session)
                  =40 % in positive frame
                  =50 % in negative frame
Roiser et al.     Used monetary problems.        Framing effects-prone             30     4
(2009)            Framing susceptible and in-    individuals had higher
                  susceptible participants       activation in the left
                  differed in the size of the    amygdala, whereas
                  alleles at 5-HTTLPR. The       insusceptibility to framing
                  risk-seeking choices           was associated with ACC
                  =43.3 % in positive frame      activation.
                  =56.7 % in negative frame
Zheng et al.      Used life–death problems.        The framing effect was         22   3
(2010)            The risk-seeking choices         correlated with activation in
                  =52 % in positive frame          the right IFG. The
                  =65 % in negative frame          reduction of the framing
                                                   effect was associated with
                                                   activation in the right
                                                   insula and an area in the
                                                   right parietal cortex
Note: ACC Anterior cingular cortex; OMPFC Orbital and medial prefrontal cortex; DLPFC Dorsal
lateral prefrontal cortex; 5-HTTLPR serotonin transporter-linked polymorphic region; OFC The
orbitofrontal cortex; IFG inferior frontal gyrus
9 Framing Effects: Behavioral Dynamics and Neural Basis                            159

associating visual stimuli (different texture patterns printed on a card) with gains or
losses before using them as valence frames for framing choice outcomes. When the
sure-thing outcome of a choice is either presented on a ‘gain’ card (positive frame)
or on a ‘loss’ card (negative frame), classic monetary framing effects occurred.
    Brain regions which were reported to contribute to the appearance of framing
effects include the amygdala (De Martino et al. 2006; Guitart-Masip et al. 2010), the
insula, and the right IFG (Zheng et al. 2010).
    Some brain regions inhibit or reduce framing effects. De Martino et al. (2006)
found that greater activity in the orbital and medial prefrontal cortex (OMPFC)
predicted a reduced susceptibility to the framing effect across participants. The
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) was also implicated in reduced framing effects (De
Martino et al. 2006; Roiser et al. 2009).
    The ACC is thought to reduce framing effects by acting as a teaching signal
(Botvinick 2007). Because ACC activation was greater when participants’ choices
were incongruent with frame effects (De Martino et al. 2006), it may modulate the
motivational influence of the amygdala on choice. This possibility is supported by
the greater coupling between the ACC and the amygdala in participants who were
less susceptible to the frame (Roiser et al. 2009). A similar role might be attributed
to the orbital frontal cortex (OFC), a region which correlates with resistance to
monetary framing effects (De Martino et al. 2006), and with which the ACC has
strong reciprocal connectivity (Kringelbach and Rolls 2004).
    Interestingly, researchers discovered that susceptibility to framing is related to
genetic variation in the serotonin transporter gene (the 5-HTTLPR). Individuals
homozygous for the short allele at the 5-HTTLPR rather than individuals
homozygous for the long allele were found to be more susceptible to valence
framing when making hypothetical monetary risky choices. This susceptibility to
framing effects is associated with altered amygdala activity and lack of prefrontal
regulatory control (Roiser et al. 2009). However, this ﬁnding has been challenged
by a follow-up study. Talmi, Hurlemann, Patin, and Dolan (2010) reported that two
patients with Urbach-Wiethe disease, a rare condition associated with congenital,
complete bilateral amygdala degeneration, exhibited an intact framing effect.
However, choice preference in these patients did show a qualitatively distinct
pattern compared to controls, as evidenced by a signiﬁcantly increased risk-seeking
preference. These ﬁndings suggest that the amygdala does exert an overall influence
on risk-taking but may not play a causal role in framing effects.
    We then conducted our meta-analysis by entering the coordinates of all the foci
that were reported in the above fMRI studies of framing effects to get their topo-
graphic convergences. The goal of coordinate-based meta-analysis of neuroimaging
data is to identify brain areas where the reported foci of activation converge across
published experiments. In this meta-analysis of neural correlates of framing effects,
we adopted a widely used technique for coordinate-based meta-analyses of neu-
roimaging data, called activation likelihood estimation (ALE). ALE assesses the
overlap between foci based on modeling them as probability distributions centered
at their respective coordinates. ALE maps are then obtained by computing the union
of activation probabilities for each voxel. To differentiate true convergence of foci
160                                                                                 X.-T. Wang et al.

from random clustering (i.e., noise), a permutation test is applied: to obtain an ALE
null distribution, the same number of foci as in the real analysis are randomly
redistributed throughout the brain (see Eickhoff et al. 2009; Turkeltaub et al. 2002).
In other words, the meta-analysis determines if the clustering is signiﬁcantly higher
than expected under the null distribution of a random spatial association of results
from the considered experiments.
   Our analysis was implemented using GingerALE Version 2.1.1 (available at
http://brainmap.org/ale). The meta-analysis was performed using the Montreal
Neurological Institute (MNI) stereotactic coordinates derived from the studies listed
in Table 9.4. Coordinates published in Talairach space were transformed to the
Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template according to the Lancaster trans-
form (icbm2tal) in GingerALE. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined using a
permutation test of randomly generated foci. No assumptions were made con-
cerning the distribution or spatial separation of these random foci; however, clusters
of activity were required to exceed 200 mm3 in volume. The test was corrected for
multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate (FDR) method (Genovese et al.
2002). Anatomical labels of ﬁnal cluster locations are provided by the Talairach
Daemon.
   Initially, a total of 23 foci were analyzed. The ALE meta-analysis showed that
high ALE values were observed in the left ACC and the right IFG (see Table 9.5;
Fig. 9.2), indicating these two brain regions are the key neural correlates of framing
effects.
   We then added into the ALE meta-analysis the coordinates of the three foci
associated with framing effects as reported in the previous section of this chapter.
The brain localization results for framing effects based on the 26 foci remained the
same.
   Neurobiological studies of the right IFG have shown some converging evidence
for its unique role in ‘semantic selection’ by which competing activated concepts
are sorted out, inhibiting competing concepts while selecting one concept for
action, particularly when the concept to be selected involves atypical usage. For
instance, when people are given a common noun (e.g., cake) and asked to produce a
typical use (‘bake’ or ‘eat’), the left IFG is strongly active; but when asked to
produce an unusual use (e.g. ‘sell’) of such nouns, the right IFG is more strongly
active (see Jung-Beeman 2005 for a review). Both the left and the right IFG play a


Table 9.5 Neural correlates of framing effects derived from ALE meta-analysis
Cluster      Region           BA       Talairach                ALE (×10−2)         Volume (mm3)
                                       coordinates
                                       x       y        z
 1           Left ACC          24      −4       36     −6       1.16                408 (880)
 2           Right IFG         47       32      30     −8       0.90                216 (216)
Note: ACC Anterior cingulate cortex; IFG Inferior frontal gyrus, BA Brodmann area. The values in
parentheses are the results after adding four foci from the study reported in this chapter in the prior
section
9 Framing Effects: Behavioral Dynamics and Neural Basis                                       161




Fig. 9.2 Meta-analysis results of neural correlates of framing effects. a Topographic convergences
from the foci reported in the studies in Table 9.4. b Topographic convergences from the foci
reported in the studies in Table 9.4 plus additional foci reported in this chapter


unique role in understanding the ﬁgurative meaning of a metaphor beyond semantic
analysis (Rapp et al. 2004). In addition, the right IFG is active in response inhibition
and selection. The go/no-go task, which taps the ability to inhibit prepotent
response tendency (for instance, stop pressing a button when a red signal appears),
has consistently activated the lateral prefrontal cortex, particularly the right IFG
(Aron et al. 2003; Asahi et al. 2004; Chikazoe et al. 2007). Some researchers
consider the right IFG the most important prefrontal structure that exerts inhibition
and cognitive control over subcortical structures of the brain (Aron et al. 2004). The
same area is also implicated in risk aversion: higher risk aversion is correlated with
higher activity at the right IFG (Christopoulos et al. 2009).
   Coupled with the results of our meta-analysis, these ﬁndings suggest that the
right IFG is a unique neural correlate of framing effects. It plays an integrative role
in evaluating risk-related cues and in regulating risk preference and choice selection
based on both semantic and affective meanings imbedded in choice problems.
   Researchers have suggested a variety of ways to interpret the neuroimaging
ﬁndings of the framing effect. De Martino et al. (2006) suggested that the framing
effect is driven by an affect heuristic underwritten by an emotional system. From the
perspective of a dual-system framework, Kahneman and Frederick (2006) inter-
preted these ﬁndings as evidence that different frames evoke distinct emotional
responses that different individuals can suppress to various degrees. Similarly,
Gonzalez et al. (2005) proposed a model which tries to incorporate a tradeoff
between the cognitive effort required to calculate expected values of an alternative
and the affective value of the alternative to explain the choice process underlying
the framing effect.
162                                                                             X.-T. Wang et al.

   Based on our meta-analysis and the AA hypothesis of framing effects, we pro-
pose a new view on neural mechanisms of framing effects. First, valence framing as
a secondary choice cue becomes most salient and effective when primary contextual
or social cues are absent or incongruent. The processing of choice problems under
these conditions calls for an ambiguity-reducing and conflict-monitoring function,
which would result in the ACC recruitment and activation. Second, the right IFG
activation suggests that the nature of valence framing is both semantic and hedonic,
involving not only verbatim linguistic analysis but also interpretation of its affective
tones and metaphorical implications.

Acknowledgments This work was partially supported by National Science Foundation
(NSF) Grant SES-1123341, and a research fund from the Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science,
Institute of Psychology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences to the ﬁrst author, and a research fund
(No. Y2CQ043005) from the Institute of Psychology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences to the
second author. We thank Steven Garelik for his helpful comments on an earlier version of this
paper.




References

Aron AR, Fletcher PC, Bullmore ET, Sahakian BJ, Robbins TW (2003) Stop-signal inhibition
   disrupted by damage to right inferior frontal gyrus in humans. Nat Neurosci 6:115–116
Aron AR, Robbins T, Poldrack R (2004) Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex. Trends
   Cogn Sci 8:170–177
Asahi S, Okamoto Y, Okada G, Yamawaki S, Yokota N (2004) Negative correlation between right
   prefrontal activity during response inhibition and impulsiveness: an fMRI study. Eur Arch
   Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 254:245–251
Bless H, Betsch T, Franzen A (1998) Framing the framing effect: the impact of context cues on
   solutions to the “Asian disease” problem. Euro J Soc Psychol 28:287–291
Bloomﬁeld AN (2006) Group size and the framing effect: treats to human beings and animals.
   Mem Cogn 34:929–937
Bloomﬁeld AN, Sager JA, Bartels DM, Medin DL (2006) Caring about framing effects. Mind Soc
   5:123–138
Bohm P, Lind H (1992) A note on the robustness of a classical framing result. J Econ Psychol
   13:355–361
Botvinick MM (2007) Conflict monitoring and decision making: Reconciling two perspectives on
   anterior cingulate function. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 7:356–366
Botvinick MM, Cohen JD, Carter CS (2004) Conflict monitoring and anterior cingulate cortex: an
   update. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 8:539–546
Breiter HC, Aharon H, Kahneman D, Dale A, Shizgal P (2001) Functional imaging of neural
   responses to expectancy and experience of monetary gains and losses. Neuron 30:619–639
Cendri A, Hutcherson CA, Plassmann H, Gross JJ, Rangel A (2012) Cognitive regulation during
   decision making shifts behavioral control between ventromedial and dorsolateral prefrontal
   value systems. J Neurosci 32:13543–13554
Chang CJ, Yen SH, Duh RR (2002) An empirical investigation of competing theories to explain
   the framing effect in accounting-related decision. Behav Res Acc 14:35–64
Chikazoe J, Konishi S, Asari T, Jimura K, Miyashita Y (2007) Activation of right inferior frontal
   gyrus during response inhibition across response modalities. J Cogn Neurosci Arch 19:69–80
Chong D, Druckman J (2007) Framing theory. Annu Rev Polit Sci 10:103–126
9 Framing Effects: Behavioral Dynamics and Neural Basis                                     163

Christopoulos GI, Tobler PN, Bossaerts P, Dolan RJ, Schultz W (2009) Neural correlates of value,
   risk, and risk aversion contributing to decision making under risk. J Neurosci 29:12574–12583
Cohen NJ, Eichenbaum HE (1993) Memory, amnesia, and the hippocampal system. MIT Press,
   Cambridge, MA
De Martino B, Kumaran D, Seymour B, Dolan RJ (2006) Frames, biases, and rational
   decision-making in the human brain. Science 313:684–687
Druckman JN (2001) On the limits of framing effects: Who can frame? J Polit 63:1041–1066
Dunegan KJ (1993) Framing, cognitive modes, and image theory: toward an understanding of a
   glass half full. J Appl Psychol 78:491–503
Eickhoff SB, Laird AR, Grefkes C, Wang LE, Zilles K, Fox PT (2009) Coordinate-based
   activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis of neuroimaging data: a random-effects
   approach based on empirical estimates of spatial uncertainty. Hum Brain Mapp 30:2907–2926
Fagley NS, Miller PM (1987) The effects of decision framing on choice of risky vs. certain
   options. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 39:264–277
Fagley NS, Miller PM (1990) The effect of framing on choice: interactions with risk-taking
   propensity, cognitive style, and sex. Pers Soc Psychol Bull 16:496–510
Fagley NS, Miller PM (1997) Framing effects and arenas of choice: your money or your life?
   Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 71:355–373
Genovese CR, Lazar NA, Nichols TE (2002) Thresholding of statistical maps in functional
   neuroimaging using the false discovery rate. NeuroImage 15:870–878
Gigerenzer G, Hoffrage U, Kleinbölting H (1991) Probabilistic mental models: a Brunswikian
   theory of conﬁdence. Psychol Rev 98:506–528
Gonzalez C, Dana J, Koshino H, Just M (2005) The framing effect and risky decisions: examining
   cognitive functions with fMRI. J Econ Psychol 26:1–20
Guitart-Masip M, Talmi D, Dolan R (2010) Conditioned associations and economic decision
   biases. NeuroImage 53:206–214
Holroyd CB, Nieuwenhuis S, Mars RB, Coles MGH (2004) Anterior cingulate cortex, selection for
   action, and error processing. In Posner MI (ed) Cognitive neuroscience of attention. Guilford
   Press, New York, pp 219–231
Honey GD, Fu CH, Kim J et al (2002) Effects of verbal working memory load on corticocortical
   connectivity modeled by path analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging data.
   NeuroImage 17:573–582
Jung-Beeman M (2005) Bilateral brain processes for comprehending natural language. Trends
   Cogn Sci 9:512–518
Kahneman D, Frederick S (2006) Frames and brains: elicitation and control of response
   tendencies. Trends Cogn Sci 11:45–46
Kahneman D, Tversky A (1979) Prospect theory. Econometrica 47:263–292
Kringelbach ML, Rolls ET (2004) The functional neuroanatomy of the human orbitofrontal cortex:
   evidence from neuroimaging and neuropsychology. Prog Neurobiol 72:341–372
Kühberger A (1995) The framing of decisions: a new look at old problems. Organ Behav Hum
   Decis Process 62:230–240
Kühberger A (1998) The influence of framing on risky decisions: a meta-analysis. Organ Behav
   Hum Decis Process 75:23–55
Kühberger A, Schulte-Mecklenbeck M, Perner J (1999) The effects of framing, reflection,
   probability, and payoff on risk preference in choice tasks. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process
   78:204–231
Kuo FY, Hsu CW, Day RF (2009) An exploratory study of cognitive effort involved in decision
   under Framing-an application of the eye-tracking technology. Decis Support Syst 48:81–91
LeBoeuf RA, Shaﬁr E (2003) Deep thoughts and shallow frames: on the susceptibility to framing
   effects. J Behav Decis Mak 16:77–92
Levin IP, Chapman DP (1990) Risk taking, frame of reference, and characterization of victim
   groups in AIDS treatment decisions. J Exp Soc Psychol 26:421–434
Levin IP, Gaeth GJ (1988) Framing of attribute information before and after consuming the
   product. J Consum Res 15:374–378
164                                                                             X.-T. Wang et al.

Levin IP, Schneider S, Gaeth GJ (1998) All frames are not created equal: a typology and critical
   analysis of framing effects. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 76:149–188
McElroy T, Seta J (2003) Framing effects: an analytic-holistic perspective. J Exp Soc Psychol
   39:610–617
McElroy T, Seta JJ (2004) On the other hand Am I rational? Hemispheric activation and the
   farming effect. Brain Cogn 55:572–580
Meyerowitz BE, Chaiken S (1987) The effect of message framing on breast self-examination
   attitudes, intentions, and behavior. J Pers Soc Psychol 52:500–510
Miller PM, Fagley NS (1991) The effects of framing, problem variations, and providing rationale
   on choice. Pers Soc Psychol Bull 17:517–522
Montague PR, Berns GS (2002) Neural economics and the biological substrates of valuation.
   Neuron 36:265–284
Moscovitch M (1994) Cognitive resources and dual-task interference effects at retrieval in normal
   people: the role of the frontal lobes and medial temporal cortex. Neuropsychology 8:524
O’Doherty J, Kringelbach ML, Rolls ET, Hornak J, Andrews C (2001) Abstract reward and
   punishment representations in the human orbitofrontal cortex. Nat Neurosci 4:95–102
Owen AM (1997) The functional organization of working memory processes within human lateral
   frontal cortex: the contribution of functional neuroimaging. Euro J Neurosci 9:1329–1339
Payne JW, Bettman JR, Johnson EJ (1993) The adaptive decision maker. Cambridge University
   Press, New York
Piazza M, Izard V, Pinel P, Le Bihan D, Dehaene S (2004) Tuning curves for approximate
   numerosity in the human intraparietal sulcus. Neuron 44:547–555
Pinel P, Piazza M, Le Bihan D, Dehaene S (2004) Distributed and overlapping cerebral
   representations of number, size, and luminance during comparative judgments. Neuron
   41:983–993
Rapp AM, Leube DT, Erb M, Grodd W, Kircher TTJ (2004) Neural correlates of metaphor
   processing. Cogn Brain Res 20:395–402
Reyna VF, Brainerd CJ (1991) Fuzzy-trace theory and framing effects in choice: Gist extraction,
   truncation, and conversion. J Behav Decis Mak 4:249–262
Reyna VF, Brainerd CJ (1995) Fuzzy-trace theory: an interim synthesis. Learn Individ Differ 7:1–75
Reyna VF, Brainerd CJ (2011) Dual processes in decision making and developmental
   neuroscience: a fuzzy-trace model. Dev Rev 31:180–206
Roiser JP, De Martino B, Tan GCY, Kumaran D, Seymour B, Wood NW, Dolan R (2009) A
   genetically mediated bias in decision making driven by failure of amygdala control. J Neurosci
   29:5985–5991
Shimizu K, Udagawa D (2011a) A re-examination of the effect of contextual group size on
   people’s attitude to risk. Judgment and Decision Making 6:156–162
Shimizu K, Udagawa D (2011b) How can group experience influence the cue priority? A
   re-examination of the ambiguity-ambivalence hypothesis. Front Evol Psychol 2:1–9
Sieck W, Yates JF (1997) Exposition effects on decision making: choice and conﬁdence in choice.
   Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 70:207–219
Sokol-Hessner P, Hutcherson C, Hare T, Rangel A (2012) Decision value computations adjust to
   the available decision time. Eur J Neurosci 35:1065–1074
Stanovich KE, West RF (1998) Individual differences in framing and conjunction effects. Think
   Reason 4:289–317
Takemura K (1994) Influence of elaboration on the framing of decision. J Psychol 128:33–39
Talmi D, Hurlemann R, Patin A, Dolan R (2010) Framing effect following bilateral amygdala
   lesion. Neuropsychologia 48:1823–1827
Tom SM, Fox CR, Trepel C, Poldrack RA (2007) The neural basis of loss aversion in decision
   making under risk. Science 315:515–518
Tulving E, Kapur S, Craik FIM, Markowitsch HJ, Houle S (1994) Hemispheric encoding/retrieval
   asymmetry in episodic memory: positron emission tomography ﬁndings. Proc Natl Acad
   Sci USA 91:2016–2020
9 Framing Effects: Behavioral Dynamics and Neural Basis                                  165

Turkeltaub PE, Eden GF, Jones KM, Zefﬁro TA (2002) Meta-analysis of the functional
   neuroanatomy of single-word reading: method and validation. Neuroimage 16:765–780
Tversky A, Kahneman D (1981) The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science
   211:453–458
Wang XT (1996a) Framing effects: Dynamics and task domains. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process
   68:145–157
Wang XT (1996b) Domain-speciﬁc rationality in human choices: violations of utility axioms and
   social contexts. Cognition 60:31–63
Wang XT (2008) Risk communication and risky choice in context: ambiguity and ambivalence
   hypothesis. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1128:78–89
Wang XT, Johnson GJ (2012) A tri-reference point theory of decision making under risk. J Exp
   Psychol Gen 141:743–756
Wang XT, Johnston V (1995) Perceived social context and risk preference: a re-examination of
   framing effects in a life-death decision problem. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
   8:279–293
Wang XT, Simons F, Brédart S (2001) Social cues and verbal framing in risky choice. J Behav
   Decis Mak 14:1–15
Whitney P, Rinehart CA, Hinson JM (2008) Framing effects under cognitive load: The role of
   working memory in risky decisions. Psychon Bull Rev 15:1179–1184
Zhang Y, Miao D (2008) Social cues and framing effects in risky decisions among Chinese
   military students. Asian J Soc Psychol 11:241–246
Zheng H, Wang XT, Zhu L (2010) Framing effects: behavioral dynamics and neural basis.
   Neuropsychologia 48:3198–3204
