CHAPTER ELEVEN

The SPE: Ethics and Extensions

We’ve traveled too far, and our momentum has taken over: We move idly towards eternity, without possibility of reprieve or hope of explanation.

—Tom Stoppard, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead, Act 3 (1967)



We have seen the way in which the momentum of the simulated Stanford Prison took over the lives of those within its walls—mostly for the worse. In the previous chapter, I sketched a rough answer to the question of how people could be so swiftly and radically transformed. In particular, I pointed out the ways in which situational and systemic forces operated in tandem to spoil the fruits of human nature.

Our young research participants were not the proverbial “Bad Apples” in an otherwise good barrel. Rather, our experimental design ensured that they were initially good apples and were corrupted by the insidious power of the bad barrel, this prison. Of course, compared to the toxic and lethal nature of real civilian and military prisons, our Stanford Prison was relatively benign. The changes in the ways our volunteer participants thought, felt, and behaved in this environment were the consequences of known psychological processes that operate on all of us in various ways in many situations—albeit not so intensely, pervasively, and relentlessly. They were enmeshed in a “total situation” whose impact was greater than most ordinary situations that we move into and out of repeatedly at will.1

Consider the possibility that each of us has the potential, or mental templates, to be saint or sinner, altruistic or selfish, gentle or cruel, submissive or dominant, sane or mad, good or evil. Perhaps we are born with a full range of capacities, each of which is activated and developed depending on the social and cultural circumstances that govern our lives. I will argue that the potential for perversion is inherent in the very processes that make human beings do all the wonderful things we do. Each of us is the end product of the complex development and specialization that have grown out of millions of years of evolution, growth, adaptation, and coping. Our species has reached its special place on Earth because of our remarkable capacity for learning, for language, for reasoning, for inventing, and for imagining new and better futures. Every human being has the potential to perfect the skills, talents, and attributes we need to go beyond surviving to thrive in and enhance our human condition.





THE PERVERSION OF HUMAN PERFECTIBILITY


Could some of the world’s evil result from ordinary people operating in circumstances that selectively elicit bad behavior from their natures? Let’s answer such a question with a few general examples and then refocus on the normal human processes that became degraded in the SPE. Memory enables us to profit from mistakes and build upon the known to create better futures. However, with memory come grudges, revenge, learned helplessness, and the rumination over trauma that feeds depression. Likewise, our extraordinary ability to use language and symbols enables us to communicate with others personally, abstractly, over time and place. Language provides the foundation for history, planning, and social control. However, with language come rumors, lies, propaganda, stereotypes, and coercive rules. Our remarkable creative genius leads to great literature, drama, music, science, and inventions like the computer and the Internet. Yet that same creativity can be perverted into inventing torture chambers and torture tactics, into paranoid ideologies and the Nazis’ efficient system of mass murder. Any one of our special attributes contains the possibility of its opposite negative, as in the dichotomies of love–hate; pride–arrogance; self-esteem–self-loathing.2

The fundamental human need to belong comes from the desire to associate with others, to cooperate, to accept group norms. However, the SPE shows that the need to belong can also be perverted into excessive conformity, compliance, and in-group versus out-group hostility. The need for autonomy and control, the central forces toward self-direction and planning, can be perverted into an excessive exercise of power to dominate others or into learned helplessness.

Consider three more such needs that can cut both ways. First, needs for consistency and rationality give meaningful and wise direction to our lives. Yet dissonant commitments force us to honor and rationalize wrong-headed decisions, such as prisoners remaining when they should have quit and guards justifying their abuse. Second, needs to know and to understand our environment and our relationship to it lead to curiosity, scientific discovery, philosophy, the humanities, and art. But a capricious, arbitrary environment that does not make sense can pervert those basic needs and lead to frustration and self-isolation (as it did in our prisoners). And finally, our need for stimulation triggers explorations and adventurous risk taking, but it can also make us vulnerable to boredom when we are placed in a static setting. Boredom, in turn, can become a powerful motivator of actions as we saw with the SPE night shift guards to have fun with their “playthings.”

However, let me make clear one critical point: understanding the “why” of what was done does not excuse “what” was done. Psychological analysis is not “excusiology.” Individuals and groups who behave immorally or illegally must still be held responsible and legally accountable for their complicity and crimes. However, in determining the severity of their sentence, the situational and systemic factors that caused their behavior must be taken into account.3

In the next two chapters, we will move beyond the SPE to review a large body of psychological research that complements and extends the arguments made so far about the power of situational forces in shaping human thinking and acting. Before moving on, we have go back to deal with some final, critical issues that were raised by this experiment. First, and most important, was the suffering worth it? There is no question that people suffered during this experiment. Those who made them suffer also had to deal with the recognition that they had gone beyond the demands of their role to inflict pain and humiliation on others for hours on end. Therefore, the ethics in this and similar research demand careful consideration.

Virtue, as Dante showed in the Inferno, is not simply refraining from sin; it requires action. Here I will discuss how paralysis of action worked in the SPE. In the next chapter, I will consider the broader implications of failure to act for society, as when passive bystanders fail to intervene when their help is needed.

In addition to dealing with the ethical errors of omission and with absolute ethics, we must focus in depth on the relative ethics that guide most scientific research. A central balance in the equation of relative ethics requires weighing pain against gain. Was the pain endured by the participants in this experiment offset by the gain to science and society generated by the research? In other words, did the scientific ends justify the experimental means? While there were many positive consequences that flowed from the study, the reader will have to decide for him or herself whether the study should ever have been done.

Research that provokes thought breeds other research and invites extensions, as the SPE did. After reflecting on the SPE’s ethics, we will briefly review some of the replications and applications of this study that offer a broader context for appreciating its significance.





ETHICAL REFLECTIONS ON THE SPE


Was the SPE study unethical? In several ways, the answer must surely be “Yes.” However, there are other ways of viewing this research that provide a reasonable “No.” Before we look at evidence in this retrospective analysis in support of each of these alternatives, I need to make clear why I am even discussing these matters decades after the study is over and done. Having focused much personal attention on these ethical issues, I believe that I can bring a broader perspective to this discussion than is typical. Other researchers may benefit by avoiding similar pitfalls if they become aware of some subtle warning signs, and also by engaging greater sensitivity to ethical safeguards that the SPE highlighted. Without being defensive or rationalizing my role in this study, I will use this research as a vehicle for outlining the complexity of ethical judgments involved in research that entails interventions in human functioning. First, let us consider the category of the ethics of intervention. That will provide a foundation for comparing absolute ethics to the relative ethics that guide experimental research.

The Ethics of Intervention

Every act of intervention in the life of an individual, a group, or an environment is a matter of ethics (the radical therapist R. D. Laing would say it is a “political decision”). The following diverse groups share common objectives: therapists, surgeons, counselors, experimentalists, educators, urban planners, architects, social reformers, public health agents, cult leaders, used-car salespeople, and our parents. They all subscribe to one of these objectives: cure, behavior modification, recommendations for action, training, teaching, mind alteration, control, change, monetary allocation, construction, or discipline—in sum, various forms of intervention that directly affect our lives or do so indirectly by changing human environments.

Most agents of intervention initially intend benefits to the target of change and/or society. However, it is their subjective values that determine the cost-benefit ratio and raise critical ethical questions for us to consider. We take for granted the value of the powerful socializing influences parents exert on their children in shaping them to their image and toward a socially, politically, and religiously imposed ideal. Should we care that parents do so without obtaining their children’s informed consent? Seems like an idle question until one considers parents who help indoctrinate their children into hate groups like the Ku Klux Klan, destructive cults, or terrorist cells, or into prostitution.

To put a finer point on the issue, “parental rights of domain” are usually not questioned—even when they teach children intolerance and prejudice—except when parents are excessively abusive in getting their way. But what can we say about the case of a father who wanted his son to be more patriotic, ostensibly a reasonable goal in almost all societies? The father in question wrote to a medical doctor whose advice column ran in a nationally circulated magazine: “I love my country and want my boy to love it too. Is it O.K. for me to give him a little pep talk while he’s asleep; no big deal, just some patriotic stuff?”

At one level, Dad is asking if this tactic will work; is there evidence that sleep learning can be effective in delivering such below-consciousness persuasive messages? (The answer is that there is no supporting evidence.) At another level, Dad is raising an ethical question: Is it ethical for him to indoctrinate his defenseless child in this way? Would it be ethical if he did so when the child was awake or if he used monetary reinforcement or social approval instead of this dubious technique? Is it his goal or his means that some might find ethically offensive? Would it be preferable instead for this anxious father to rely upon the more subtle indoctrination devices that are disguised as “education” in the classroom: national flags; pictures of national leaders; national anthems; prayers; and being forced to read historical narratives and geography and civics textbooks that often give a biased view of history and are designed by every society as propaganda to maintain the status quo? The point here is that we must increase our collective sensitivity to the broad range of daily situations where interventions occur as a “natural” process of social life and where a violation of ethics goes unnoticed because of its prevalent and insidious presence.





ABSOLUTE ETHICS


For the sake of brevity, we may say that ethics can be categorized as “absolute” or “relative.” When behavior is guided by absolute ethical standards, a higher-order moral principle that is invariant with regard to the conditions of its applicability can be postulated—across time, situations, persons, and expediency. Such absolute ethics are embodied in communal codes of conduct. These codes are often based upon adherence to a set of explicit principles, as in the Ten Commandments or the Bill of Rights. Such absolute ethics allow no degree of freedom that might justify means to an end or circumstances that might qualify instances where the principle is suspended or applied in an altered, watered-down form. In the extreme, no extenuating circumstances can justify an abrogation of the ethical standard.

An absolute ethical standard postulates that because human life is sacred it must not in any way be demeaned, however unintentionally. In the case of research, there is no justification for any experiment that induces human suffering. From such a position, it is even reasonable to maintain that no research should be conducted in psychology or medicine that violates the biological or psychological integrity of any human being regardless of the benefit that might, or even definitely accrue to the society at large.

Those who adopt this perspective argue that even if the actions that cause suffering are conducted in the name of science, for the sake of knowledge, “national security,” or any other high-flying abstraction—they are unethical. Within psychology, those closely identified with the humanist tradition have been most vocal in urging that the basic concern for human dignity must take precedence over the stated goals of the discipline, namely, to predict and control behavior.

The SPE Was Absolutely Unethical

On the basis of such an absolute ethic, the Stanford Prison Experiment must certainly be judged unethical because human beings did suffer considerable anguish. People suffered much more than they could have reasonably anticipated when they volunteered for an academic study of “prison life” that was being conducted at a prestigious university. Moreover, that suffering escalated over time and resulted in such extreme stress and emotional turmoil that five of the sample of initially healthy young prisoners had to be released early.

The guards also suffered from the realization of what they had done under the cloak of their role and behind their anonymity-engendering sunglasses. They could see and hear the pain and humiliation they were causing to fellow students who had done nothing to deserve such brutality. Their realization of their undeniably excessive abuse of the prisoners was much greater than the distress experienced by participants in Stanley Milgram’s classic research on “blind obedience to authority,” which we will review in depth in the next chapter.4 That research has been challenged as unethical because participants could imagine the pain they were supposedly inflicting by shocking a remote victim, the “learner.”5 But as soon as the study ended they discovered that the “victim” was really an experimental confederate who had never been hurt but only pretended to be. Their distress came from their awareness of what they might have done had the shocks been real. In contrast, the distress of our guards came from their awareness that their “shocks” to the prisoners were all real, direct, and continual.

An additional feature of the study that would qualify it as unethical was not disclosing in advance the nature of the arrests and formal booking at police headquarters to the students who had been assigned to the prisoner role or to their parents, who were caught off guard by this unexpected Sunday intrusion into their lives. We were also guilty of manipulating parents into thinking the situation of their sons was not as bad as it was by the various deceptive and control procedures we inaugurated on Visiting Nights. If you recall, we worried that parents would take their sons home if they fully realized the abusive nature of this mock prison. To forestall such action, which would have ended the study, we put on a “show” for them. We did so not only to keep our prison intact but also as a basic ingredient of our prison simulation, because such deceptions are usual in many systems under investigation by oversight committees. By putting out a good-looking red carpet, system managers counter complaints and concerns about the negative aspects of their situation.

Another reason for considering the SPE as unethical is the failure to terminate the study sooner than we did. I should have called it quits after the second prisoner suffered a severe stress disorder on Day 3. That should have been sufficient evidence that Doug-8612 was not faking his emotional reaction and breakdown on the previous day. We should have stopped after the next and the next and the next prisoners suffered extreme disorders. But we did not. It is likely, however, that I would have terminated the study on Sunday, at the end of a full week, as a “natural ending,” had not Christina Maslach’s intervention forced premature closure. I might have ended it after one week because I and the small staff of Curt Banks and David Jaffe were exhausted from dealing with the around-the-clock logistics and the need to contain the guards’ escalating abuses.

In retrospect, I believe that the main reason I did not end the study sooner, when it began to get out of hand, resulted from the conflict created in me by my dual roles as principal investigator, and thus guardian of the research ethics of the experiment, and as prison superintendent, eager to maintain the integrity and stability of my prison at all costs. I would like to believe that had someone else been playing the superintendent’s role, I would have seen the light and blown the whistle sooner. I now realize that there should have been someone with authority above mine, someone in charge of oversight of the experiment.

However, neither the members of the Human Subjects Research Committee nor I imagined in advance that any such external authority was necessary in an experiment where college students had the freedom to stay or go anytime the going became rougher than they could handle. Before the experiment, it was just “kids going to play cops and robbers,” and it was hard to imagine what could happen within a few days. It would have been good to have had advance hindsight operating.

I am sure that had this experiment been conducted in more recent times, the students and their parents would have filed lawsuits against the university and me. But the 1970s were a less litigious time in the United States than has existed since then. No legal charges were ever filed, and there were only a few attacks on the ethics of this research by professional colleagues.6 Indeed, it was I who requested a postexperiment ethics evaluation by the American Psychological Association in July 1973, which determined that the existing ethical guidelines had been followed.

Nevertheless, I do feel responsible for creating an institution that gave permission for such abuses to occur within the context of the “psychology of imprisonment.” The experiment succeeded all too well in creating some of what is worst in real prisons, but the findings came at the expense of human suffering. I am sorry for that and to this day apologize for contributing to this inhumanity.





RELATIVE ETHICS


Most research follows a utilitarian ethics model. When an ethical principle admits of contingent applications, its standard is relative and it is to be judged on pragmatic criteria weighted according to utilitarian principles. Obviously such a model guided this research, as it does most psychological experimentation. But what elements are considered in the cost-gain equation? How are the loss and gain to be proportionately weighted? Who is to judge whether the gain offsets the loss? These are some of the questions that must be faced if a position of relative ethics is deemed to be ethical at all.

Some solutions are resolved on the basis of conventional wisdom, meaning the present state of relevant knowledge, precedents in similar cases, social consensus, the values and sensitivity of the individual researcher, and the level of consciousness prevailing in the given society at a particular time. Research institutions, funding agencies, and governments also establish strict guidelines for and restrictions on all medical and nonmedical human research.

At the core of the ethical dilemma for social scientists is: Can a given researcher create a balance between what he or she believes is necessary for the conduct of socially or theoretically useful research and what is thought necessary to the well-being and dignity of the research participants? Since researchers’ self-serving biases may push them more nearly toward the former than the latter, external reviewers, particularly grant reviewers and institutional review boards (IRBs), must serve as ombudspersons for the relatively powerless participants. However, these external reviewers must also act in the interest of “science” and “society” in determining whether, and to what degree, some deception, emotional arousal, or other aversive states can be permitted in a given experiment. They operate on the assumption that any negative impact of such procedures is transient and not likely to endure beyond the limits of the experiment. Let us consider next how those competing interests were served in the SPE.

On the relativist side of the ethical argument, one could contend that the SPE was not unethical because of the following: The legal counsel of Stanford University was consulted, drew up a formal “informed consent” statement, and told us of the work, safety, and insurance requirements we had to satisfy for them to approve the experiment. The “informed consent” statement signed by every participant specified that during the experiment there would be an invasion of his privacy; prisoners would have only a minimally adequate diet, would lose some of their civil rights, and would experience harassment. All were expected to complete their two-week contract to the best of their ability. The Student Health Department was alerted to our study and prior arrangements were made for any medical care subjects might need. Approval was officially sought and received in writing from the agency sponsoring the research, the Group Effectiveness Branch of the Office of Naval Research (ONR), the Stanford Psychology Department, and Stanford’s Institutional Review Board (IRB).7

Aside from having the subjects arrested by police, there was no deception of the participants. Moreover, my staff and I repeatedly reminded the guards not to be physically abusive to the prisoners, individually or collectively. However, we did not extend the mandate to restrict psychological abuse.

Another factor that complicates assessing the ethics of this study is that our prison was open to inspection by outsiders, who should have protected the rights of the participants. Imagine you were a prisoner suffering in this setting. If you were a prisoner in our jail, who would you have wanted as your supporter? Who might have pressed the “Exit” button for you if you were unable to press it yourself? Would it have been the Catholic priest/prison chaplain when he saw you crying? Not a chance. How about your mom and pop, friends, family? Wouldn’t they intervene after they noticed that your condition was deteriorating? None ever did. Maybe help would have come from one of the many professional psychologists, graduate students, secretaries, or staff of the Psychology Department, some of whom watched live-action videos of parts of the study, took part in Parole Board hearings, or spoke to participants during interviews or when they were in the storage closet during the “break-in” fiasco. No help for you from that source.

As noted, each of these onlookers fell into playing a passive role. They all accepted my framing of the situation, which blinded them to the real picture. They also intellectualized because the simulation seemed real; or because of the realism of the role-playing; or because they focused solely on the minutiae of the experimental design. Moreover, the bystanders did not see the more severe abuses as they were unfolding, nor were the participants willing to disclose them fully to outsiders, even to close friends and families. They were driven, perhaps, by embarrassment, pride, or a sense of “manliness.” So many came and looked but did not see and just walked away.

Finally, what we did right was to engage in extensive debriefing, not just for three hours following the experiment but also on several subsequent occasions when most of the participants returned to review the videos and see a slide show of the study. I maintained contact with most of the participants for several years after the conclusion of the experiment, sending copies of articles, my congressional testimony, news clippings, and notices of upcoming TV shows on the SPE. Over the years, about a half dozen of the participants have joined me in some of these national broadcasts. I am still in contact with a few of them more than three decades later.

What was important about the extensive debriefing sessions was that they gave the participants a chance to openly express their strong feelings and to gain a new understanding of themselves and their unusual behavior in a novel, alien setting. Our method was a form of “process debriefing”8 in which we made explicit that some effects and beliefs that are developed in an experiment can last beyond the limits of the experiment. We explained the reasons they should not in this special case. I emphasized that what they had done was diagnostic of the negative nature of the prison situation that we had created for them and was not diagnostic of their personalities. I reminded them that they had been carefully selected, precisely because they were normal and healthy, and that they had been assigned randomly to one or the other of the two roles. They did not bring any pathology into the place; rather, the place elicited pathology of various kinds from them. In addition, I informed them that their peers likewise had done almost anything that any one prisoner did that was demeaning or disordered. The same was true of most of the guards, who at some time were abusive of the prisoners. They behaved as they did in the role exactly as their shift mates had.

I also tried to make the debriefing a lesson on “moral education” by explicitly discussing the moral conflicts we all faced throughout the study. A pioneering theorist in moral development, Larry Kohlberg, has argued that such discussions within the context of moral conflict are the primary, perhaps the only way to increase an individual’s level of moral development.9

Recall that the data from the mood adjective checklist showed that both prisoners and guards had returned to a more balanced emotional state following the debriefing session, to reach levels comparable to their emotional conditions at the start of the study. The relatively short duration of the negative impact of this intense experience on the participants can be ascribed to three factors: First, these youngsters all had a sound psychological and personal foundation to bounce back to after the study ended. Second, the experience was unique to and contained in that time, setting, costumes, and script, all of which could be left behind as a package of their “SPE adventure” and not reactivated in the future. Third, our detailed debriefing took the guards and prisoners off the hook for behaving badly and identified the features of the situation that had influenced them.

Positive Consequences to the Participants

In the traditional accounts of the relative ethics of research, in order for any research to be sanctioned it is necessary for the gain to science, medicine, and/or society to outweigh the cost to the participants. Although such a gain-cost ratio seems appropriate, I now want to challenge this method of accounting. The costs to the participants (“subjects” in the days of the SPE) were real, immediate, and often tangible. In contrast, whatever gains were anticipated when the study was designed or approval given were merely probable and distant and perhaps might never be realized. Much promising research does not yield significant results and thus is not even published and circulated in the scientific community. Even significant published findings may not translate into practice, and practice may not prove feasible or practical when scaled up to the level of social benefits. On the other hand, some basic research that had no obvious application when originally conceived has turned out to yield important applications. For example, basic research on the conditioning of the autonomic nervous system has led directly to the use of biofeedback as a therapeutic aid in health care.10 Moreover, most researchers have shown little interest or talent in the “social engineering” applications of their findings to personal and social problems. Taken together, these criticisms say that the lofty “gain” side of the research ethical equation may not be met either in principle or practice, while the pain part remains a net loss as well as a gross loss to participants and society.

Also singularly missing from this ethical equation is concern for the net gain to the participants. Do they benefit in some way from having been part of a given research project? For instance, does their financial remuneration offset the distress they experience from taking part in medical research assessing aspects of pain? Do people value the knowledge they accrue as research participants? Do they learn something special about themselves from the research experience? Adequate, detailed debriefing is essential to realize this secondary objective of human subjects research. (For an example of how this can be achieved in one of my experiments on induced psychopathology, see notes.11) But such gains cannot be assumed or hoped for; they must be demonstrated empirically as outcome measures of any study conducted with a prior sense of its “questionable ethics.” Also absent from most considerations of research ethics is the obligation incumbent on researchers to engage in a special kind of social activism that makes their research useful to their field of knowledge and to the improvement of their society.

I would like to balance the SPE’s ethics slate a bit by first noting some remarkable profits it had to both its participants and staff. Then I will outline some of the social activism that I have engaged in over the past three or more decades to ensure that the value of this experiment has been realized as fully as possible.

Unexpected Personal Gains to SPE Participants and Staff

A number of unexpectedly positive effects emerged from this study that have had lasting impact on some of the participants and staff. In general, most of the participants indicated on their final follow-up evaluations (submitted from home at varying times after the study) that it was a valuable personal learning experience. These positives help balance, to some extent, the obvious negatives of the prison experience, as we note that none of the participants would volunteer for a similar study again. Let’s examine some of the positive aftershocks of the SPE, taken from their evaluations.



Doug, Prisoner 8612, a ringleader of the prisoner rebellion, was the first prisoner to suffer an extreme emotional stress reaction. His response forced us to release him after only thirty-six hours. The experience was truly disturbing for him, as he said in an interview during the filming of our documentary, Quiet Rage: The Stanford Prison Experiment: “As an experience it was unique, I’ve never screamed so loud in my life; I’ve never been so upset in my life. It was an experience of being out of control, both of the situation and of my feelings. Maybe I’ve always had difficulties with losing control. I wanted to understand myself, so I went into psychology [after the SPE]. I’ll go into psychology and I’ll learn what makes a person tick so I won’t be so afraid of the unknown.”12

In a follow-up evaluation that he completed five years after the study, Doug revealed that he started to simulate extreme distress in order to be released, but then that role got to him. “I figured the only way I could get out of the experiment was to play sick, first physical. Then when that didn’t work I played at mental fatigue. However, the energy it took to get into that space, and the mere fact that I could be so upset, upset me.” How upset? He reported that his girlfriend told him that he was so upset and nervous that he talked about the experiment constantly for two months afterward.

Doug went on to get a Ph.D. in clinical psychology, in part to learn how to gain greater control over his emotions and behavior. He did his dissertation on shame (of the prisoner status) and guilt (of the guard status), completing his internship at San Quentin State Prison, rather than in the usual medical/clinical setting, and has been a forensic psychologist in the San Francisco and California corrections systems for more than twenty years. It was his moving testimony that gave us the title of our video, Quiet Rage, as he talked about the sadistic impulse in guards that must be guarded against because it is always there in situations of differential power—ready to slip out, to explode, as a kind of “quiet rage.” Part of Doug’s career has focused on helping inmates maintain a sense of dignity despite their surroundings, and to enable guards and prisoners to coexist more amicably. This is a case of the initial strongly negative effect of the SPE being transformed into insight that has had enduring consequences for the individual and society. There was much pain and much gain to the same research subject.



Guard Hellmann, the tough “John Wayne” macho guard, has been featured in all of the televised portrayals of the study for his dominating role and the “creatively evil” tasks and games he invented for the prisoners. We met recently at a lecture I was giving, and he confided that, unlike Andy Warhol’s fifteen minutes of fame, which everyone gets once in a lifetime, the Stanford Prison Experiment has provided him with “fifteen minutes of infamy, permanently.” In response to my request that he think about whether his participation may have had any positive consequences on his life, he sent me this note:



Decades of carrying the baggage of life have softened the arrogant and insensitive teenager that I was in 1971. If someone had told me that my actions had harmed any of the prisoners, my likely response would have been “they’re weaklings and sissies.” But the memory of how I fell so deeply into my role that I was blind to the suffering of others serves today as a cautionary tale, and I think carefully about how I treat people. In fact, some might find me overly sensitive for my role as a business owner, as I sometimes hesitate to make decisions to, for example, fire non-performing employees for fear that it would be a hardship to them.”13



Guard Vandy explained some of the personal insight he gained from his experience as the tough leader of his shift. During a follow-up evaluation a few months later, he told us, “My enjoyment in harassing and punishing prisoners was quite unnatural because I do tend to think of myself as being sympathetic to the injured, especially animals. I think it was an outgrowth from my total freedom to rule the prisoners; I began to abuse my authority. In view of this I have tried to realize when I am being pushy or authoritarian and then correct it. I find it much easier to examine it and realize just when I am behaving that way. I feel that now because of my ability to better understand it, that I have become less demanding and bossy than I was before the experiment.”



Carlo Prescott, our prison consultant, was released from San Quentin State Prison only six months before his involvement in the SPE. He had been incarcerated in several California prisons as well as in a California Youth Authority facility for more than seventeen years of his life. The changes in his professional status and the enhanced self-esteem that accompanied his teaching at Stanford with me on the subject of the psychology of imprisonment, and his contributions to the SPE, have had salutary consequences for him. He landed a good job as the radio talk-show host of Carlo’s Corner on San Francisco’s KGO station, where he provoked his listeners to social consciousness and offered penetrating insights into racist and fascist trends in the United States. He also taught other college courses, lectured in the community, did community service, gave congressional testimony along with me, and has been a model citizen all these years.



Craig Haney went on to graduate from Stanford University’s Law School with J.D., as well as a Ph.D. from our Psychology Department. He is a professor on the faculty of the University of California, Santa Cruz, where he teaches popular courses in psychology and law and in the psychology of institutions. Craig has become one of the nation’s leading consultants on prison conditions and one of only a handful of psychological experts working with attorneys who represent prisoner class action suits in the United States. He has written extensively and brilliantly about many different aspects of crime, punishment, execution, and correction. We have collaborated on a number of professional journal articles, books, and trade magazines.14 His statement of the impact that the SPE had on him clearly shows the worth of this experiment:



For me, the Stanford Prison Experiment was a formative, career-altering experience. I had just finished my second year as a psychology graduate student at Stanford when Phil Zimbardo, Curtis Banks, and I began to plan this research. My interests in applying social psychology to questions of crime and punishment had just begun to crystallize, with Phil Zimbardo’s blessing and support . . . . Not long after I finished my work on the SPE I began to study actual prisons and eventually focused also on the social histories that helped to shape the lives of the people who were confined inside them. But I never lost sight of the perspective on institutions that I gleaned from observing and evaluating the results of 6 short days inside our simulated prison.15



Christina Maslach, the heroine of the SPE, is now a psychology professor at the University of California, Berkeley, vice provost of undergraduate education, dean of letters and sciences, and a Carnegie Foundation Distinguished Professor of the Year. Her brief but powerful experience in the SPE also had a positive impact on her career decisions, as she said in this retrospective account:16



For me, the important legacy of the prison experiment is what I learned from my personal experience and how that helped to shape my own subsequent professional contributions to psychology. What I learned about most directly was the psychology of dehumanization—how basically good people can come to perceive and treat others in such bad ways; how easy it is for people to treat others who rely on their help or good will as less than human, as animals, inferior, unworthy of respect or equality. That experience in the SPE led me to do the pioneering research on burnout—the psychological hazards of emotionally demanding human service work that can lead initially dedicated and caring individuals to dehumanize and mistreat the very people they are supposed to serve. My research has tried to elucidate the causes and consequences of burnout in a variety of occupational settings; it has also tried to apply these findings to practical solutions. I also encourage analysis and change of the situational determinants of burnout rather than focusing on individual personalities of the human caregivers. So my own story in the Stanford Prison Experiment is not simply whatever role I played in ending the study earlier than planned, but my role in beginning a new research program that was inspired by my personal experience with that unique study.17



I might add that as the flip side to the deindividuation processes that were so potent in the SPE, Christina has also done pioneering research on its opposite, individuation, the ways in which people strive for uniqueness.18



Phil Zimbardo. And then there was me. (See notes for status of Curtis Banks and David Jaffee.19) The week in the SPE changed my life in many ways, both professionally and personally. The outcomes that can be traced to the unexpectedly positive consequences that this experience created for me were vast. My research was affected, as was my teaching and personal life, and I became a social change agent for improving prison conditions and highlighting other forms of institutional abuses of power.

My research focus for the following three decades has been stimulated by a variety of ideas I extracted from this prison simulation. They led me to study shyness, time perspective, and madness. It also changed my approach to teaching. Please allow me, at this point, to amplify on these three intersecting lines of research and the changes in my teaching style that were all stimulated by the SPE. Following that, I will reveal in a bit more detail how the experiment also helped to change my personal life.

Shyness as Self-Imposed Prison

What other dungeon is so dark as one’s own heart! What jailer so inexorable as one’s self?


—Nathaniel Hawthorne



In our basement jail, prisoners surrendered their basic freedoms in response to the coercive control of the guards. Yet in real life beyond the laboratory, many people voluntarily give up their freedoms of speech, action, and association without external guards forcing them to do so. They have internalized the demanding guard as part of their self-image; the guard who limits their options for spontaneity, liberty, and joy in life. Paradoxically, these same people have also internalized the image of the passive prisoner who reluctantly acquiesces to these self-imposed restrictions on all their actions. Any action that calls attention to one’s person threatens her or him with potential humiliation, shame, and social rejection and thus must be avoided. In response to that inner guardian, the prisoner-self shrinks back from life, retreats into a shell, and chooses the safety of the silent prison of shyness.

Elaborating that metaphor from the SPE led me to think about shyness as a social phobia that breaks the bonds of the human connection by making other people threatening rather than inviting. The year after our prison study ended, I started a major research initiative, the Stanford Shyness Project, to investigate the causes, correlates, and consequences of shyness in adults and adolescents. Ours was the first systematic study of adult shyness; once we knew enough, we went on to develop a program for treating shyness in a unique Shyness Clinic (1977). The clinic, which has been in continuous operation over all this time in the Palo Alto community, has been directed by Dr. Lynne Henderson and is now part of the Pacific Graduate School of Psychology. My primary goal in the treatment and prevention of shyness has been to develop means to help shy people liberate themselves from their self-imposed, silent prisons. I have done so in part through writing popular books for the general public on how to deal with shyness in adults and children.20 These activities are a counterpoint to the imprisonment to which I had subjected the participants in the SPE.

Time Perspective Biases

People on the outside tend to live looking toward the future. The future for a convict is vague and sketchy. His past is gone; people stop writing after a while. The present becomes magnified.


—Ken Whalen, ex-convict and playwright21



In the SPE, time sense became distorted in many ways. For the prisoners, their sleep cycle was disrupted by forced awakening for the counts; they were always tired, and that exhaustion was amplified by the tedious exercises and menial work regimes assigned to them. Their sense of time was also affected by the absence of external signs of day and night and lack of clocks. (The absence of clocks is part of the design strategy of gambling casinos to embed gamblers in an expanded present by removing any references to time.) As noted in the last chapter, the prisoners magnified their focus on the awful present by talking about the immediate situation and rarely about their past or future lives. Interestingly, after each of the prisoners who was released early was gone, the remaining prisoners made virtually no references to them. They were gone and forgotten, pushed out of immediate memory focus.

As for the staff, our time perspective also became distorted by the long shifts we had to endure, the short sleep episodes, and the many different logistical and tactical issues we had to deal with every day and night. I think that some of our misjudgments and indecisions can be traced in part to our distorted time sense. These experiences led to my need to understand how human behavior is influenced by our sense of time perspective, the way we partition the flow of our experiences into the temporal categories of past, present, and future. Using surveys, interviews, experiments, and cross-cultural studies, I learned many new things about time perspective that enabled me to develop a valid, reliable metric for assessing individual differences in time perspective.22 The Zimbardo Time Perspective Inventory (ZTPI) is being used by researchers around the world to study a host of important phenomena, such as decision-making biases, health issues, stress, addiction, problem solving, environmental sustainability, and many more “time-tagged” phenomena.

Most people’s lives are controlled by their overuse of one time frame—past, present, or future—and underreliance on the other frames, which they should be using in a more flexible, balanced fashion depending on the demands of any given situation. When there is work to be done, the discipline associated with future orientation is needed. When we need to connect to family and friends, the rooted positive past should be called upon. When we want to enjoy life’s sensual pleasures and seek new adventures, a present orientation best enables us to do so. Many factors contribute to biasing people toward being excessively present-oriented—either hedonistic or fatalistic—excessively future-oriented, or excessively past-oriented—in either positive or negative focus. Among those factors are cultural influences, education, religion, social class, family modeling, and personal experiences. The SPE made it obvious that time perspective was not merely a personal trait or an outcome measure but could be altered by experiences in situations that expanded or contracted it.

When studying institutions, it also becomes apparent that time perspective plays a powerful, hidden role in shaping the minds of the those who become “institutionalized,” whether in prisons, homes for the aged, or chronic care hospitals. Endless routines and undifferentiated daily activities create a seeming circularity of time—it just flows on, undivided into meaningful linear units but creeping onward as if it were an ant’s journey on a Möbius strip of life. Among his insights into the meaning of imprisonment in Soledad Brother, George Jackson reflects on time and its distortion:



The Time slips away from me . . . . There is no rest from it even at night . . . . The days, even the weeks lapse one into the other, endlessly into one another. Each day that comes and goes is exactly like the one that went before.23

Madness in Normal People

Do you know what you have done? [Sherlock Holmes asked Sigmund Freud] You have succeeded in taking my methods—observation and inference—and applying them to the inside of a subject’s head.


—Nicholas Meyer, The Seven Percent Solution



One of the most dramatic outcomes of the SPE was the way in which many healthy, normal young men began to behave pathologically in a short time. Because our selection procedures ruled out preexistent, so-called premorbid, dispositions as causal factors, I wanted to understand the processes by which psychopathological symptoms first develop in ordinary people. Thus, in addition to stimulating me to study shyness and time perspective, my experiences in the SPE stimulated a new line of theorizing and experimental research on how normal people first begin to “go mad.”

Most of what is known about abnormal functioning comes from retrospective analyses that attempt to figure out what factors might have caused the current mental disturbance in a given person—much like Sherlock Holmes’s strategies of inferential reasoning from effects back to causes. Instead, I tried to develop a model that focuses on the processes involved in the development of symptoms of mental disorders, such as phobia and paranoia. People are motivated to generate explanations when they perceive that some expectation about their functioning is violated. They try to make sense of what went wrong when they fail in academic, social, business, athletic, or sexual situations—depending on how important such a discrepancy is to their self-integrity. The rational search process for meaning is distorted by cognitive biases that focus attention on classes of explanation that are not appropriate in the current analysis. Thus, overusing explanations that focus on “people” as the causes of one’s reactions may bias the search for meaning toward developing symptoms characteristic of paranoid thinking. Similarly, explanations focused on “environments” as the causes of one’s reactions may bias that search toward the symptom development typical of phobic thinking.

This new model of the cognitive and social bases of “madness” in normal, healthy people has been validated in our controlled laboratory experiments. We have found, for example, that pathological symptoms may develop in up to one third of normal participants in the rational process of their trying to make sense of unexplained sources of arousal.24 We also demonstrated that college students with normal hearing who were made to experience partial temporary deafness by means of hypnotic suggestion soon began to think and act in paranoid ways, believing that others were hostile to them. Thus, undetected hearing impairment in the elderly may be a contributor to their development of paranoid disorders—and thus can be prevented or treated with hearing aids rather than psychotherapy or institutionalization.

Therefore, I have argued that the seeds of madness can be planted in anyone’s backyard and will grow in response to transient psychological perturbations in the course of the lifetime of ordinary experience. Switching from a restrictive medical model of mental disturbances to a public health model encourages the search for situational vectors at play in individual and societal disturbances rather than restricting the search to within the head of the distressed individual. We are in a better position to prevent, as well as to treat, madness and psychopathology when we bring fundamental knowledge of cognitive, social, and cultural processes to bear on a fuller appreciation of the mechanisms involved in transforming normal into dysfunctional behavior.

Teaching by Powering Down

My awareness of the ease with which I became a dominating power figure in the SPE led me to restructure my teaching methods to give students more power and limit the teacher’s role to his command of expertise in his field rather than social control. I instituted “open-mike” periods at the start of class when students in large lectures could criticize anything about the course or make personal statements about it. This evolved into online bulletin boards in which students were encouraged to speak openly about positive and negative aspects of the course every day throughout the term. I also reduced competition for top grades among students by not grading on a curve and instead developing absolute standards that derived from each student’s mastery of material criteria, taking tests with a learning partner, and even eliminating grading altogether in some courses.25

The SPE’s Personal Impact

The year after the end of the SPE (August 10, 1972), I married Christina Maslach at the Stanford Memorial Church, where we also renewed our marital vows on our twenty-fifth anniversary in the presence of our children. That heroine profoundly affects all that I do in the best ways imaginable. In this relationship, I was able to salvage one more bit of heaven from the hell of that prison experience.

Another personal impact that this little weeklong study had on me was in becoming an advocate for social change based on research-based evidence, in promoting prison reform, and in my dedicated efforts to maximize the reach of the SPE’s significant messages. Let’s review them in some detail.

Maximizing the Gain: Spreading the Social Gospel

While the SPE changed my life in many ways, one of the most abrupt changes occurred as the result of my invited appearance before a subcommittee of the U.S. House of Representatives: suddenly, I was transformed from an academic researcher to an advocate for social change. In its hearings on prison reform in October 1971, the subcommittee wanted not only analysis but also recommendations for reform. In my statement in the Congressional Record, I clearly advocated congressional intervention into the prison structure to bring about improvements in the condition of inmates, as well as for correctional personnel.26

My advocacy has largely taken the form of consciousness raising about the necessity for ending the “social experiment” of prisons because, as demonstrated by the high rates of recidivism, the experiment has failed. We must find the reason for that through more thorough systems analyses and propose alternative solutions to incarceration. We must also break down resistance to meaningful prison reform. My second testimony before a congressional subcommittee, which focused on juvenile detention (September 1973), moved me further toward becoming a social advocate. I outlined nineteen separate recommendations for improved treatment of detained juveniles.27 I was pleased to learn that a new federal law was passed that was in part stimulated by my testimony. Senator Birch Bayh, who headed this investigation, helped to put into law the rule that, to prevent their being abused, juveniles in pretrial detention should not be housed with adults in federal prisons. The SPE was about abuse of juveniles in pretrial detention. (Of course, we confused matters by having parole hearings, which in real life would not occur until one had been convicted and sentenced.)

One powerful legal impact of the SPE for me derived from my participation in the federal court trial of Spain et al. v. Procunier et al. (1973). The “San Quentin Six” prisoners had been isolated in solitary confinement for more than three years for their alleged involvement in the murder of guards and informer prisoners during the escape attempt of George Jackson on August 21, 1971. As an expert witness, I toured the facilities of San Quentin’s maximum-adjustment center and interviewed each of the six prisoners a number of times. My prepared statement and two days of trial testimony concluded with the opinion that all of these prison conditions of involuntary, prolonged, indefinite confinement under dehumanizing conditions constituted “cruel and unusual punishment” and must therefore be changed. The court arrived at a similar conclusion. In addition, I served throughout the trial as a psychological consultant to the team of lawyers for the plaintiffs.

These and other activities that I have engaged in following the SPE were undertaken with the sense of an ethical mission. To balance the relative ethics equation, I felt it was necessary to compensate for the pain experienced by our SPE participants by maximizing the gain of this research to science and society. My early efforts are summarized in a book chapter written in 1983, “Transforming Experimental Research into Advocacy for Social Change.”28

The Power of Media and Visual Images

Because the SPE was such a visual experience, we used its images to spread the message of situational power. First, I created a slide show of eighty images that were synchronized to my audiotaped narration, with the help of Gregory White in 1972; it was distributed mostly to college teachers as a lecture supplement. The advent of video enabled us to transfer these images and include in the presentation both archival footage from the study along with new footage, interviews, and my videotaped narration. This project was developed with a team of Stanford students headed by Ken Musen, the director of Quiet Rage: The Stanford Prison Experiment (1985). Recently, it was upgraded to DVD format with the assistance of Scott Plous in 2004. This fifty-minute presentation ensures the best quality and worldwide accessibility. Its many dramatic still and action images made it possible to further broaden the reach of the SPE by including a segment on it in Program 19 of the public television series that I helped to develop, Discovering Psychology, “The Power of the Situation.” I was also able to feature images from the SPE in my introductory psychology textbooks, Psychology and Life and Psychology: Core Concepts. Those images have also been incorporated into my lectures on the psychology of evil before student, professional, and civic audiences.

The first publication of the SPE was in an article in the mainstream media, “The Mind Is a Formidable Jailer: A Pirandellian Prison,” in The New York Times Magazine (April 8, 1973). This presentation was designed to reach beyond the usual limited academic audience for such experimental research. In this publication, the power of the story was amplified by the inclusion of many illustrative images. A story in Life magazine (October 15, 1971), entitled “I Almost Considered the Prisoners as Cattle,” attracted further media attention.

The visual nature of the SPE made it ripe for television and other media coverage. I mentioned earlier that it was featured only a few months after its completion on NBC-TV’s Chronolog series.29 The illustrated story of the SPE was also aired on 60 Minutes and the National Geographic TV series.30 Most recently, it was featured in a well-made television program, “The Human Behavior Experiments.”31

Other ways in which I have actively tried to extend the impact of our study include the following:



• Presenting the study to civic, judicial, military, law enforcement, and psychology groups to enlighten them and to arouse concern about prison life.

• Organizing conferences on corrections in the U.S. military (1972, 1973, and 1974) that examined the relationship of research programs to policy decisions and measured their impact on military correctional systems. One focus was on systemic problems, such as racial discrimination and the frustrations of ambition that are fostered by recruiters.32

• Helping a local community test out its new jail and its newly hired staff by creating a mock prison in which 132 citizens volunteered to role-play prisoners for three days: The power of role-playing we witnessed in the SPE was even more dramatic in this real jail setting—given that these guards realized that they were under public scrutiny, they behaved rather kindly. A reporter noted some of the extreme reactions: “A housewife exhibited the symptoms of a nervous breakdown and had to be released.” “A woman inmate took another hostage, held a knife to her throat, pierced the skin and refused to end the role she was supposed to be playing. Guards had to overpower her.” “Many would later remark that within a day their minds grew foggy and they couldn’t concentrate. They became irritated by the lack of privacy, especially the open toilets. Some felt abandoned and dehumanized. Others said they began to withdraw or wanted to rebel. Some lost track of time.” This demonstration alerted the staff to several technical and operational problems that they fixed before opening the jail for local felons. One of the mock prisoners was an attorney who concluded that despite the good appearance of the jail and the courteous staff, prison “really is a miserable place to be.”33 As a result of this mock prison trial, the officials put into place remedial practices designed to counter such extreme reactions from future inmates.

• Exchanging letters (all handwritten, in those precomputer days!) with more than two hundred prisoners, a dozen of whom became regular correspondents. Even today, I answer many e-mail queries every day from students, notably British high school students, for whom the SPE is required learning in the social and cognitive psychology portion of their A Level courses (see www.revision-notes.co.uk).



Two of the most powerful letters that were stimulated by the SPE came from a psychologist colleague recently and from a prisoner right after the study. I’d like to share them before we move on to examine further extensions of our experiment in different realms. The psychologist described the parallels between the SPE and the military indoctrination he had experienced:



My interest in social psychology began when I was a cadet at the USAF Academy and read about (or saw the video of) the SPE study in my intro psych class. It spoke to what I saw going on all around me in the indoctrination of promising young minds into killing, dehumanizing, abuse machines. Your analysis is dead on: It is not a question of getting more moral soldiers. Instead it is a question of recognizing how the situation of war (and the cultural institutions/practices of the military that we have designed to “prepare” people for that situation) creates monsters out of us all.34



A prisoner in an Ohio state prison described the abuses he experienced and the rage they instilled in him:



I was recently released from “solitary confinement” after being held therein for 37 months [months!]. A silent system was imposed upon me and to even “whisper” to the man in the next cell resulted in being beaten by guards, sprayed with chemical mace, black-jacked, stomped, and thrown into a “strip-cell” naked to sleep on a concrete floor without bedding, covering, wash basin, or even a toilet. The floor served as toilet and bed, and even there the “silent system” was enforced. To let a “moan” escape your lips because of the pain and discomfort resulted in another beating. I spent not days, but months there during my 37 months in solitary.

I have filed every writ possible against the administrative acts of brutality. The State Courts have all denied the petitions. Because of my refusal to let the “things die down” and “forget” all that happened during my 37 months in solitary, I am the most hated prisoner in this Ohio Penitentiary and called a “hard-core incorrigible.”

Professor Zimbardo, maybe I am an incorrigible, but if true, it’s because I would rather die than to accept being treated as less than a human being. I have never complained of my prison sentence as being unjustified except through legal means of appeals. I have never put a knife on a guard’s throat and demanded my release. I know that thieves must be punished and I don’t justify stealing, even though I am a thief myself. But now I don’t think I will be a thief when I am released.

No, I’m not rehabilitated. It’s just that I no longer think of becoming wealthy by stealing. I now only think of “killing.” Killing those who have beaten me and treated me as if I were a dog. I hope and pray for the sake of my own soul and future life of freedom, that I am able to overcome the bitterness and hatred which eats daily at my soul, but I know to overcome it will not be easy.





REPLICATIONS AND EXTENSIONS


We bring to an end our investigation into the Stanford Prison Experiment as a social phenomenon with a brief overview of the ways in which its results have been replicated or reproduced and have been extended in various domains. Beyond its utility within social science, the SPE has migrated far out into other realms, into the public arena of television shows, commercial film, and even artistic productions. Its basic findings about the ease with which good people can be transformed into perpetrators of evil if their institutional power is not restrained has led to some social and military applications designed to prevent such outcomes.

Because it is important for us to move on to consider the full range of psychological research that validates and broadens the conclusions of the SPE, at this point it is sufficient simply to outline these replications and extensions. A fuller presentation of this material, with detailed commentary and references, is available at www.lucifereffect.com.

A Solid Replication in Another Culture

A team of researchers at the University of New South Wales, Australia, extended the SPE by having one condition similar to ours and several other experimental variants to explore how social organizations influence the relationship between prisoners and guards.35 Their “Standard Custodial” regime was modeled on medium-security prisons in Australia and was closest in its procedure to the SPE. The researchers’ central conclusion of their rigorous experimental protocol notes: “Our results thus support the major conclusion of Zimbardo et al that hostile, confrontive relations in prisons result primarily from the nature of the prison regime, rather than the personal characteristics of inmates and officers”. These results, within this research design, also help offset skepticism about the validity of such simulation experiments by providing baselines to assess behavioral changes from objectively defined structural characteristics of real-life prisons.36

The Mock Psychiatric Ward Experience

For three days, twenty-nine staff members at Elgin State Hospital in Illinois were confined to a ward of their own, a mental ward in which they performed the role of “patient.” Twenty-two regular staff played their usual roles while trained observers and video cameras recorded what transpired. “It was really fantastic the things that happened in there,” reported research director Norma Jean Orlando. In a short time the mock patients began acting in ways that were indistinguishable from those of real patients: six tried to escape, two withdrew into themselves, two wept uncontrollably, one came close to having a nervous breakdown. Most experienced a general increase in tension, anxiety, frustration, and despair. The vast majority of staff-patients (more than 75 percent) reported feeling each of the following: “incarcerated,” without an identity, as if their feelings were not important, as if nobody were listening to them, not being treated as a person, nobody caring about them, forgetting it was an experiment, and really feeling like a patient. One staff-member-turned-patient who suffered during his weekend ordeal gained enough insight to declare: “I used to look at the patients as if they were a bunch of animals; I never knew what they were going through before.”37

The positive outcome of this study, which was conceived as a follow-up to the Stanford Prison Experiment, was the formation of an organization of staff members who worked cooperatively with current and former patients. They became dedicated to raising the consciousness of the hospital personnel about the way patients were being mistreated, as well as working at personally improving their own relationship to patients and of patients’ relationship with staff. They came to realize the power of their “total situation” to transform the behavior of patients and staff in unwelcome ways, and then in more constructive ways.

A Seeming Replication Failure in a TV Pseudoexperiment

An experiment was conducted for a BBC-TV show based on the SPE model. Its results challenged those of the SPE because the guards showed little violence or cruelty. Let’s fast-forward to the end of the study and its remarkable conclusion: the prisoners dominated the guards! The guards became “increasingly paranoid, depressed and stressed and complained most of being bullied.”38 Repeat, not the prisoners but the guards were distressed by their experiences in this reality TV show. Several of the guards couldn’t take it anymore and quit; none of the prisoners did so. The prisoners soon established the upper hand, working as a team to undermine the guards; then everyone got together and decided to form a peaceful “commune”—with the help of a labor union organizer! Our Lucifer Effect website contains a critical analysis of this pseudoexperiment.

The SPE as a Warning Against Abuse of Power

Two of the unexpected uses of our research have been in women’s shelters and in the Navy’s Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE) program. Directors of a number of shelters for abused women have informed me that they use our Quiet Rage video to illustrate the ease with which masculine power can become abusive and destructive. Seeing the film and discussing its implications helps abused women not to blame themselves for their abuse but to better understand the situational factors that transformed their once loving mates into such abusing criminals. The experiment has also become absorbed into some versions of feminist theory of gender relations based on power.

Every branch of the military has a version of the SERE program. It was developed after the Korean War to teach those captured by the enemy how to withstand and resist extreme forms of coercive interrogation and abuse. Central to the training is the psychological and physical hardship trainees experience for days within a mock prisoner-of-war camp. This intense, grueling simulation prepares them to better cope with the terrors they might face if they are captured and tortured.

I have been informed by several sources in the Navy that the SPE’s message of the ease with which command power can become excessive has been made explicit in its training through using both our video and our website. This serves to warn the SERE trainer-captors against the impulse to “go over the top” in abusing their “captives.” So one use of the SPE is to guide training in “guard” restraint in a setting that gives permission for guards to abuse others “for their own eventual good.”

On the other hand, the SERE program, as practiced by the Army at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, has been indicted by a number of critics as now being misused by the Pentagon. They argue that top officials have “flipped the switch” from focusing on ways to increase resistance by captured American soldiers to developing effective interrogation techniques to use against captured “enemy combatants” and other assumed enemies of America. According to several accounts, these techniques have migrated from the military SERE programs to Guantánamo Bay Prison, known as “Gitmo.”

An American law professor, M. Gregg Bloche, and Jonathan H. Marks, a British barrister and bioethics fellow, have condemned the use of these interrogation procedures, which have been developed in part by behavioral scientists and physicians. They argue that “by bringing SERE tactics and the Guantanamo model onto the battlefield, the Pentagon opened a Pandora’s box of potential abuse . . . the SERE model’s embrace by the Pentagon’s civilian leaders is further evidence that abuse tantamount to torture was national policy, not merely the product of rogue freelancers.”39 The investigative reporter Jane Mayer in a New Yorker essay, “The Experiment,” has expressed similar concerns.40 I will visit the issue of the misuse of the SPE by the Pentagon in chapter 15.

The tactics developed by SERE programs were part of the protocol for defensive training of military personnel in case of enemy capture; however, after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, they were retrofit to be part of the arsenal of offensive tactics to elicit information from military personnel or civilians considered as enemies. Their objective was to make those being interrogated feel vulnerable, be pliable, and become cooperative in revealing desired information. Their techniques were developed with the help of behavioral scientist consultants and refined based on trial-and-error field practice in SERE drills at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, and other military training installations. In general, these tactics minimized the use of physical torture, substituting mental, “soft torture” instead. Five of the main tactics in the SERE program to render detainees or others being interrogated as amenable to yielding information and confessions are:



• Sexual humiliation and degradation

• Humiliation based on religious and cultural practices

• Sleep deprivation

• Sensory deprivation and sensory overload

• Physical torment to achieve the psychological advantages of fear and anxiety, such as “water-boarding,” or hypothermia (exposure to freezing temperatures)



We see these tactics specifically proposed in memos of both Secretary Rumsfeld for use at Guantánamo and of General Sanchez at Abu Ghraib, and put into operation at those prisons and elsewhere. There is also documented evidence that a team of interrogators and other military personnel from Guantánamo visited the SERE training program at Fort Bragg in August 2002. Given the classified nature of this information, these statements are of course only reasonable inferences based on reports from various knowledgeable sources.

Is it possible that the SPE’s main message of situational power was co-opted by the Pentagon and utilized in its torture training programs? I would not like to believe that; however, one recent critique makes that claim rather powerfully.

“This appears to be the experiment that informs torture in Iraq . . . A situation is created—made worse by understaffing, danger, and no outside independent controls—and with a little encouragement (never specific instructions to torture) guards do torture. This situation and this torture are now widely recognized in U.S. prisons in Iraq . . . . The U.S. administration’s advantage in the Stanford experiment ‘situation’ is that it provides deniability—there are no orders to torture, but the situation can be predicted to cause it.”41

The authors of this opinion go on to specify that this is more than mere speculation because the Stanford Prison Experiment is singled out in the Schlesinger Committee Report investigating the Abu Ghraib abuses. They argue that “[t]he publication of information about this experiment in an official document, linking it to conditions in U.S. military prisons, further reveals chain of command responsibility for policy.” The key link to the SPE in the Schlesinger Report is how it highlighted the power of the pathological situation created in our experimental prison.

“The negative, anti-social reactions observed were not the product of an environment created by combining a collection of deviant personalities, but rather, the result of an intrinsically pathological situation which could distort and rechannel the behavior of essentially normal individuals. The abnormality here resided in the psychological nature of the situation and not in those who passed through it.”42

Crossovers into Popular Culture

Three examples of how our experiment has crossed the boundary from the ivory tower into the realms of music, theater, and art come from a rock group, a German movie, and the art of a Polish artist whose “art form” was exhibited at the 2005 Venice Biennale. “Stanford Prison Experiment” (minus the “The”) is the name of a rock band from Los Angeles whose intense music is “a fusion of punk and noise,” according to its leader, who learned about the SPE as a student at UCLA.43 Das Experiment is a German film based on the SPE that has been widely shown around the world. This attribution of Das Experiment, as inspired by the SPE, gives legitimacy and a real-world quality to this “fantasy,” as the scriptwriter called it. It purposely confuses viewers about what did happen in our study with the liberties that were taken for the sake of sensationalism. It ends up being a vulgar display of sexism and gratuitous sexuality and violence with no redeeming value.

Although some viewers found the film exciting, the movie was panned in critical reviews, such as these by two well-known British film critics. The Observer’s reviewer concluded, “‘The Experiment’ is an improbable thriller of no great originality that offers itself as a fable of national (possibly universal) inclination toward authoritarian fascism.”44 Harsher was the reviewer of The Guardian: “Any episode of Big Brother would have had more insight than this silly and obtuse nonsense.”45 An American film critic, Roger Ebert, extracted one valuable lesson from the movie, which applies to the SPE as well: “Perhaps uniforms turn us into packs, led by the top dog. There are few strays.”46

A Polish artist, Artur Zmijewski, has made a forty-six-minute film, Repetition, that highlights the seven days paid volunteers spent in his mock prison. The film was screened every hour on the hour to large audiences in the Polish Pavilion at the June 2005 Venice Biennale, the world’s oldest celebration of contemporary art, and also shown in Warsaw and San Francisco art venues.

According to one reviewer, this film “suggests that Zimbardo’s experiment, which has as much intuition as strictly scientific method in its design, may have had the makings of a work of art . . . . In the simulated prison, however, artistic decorum soon gets left behind. The ‘game’ achieves a momentum of its own, so completely wrapping up its players in its dynamic that it starts to touch them at the core. Guards get more brutal and controlling. The disobedient are put in solitary; all heads are shaved. At this point a few prisoners, rather than simply seeing all this as annoying play that they can bear with for as long as it takes (at $40 a day), see it as a genuinely evil situation and quit the ‘experiment’ for good.”47


THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT WEBSITE: INTERNET POWER

Using archival footage and a forty-two-page slide show, www.prisonexp.org tells the story of what happened during our experiment’s six fateful days; it includes background documents, discussion questions, articles, interviews, and a wealth of other material for teachers, students, and anyone else interested in learning more about the experiment and corrections, in five languages. It was launched in December 1999, with the expert assistance of Scott Plous and Mike Lestik.

If you visit Google.com and do a keyword search for “Experiment,” what you are likely to discover is that the SPE is the top-ranked website worldwide, out of 291 million results, as of August 2006. Similarly, an August 2006 Google keyword search for “Prison” places the Stanford Prison Experiment website second only to the Federal Bureau of Prisons of the United States, out of more than 192 million results.

On a typical day, www.prisonexp.org’s pages are viewed more than 25,000 times, more than 38 million times since the site was launched. At the height of news coverage on the Abu Ghraib Prison abuses in May and June 2004, Web traffic to the Stanford Prison Experiment website (and its parent site, www.socialpsychology.org) exceeded 250,000 page views per day. This level of traffic attests not only to public interest in psychological research but to the need many people feel to understand the dynamics of imprisonment or, more generally, the dynamics of power and oppression. The data may also reflect the now-legendary status that this experiment has attained in many countries of the world.

One vivid, very personal consequence of visiting the SPE website can be seen in the following letter to me from a nineteen-year-old psychology student who describes the personal value he got from his exposure to it. It enabled him to better understand a terrible experience he had had during military boot camp:



Not too far into it [watching the Stanford Prison Experiment], I was almost in tears. November 2001, I joined the United States Marine Corps, pursuing a childhood dream. To make a long story short, I had become the victim of repeated illegal physical and mental abuse. An investigation showed I suffered more than 40 unprovoked beatings. Eventually, as much as I fought it, I became suicidal, thus received a discharge from U.S.M.C. boot camp. I was in this base for just about 3 months.

The point I am trying to make is that the manner in which your guards carried about their duties and the way that Military Drill Instructors do is unbelievable. I was amazed at all the parallels of your guards and one particular D.I. that comes to mind. I was treated much the same way and even worse in some cases.

One incident that stands out was an effort to break platoon solidarity. I was forced to sit in the middle of my squad bay [living quarters] and shout to the other recruits “if you guys would have moved faster, we wouldn’t be doing this for hours” referencing every single other recruit holding over their heads very heavy foot lockers. The event was very similar to the prisoners saying, “#819 was a bad prisoner.” After my incident and after I was home safe some months later, all I could think about was how much I wanted to go back to show the other recruits that as much as the D.I.’s told the platoon that I was a bad recruit, I wasn’t. [Just as our prisoner Stew-819 wanted to do.] Other behaviors come to mind like the push-ups for punishment, shaved heads, not having any identity other than being addressed as and referring to other people as “Recruit So-and-so” which replicates your study.

The point of it all is even though your experiment was conducted 31 yrs. ago, my reading the study has helped me gain an understanding I was previously unable to gain before, even after therapy and counseling. What you have demonstrated really gave me insight into something I’ve been dealing with for almost a year now. Although, it is certainly not an excuse for their behavior, I now can understand the rationale behind the D.I.’s actions as far as being sadistic and power hungry.

In short, Dr. Zimbardo, thank you.



A full, graphic depiction of the making of a Marine can be found in William Mares, The Marine Machine.48

It is reasonable to conclude that there is something about this little experiment that has enduring value not only among social scientists but also even more strongly among the general public. I now believe that special something is the dramatic transformation of human nature, not by Dr. Jekyll’s mysterious chemicals, which turned him into the evil Mr. Hyde, but rather by the power of social situations and the Systems that create and sustain them. My colleagues and I are pleased that we have been able “to give psychology a way into the public consciousness” in an informative, interesting, and entertaining way that enables all of us to understand something so basic and disturbing about human nature.

Now it is time to broaden our empirical foundation beyond this one experiment as we turn in the next several chapters to review a variety of research from many sources that more fully informs us about how much situations can matter in turning good people into evildoers.





