CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Putting the System on Trial: Command Complicity

Army prosecutor Major Michael Holley’s patriotic closing statement in the trial of Sergeant Ivan Frederick helps set the stage for our analysis of the use of torture on “unlawful combatants” and detainees imprisoned in military prisons in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Cuba:



And I would remind you, sir, that the enemy fights on morale like we do, and this can form a rallying point for our enemies now and in the future. And I would also ask you to think about enemies who might surrender in the future. That’s what we ideally want. We want them to be so intimidated by the combat power of the United States Army that they surrender. But if a prisoner—or an enemy, rather, believes that he will be humiliated and subjected to degrading treatment, why wouldn’t he continue to fight until [his] last breath? And in fighting, might he not take the lives of soldiers, lives that might not otherwise be spent. This type of behavior [of the accused MPs] has long-term impact including, and lastly, it has the impact on soldiers, our soldiers and sailors and marines, airmen, who may be captured in the future and their treatment, and I’ll leave it at that.



The prosecutor continues to make evident that what is at stake in this and the other trials of the “Abu Ghraib Seven” is nothing less than the Honor of the Military:



Finally, sir, the honor of our United States Army is both precious and perishable. We have a sacred trust in the United States Army, of all armies, but in particular, our Army, is that we bear this great responsibility and power, the power to impose force on others. And the only thing that separates us imposing power unjustly and becoming a rival, a mob, a group of thugs, is that we have this sense of honor that we do what’s right, we follow those orders that are given to us and we do the honorable thing, and this behavior [the Abu Ghraib Prison abuses and torture] degrades that. And we also, just like any other Army, we need a moral high ground, as well, to rally ourselves.1



My closing statement in the Frederick trial was spontaneous and unscripted. It foreshadowed some key arguments that will be developed in this chapter, which provides fuller scope for the theses that powerful situational and systemic forces were operating to cause these abuses. Moreover, in the time since that trial (October 2004), further evidence has emerged that clearly shows the complicity of a host of military commanders in the abuses and torture on Tier 1A, Abu Ghraib Prison. Here is the text of my statement:



The Fay Report, the Taguba Report indicate that this [abuse] could have been prevented had the military put in any of the resources or any of the concern that they’re putting into these trials—Abu Ghraib never would have happened. But Abu Ghraib was treated with indifference. It had no priority, the same low priority in security as the archaeological museum in Baghdad [whose treasures were looted after Baghdad was “liberated” while soldiers passively watched]. These are both low-priority [military] items, and this one happened to erupt under these unfortunate circumstances. So I think that the military is on trial, particularly all of the officers who are above Sergeant Frederick who should have known what was going on, should have prevented it, should have stopped it, and should have challenged it. They are the ones who should be on trial. Or, if Sergeant Frederick is responsible to some extent, whatever his sentence is, has to be, I think, mitigated by the responsibility of the whole chain of command.2



In this chapter, our path will follow several different directions that should lead us to draw out from behind the dark screen of concealment the central role of many key players in the drama at Abu Ghraib—the directors, scriptwriters, and stage managers who made this tragic play possible. In a sense, the MPs were merely bit actors, “seven characters in search of an author,” or a director.

Our task is to determine what were the systemic pressures that existed outside of the situation that existed inside Abu Ghraib’s hard site of interrogation. We need to identify the particular parties involved at all levels in the chain of command for creating the conditions responsible for the implosion of human character in those MPs. In presenting the chronology of these intertwined forces, I will switch roles from that of defense expert to that of prosecutor. In that capacity, I introduce a new kind of modern evil, “administrative evil,” that constitutes the foundation of complicity of the chain of political and military command in these abuses and tortures.3 Both public and private organizations, because they operate within a legal framework, not an ethical framework, can inflict suffering, even death, on people by following cold rationality for achieving the goals of their ideology, a master plan, a cost-benefit equation, or the bottom line of profit. Under those circumstances, their ends always justify efficient means.


INVESTIGATIONS OF ABU GHRAIB ABUSES EXPOSE SYSTEM FAULTS

In response to numerous reports of abuse, not only at Abu Ghraib but also at military prisons throughout Iraq, Afghanistan, and Cuba, the Pentagon has conducted at least a dozen official investigations. I closely reviewed half of them in preparation for my role in the defense of Sergeant Ivan Frederick. In this section, I will outline chronologically some of those key reports and highlight their conclusions with exact quotes from them. Doing so will give us a sense of how high-ranking officers and government officials evaluated the causes of torture and abuse. Because all but one of these investigations were ordered by the military with specific instructions to focus on perpetrators, most of them failed to indict military and political leaders for their roles in creating conditions conducive to these abuses. The only exception was the Schlesinger Report, ordered by Secretary Rumsfeld.

By looking down rather than up the chain of command, these reports are limited in scope and neither as independent nor as nonpartisan as one would wish. However, they provide us with a starting point in our case against the military and administration chains of command that we will then supplement with additional media and agency reports complemented by firsthand testimonies of soldiers involved in torture. (For a full chronology of the Abu Ghraib abuses and investigative reports, please see the website in the Notes.4)

The Ryder Report Was the First to Send Up Warning Signals

The Army’s chief law enforcement officer, Provost Marshal Donald Ryder, a major general, prepared the first report (November 6, 2003) by order of General Sanchez. Ryder was appointed in August to head an assessment team, as requested by the Army criminal investigation unit. That unit is identified as CJTF-7—Combined Joint Task Force 7, a multiservice and Department of Defense (DoD) task force that included Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, and DoD civilian staff.

This document reviewed the entire prison system in Iraq and recommended ways to improve it. At the end, Ryder concluded that there had been serious human rights violations, as well as training and manpower inadequacies that were “system-wide.” His report also raised concerns about the fuzzy boundaries between the MPs, who were supposed only to guard prisoners, and the military intelligence (MI) teams assigned to interrogate prisoners. It noted that the MIs tried to enlist the MPs to engage in activities that would “prepare” detainees for interrogation.

This MI–MP tension dated back to the Afghanistan War, during which MPs worked with MIs to “set favorable conditions for subsequent interviews,” a euphemism for breaking the will of prisoners. Ryder called for the establishment of procedures “to define the role of military police soldiers . . . clearly separating the actions of the guards from those of the military intelligence personnel.” His report should have put on notice all those in charge of the military’s prison systems.

Despite this valuable contribution, “Ryder undercut his warning,” according to the journalist Seymour Hersh, “by concluding that the situation had not yet reached a crisis point. Though some procedures were flawed, he said, he found ‘no military police units purposely applying inappropriate confinement practices.’” Remember that this report appeared at the height of the most flagrant abuses going on in Tier 1A during the fall of 2003 but before Specialist Joe Darby’s exposé (January 13, 2004). Hersh’s New Yorker magazine article (May 5, 2004), which broke open the scandal, concluded about the Ryder report that “His investigation was at best a failure and at worst a coverup.”5

The Taguba Report Is Thorough and Tough6

Once the notorious photos surfaced among military higher-ups and the criminal investigating team in January 2004, General Sanchez was forced to move beyond Ryder’s whitewash job. He assigned Major General Antonio M. Taguba to do a fuller investigation into allegations of detainee abuse, undocumented prisoner escapes, and widespread failures in discipline and accountability. Taguba did an admirable job in a detailed, extensive investigation that was published in March 2004. Although it was intended to remain classified because it made direct accusations of officer dereliction of duty, leveled other strong charges against fellow officers, and contained as evidence some of “The Photos,” it was too juicy not to be leaked to the media (probably for big bucks).

The Taguba Report was leaked to The New Yorker, where its main findings and the photos were published in Hersh’s story, but this occurred only after the photos were also leaked to the producers of 60 Minutes II and shown in its April 28, 2004, broadcast. (You will recall that this was what started me on this adventure.)

Taguba wasted no time in refuting his fellow general’s report. “Unfortunately, many of the systemic problems that surfaced during [Ryder’s] assessment are the very same issues that are the subject of this investigation,” he wrote. (Italics added for emphasis.) “In fact, many of the abuses suffered by detainees occurred during, or near to, the time of that assessment.” The report continued, “Contrary to the findings of MG [Major General] Ryder’s report, I find that personnel assigned to the 372nd MP Company, 800th MP Brigade were directed to change facility procedures to ‘set the conditions’ for MI interrogations.” His report made it clear that Army intelligence officers, CIA agents, private contractors, and OGAs [other government agencies] “actively requested that MP guards set physical and mental conditions for favorable interrogation of witnesses.”

In support of this assertion, Taguba cited sworn statements from several guards about the complicity of the military intelligence personnel and of the interrogators.



SPC [Specialist] Sabrina Harman, 372nd MP Company, stated in her sworn statement regarding the incident where a detainee was placed on a box with wires attached to his fingers, toes, and penis, “that her job was to keep detainees awake.” She said that MI was talking to CPL [Corporal] Grainer [sic]. She stated, “MI wanted to get them to talk. It is Grainer [sic] and Frederick’s job to do things for MI and OGA to get these people to talk.”



Taguba presented testimony from Sergeant Javal Davis about what he observed regarding the influence of military intelligence and OGAs on the MP guards:



“I witnessed prisoners in the MI hold section, wing 1A, being made to do various things that I would question morally. In Wing 1A we were told that they had different rules and different SOP [standard operating procedures] for treatment. I never saw a set of rules or SOP for that section just word of mouth. The Soldier in charge of 1A was Corporal Granier [sic]. He stated that the Agents and MI Soldiers would ask him to do things, but nothing was ever in writing he would complain [sic].” When asked why the rules in 1A/1B were different than those in the rest of the wings, Sergeant Davis stated: “The rest of the wings are regular prisoners and 1A/B are Military Intelligence (MI) holds.” When asked why he did not inform his chain of command about this abuse, Sergeant Davis stated: “Because I assumed that if they were doing things out of the ordinary or outside the guidelines, someone would have said something. [Observe the evil of inaction at work again.] Also the wing belongs to MI and it appeared MI personnel approved of the abuse.” Sergeant Davis also stated that he had heard MI insinuate to the guards to abuse the inmates. When asked what MI said he stated: “Loosen this guy up for us.” “Make sure he has a bad night.” “Make sure he gets the treatment.” He claimed these comments were made to CPL Granier [sic] and SGT Frederick. Finally, SGT Davis stated that [sic] “the MI staffs to my understanding have been giving Granier [sic] compliments on the way he has been handling the MI holds. Examples being statements like, ‘Good job, they’re breaking down real fast. They answer every question. They’re giving out good information, Finally,’ and Keep up the good work. Stuff like that.”



Reminiscent of my SPE guards’ taking away the prisoners’ mattresses, sheets, clothes, and pillows for rule violations is the statement made to Taguba by Specialist Jason Kennel, 372nd MP Company:



“I saw them nude, but MI would tell us to take away their mattresses, sheets, and clothes.” He could not recall who in MI had instructed him to do this, but commented that, “if they wanted me to do that they needed to give me paperwork.” He was later informed that “We could not do anything to embarrass the prisoners.”



This is just one example of the continuous inconsistencies between the reality of the abusive situation and the unofficial encouragement of the MPs to abuse detainees by MIs and other agents on that tier. As they gave orders for abuse spoken from one side of the mouth, the official public statement from the other side of the mouth insisted that “We do not condone prisoner abuse or anything but their humane treatment.” Such an approach created the case for plausible deniability later on.

Also of passing interest in establishing parallels with the SPE is the Taguba Report’s emphasis on the need for uniformity in the “counts.” Recall the central role that the “counts” came to play as occasions for abuse of our SPE prisoners. “There is a lack of standardization in the way the 320th MP Battalion conducted physical counts of their detainees.” The report goes on to complain of the lack of count standardization:



Each compound within a given encampment did their headcounts differently. Some compounds had detainees line up in lines of 10, some had them sit in rows, and some moved all the detainees to one end of the compound and counted them as they passed to the other end of the compound.



The Taguba Report specifies that top military leaders who were made aware of extreme detainee abuse had recommended court martial, but they never followed through. Their inaction, given their awareness of the abuses, thereby strengthened the impression that there would be no payback for abusing prisoners:



Another obvious example of the Brigade Leadership not communicating with its Soldiers or ensuring their tactical proficiency concerns the incident of detainee abuse that occurred at Camp Bucca, Iraq, on May 12, 2003 . . . . An extensive CID [Criminal Investigative Division] investigation determined that four soldiers from the 320th MP Battalion had kicked and beaten these detainees following a transport mission from Talil Air Base . . . .

Formal charges under the UCMJ were preferred against these Soldiers and an Article-32 Investigation conducted by LTC [Lieutenant Colonel] Gentry. He recommended a general court martial for the four accused, which BG [Brigadier General] Karpinski supported. Despite this documented abuse, there is no evidence that BG Karpinski ever attempted to remind 800th MP Soldiers of the requirements of the Geneva Conventions regarding detainee treatment or took any steps to ensure that such abuse was not repeated. Nor is there any evidence that LTC(P) Phillabaum, the commander of the Soldiers involved in the Camp Bucca abuse incident, took any initiative to ensure his Soldiers were properly trained regarding detainee treatment.



What We Have Here is a Failure to Communicate, to Educate, and to Provide Leadership



Taguba offers many instances of ways in which the soldiers and Army Reserve MPs were not properly trained and were not given the resources and information they needed to perform their difficult functions as guards in Abu Ghraib Prison. The report states:



There is a general lack of knowledge, implementation, and emphasis of basic legal, regulatory, doctrinal, and command requirements within the 800th MP Brigade and its subordinate units . . . .

The handling of detainees and criminal prisoners after in-processing was inconsistent from detention facility to detention facility, compound to compound, encampment to encampment, and even shift to shift throughout the 800th MP Brigade AOR (Area of Responsibility). [Italics added to emphasize shift differences from day to night on Tier 1A.]



The report also states:



The Abu Ghraib and Camp Bucca detention facilities are significantly over their intended maximum capacity while the guard force is undermanned and under resourced. This imbalance has contributed to the poor living conditions, escapes, and accountability lapses at the various facilities. The overcrowding of the facilities also limits the ability to identify and segregate leaders in the detainee population who may be organizing escapes and riots within the facility.



The report goes on to identify one of the problems raised by Chip Frederick in policing his tier, that of numerous unidentified civilians and unknown others coming and going, and giving orders to him and his staff.



In general, US civilian contract personnel (Titan Corporation, CACI, etc.), third country nationals, and local contractors do not appear to be properly supervised within the detention facility at Abu Ghraib. During our on-site inspection, they wandered about with too much unsupervised free access in the detainee area. Having civilians in various outfits (civilian and DCUs [Desert Camouflage Units]) in and about the detainee area causes confusion and may have contributed to the difficulties in the accountability process and with detecting escapes.



Taguba documents many instances of prisoners escaping and rioting and describes lethal encounters between MPs and detainees. In every case, the report repeats its conclusion: “No information on findings, contributing factors, or corrective action has been provided to this investigation team.” The report also takes note of one major prisoner riot that had lethal consequences, one of those that Chip Frederick mentioned as a prelude to a transfer to his Tier 1A of the riot ringleaders, who were then abused there:



24 November 03-Riot and shooting of 12 detainees . . . Several detainees allegedly began to riot at about 1300 in all of the compounds at the Ganci encampment. This resulted in the shooting deaths of 3 detainees, 9 wounded detainees, and 9 injured US Soldiers. A 15-6 investigation by COL Bruce Falcone (220th MP Brigade, Deputy Commander) concluded that the detainees rioted in protest of their living conditions, that the riot turned violent, the use of non-lethal force was ineffective, and, after the 320th MP Battalion CDR [Commander] executed “Golden Spike,” the emergency containment plan, the use of deadly force was authorized.



What or who was to blame for this riot and the use of deadly force to contain it? Taguba concludes that a host of problems were involved. He notes:



Contributing factors were lack of comprehensive training of guards, poor or non-existent SOPs, no formal guard-count conducted prior to shift, no rehearsals or ongoing training, the mix of less than lethal rounds with lethal rounds in weapons, no AARs [after action reports] being conducted after incidents, ROE [rules of engagement] not posted and not understood, overcrowding, uniforms not standardized, and poor communication between the command and Soldiers.



Taguba was especially concerned that the obviously inadequate training of the MP brigade, well-known by military command, was never corrected:



I find that the 800th MP Brigade was not adequately trained for a mission that included operating a prison or penal institution at Abu Ghraib Prison Complex. As the Ryder Assessment found, I also concur that units of the 800th MP Brigade did not receive corrections-specific training during their mobilization period. MP units did not receive pinpoint assignments prior to mobilization and during the post mobilization training, and thus could not train for specific missions. The training that was accomplished at the mobilization sites were [sic] developed and implemented at the company level with little or no direction or supervision at the Battalion and Brigade levels, and consisted primarily of common tasks and law enforcement training. However, I found no evidence that the Command, although aware of this deficiency, ever requested specific corrections training from the Commandant of the Military Police School, the US Army Confinement Facility at Mannheim, Germany, the Provost Marshal General of the Army, or the US Army Disciplinary Barracks at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas . . . .

This investigation indicates that BG Karpinski and her staff did a poor job allocating resources throughout the Iraq JOA [Joint Operations Area].

Abu Ghraib (BCCF [Baghdad Central Confinement Facility]) normally housed between 6000 and 7000 detainees, yet it was operated by only one battalion. In contrast, the HVD [High Visibility Detainees] Facility maintains only about 100 detainees, and is also run by an entire battalion . . . .

In addition to being severely undermanned, the quality of life for Soldiers assigned to Abu Ghraib (BCCF) was extremely poor. There was no DFAC [dining facility], PX [post exchange], barbershop, or MWR [morale, welfare, and recreation] facilities. There were numerous mortar attacks, random rifle and RPG [rocket-propelled grenade] attacks, and a serious threat to Soldiers and detainees in the facility. The prison complex was also severely overcrowded and the Brigade lacked adequate resources and personnel to resolve serious logistical problems. Finally, because of past associations and familiarity of Soldiers within the Brigade, it appears that friendship often took precedence over appropriate leader and subordinate relationships.




Taguba Targets Derelict, Deficient Commanders

One of the exceptional features of General Taguba’s report, compared with all the other investigations into the Abu Ghraib abuses, is its willingness to identify the commanders who failed to exercise their military leadership—and who deserve some form of military punishment. It is worth our time to lay out some of the reasons that the general targeted many military leaders for their roles in creating a command that was a mockery rather than a model of military leadership. These were the leaders who were supposed to provide the disciplinary structure for the hapless MPs:



With respect to the 800th MP Brigade mission at Abu Ghraib (BCCF), I find that there was clear friction and lack of effective communication between the Commander, 205th MI Brigade, who controlled FOB [Forward Operations Base] Abu Ghraib (BCCF) after 19 November 2003, and the Commander, 800th MP Brigade, who controlled detainee operations inside the FOB. There was no clear delineation of responsibility between commands, little coordination at the command level, and no integration of the two functions. Coordination occurred at the lowest possible levels with little oversight by commanders . . . .

The 320th MP Battalion was stigmatized as a unit due to previous detainee abuse which occurred in May 2003 at the Bucca Theater Internment Facility (TIF), while under the command of LTC (P) Phillabaum. Despite his proven deficiencies as both a commander and leader, BG

Karpinski allowed LTC (P) Phillabaum to remain in command of her most troubled battalion guarding, by far, the largest number of detainees in the>800th MP Brigade . . . .

Numerous witnesses stated that the 800th MP Brigade S-1, MAJ Hinzman and S-4, MAJ Green, were essentially dysfunctional, but that despite numerous complaints, these officers were not replaced. This had a detrimental effect on the Brigade Staff’s effectiveness and morale. Moreover, the Brigade Command Judge Advocate, LTC James O’Hare, appears to lack initiative and was unwilling to accept responsibility for any of his actions. LTC Gary Maddocks, the Brigade XO (Executive Officer) did not properly supervise the Brigade staff by failing to lay out staff priorities, take overt corrective action when needed, and supervise their daily functions . . . .

In addition, numerous officers and senior NCOs have been reprimanded/disciplined for misconduct during this period.



From my reading of Taguba’s analysis, I must conclude that Abu Ghraib was an “animal house” at the officer level, as well as among the night shift Army Reserve MPs on Tier 1A. Twelve officers and NCOs were reprimanded or disciplined (mildly) for their misconduct, dereliction of duty, lack of leadership, and alcohol abuse. One glaring example involved Captain Leo Merck, commander of the 870th MP Company, who was alleged to have taken nude photographs of his own female soldiers without their knowledge. A second example involved NCOs who were found derelict in duty for fraternizing with junior commissioned officers and for gratuitously shooting off their M-16 rifles while exiting their cars, unintentionally and negligently blowing up a fuel tank!

Taguba recommended that a dozen of the individuals in command positions, who should have been positive role models for the ordinary soldiers and reservists functioning under them, deserved to be relieved from command or relieved from Duty and given a General Officer Memorandum of Reprimand.

His report cites many specific instances of failure of leadership for each of the following principals:

Brigadier General Janis L. Karpinski, Commander, 800th MP Brigade; Colonel Thomas M. Pappas, Commander, 205th MI Brigade; Lieutenant Colonel(P) Jerry L. Phillabaum, Commander, 320th MP Battalion; Lieutenant Colonel Steven L. Jordan, former director, Joint Interrogation and Debriefing Center, and liaison officer to 205th MI Brigade; Major David W. DiNenna, S-3, 320th MP Battalion; and Captain Donald J. Reese, commander, 372nd MP Company.

Other lower-level officers also cited by Taguba are important for their positions in Tier 1A. They include: First Lieutenant Lewis C. Raeder, Platoon Leader, 372nd MP Company; Sergeant Major Marc Emerson, operations Sergeant Major 320th MP Battalion; First Sergeant Brian G. Lipinski, 372nd MP Company; and Sergeant First Class Shannon K. Snider, platoon sergeant, 372nd MP Company.

The Taguba Report issued a common justification for reprimanding those who should have been in charge of operations at Tier 1A: Reese, Raeder, Emerson, Lipinski, and Snider. Each of them was charged with one or more of the following:



• Failing to ensure that Soldiers under his direct command knew and understood the protections afforded to detainees in the Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War.

• Failing to properly supervise his Soldiers working and “visiting” Tier 1 of the Hard-Site at Abu Ghraib (BCCF).

• Failing to properly establish and enforce basic soldier standards, proficiency, and accountability.

• Failing to ensure that Soldiers under his direct command were properly trained in Internment and Resettlement Operations.



Here, then, is further support for the pleadings made by Chip Frederick and other MP guards on his shift that they were essentially clueless as to what was appropriate and what was not acceptable when preparing detainees for interrogation.

However, culpability lay not just with the military. This investigation also shows that several civilian interrogators and interpreters who wrongly involved the MPs in their interrogation of detainees on Tier 1A were personally implicated in the abuse. Among them, the Taguba Report identifies the following culprits: Steven Stephanowicz, contract U.S. civilian interrogator, CACI, 205th Military Intelligence Brigade, and John Israel, contract U.S. civilian interpreter, CACI, 205th Military Intelligence Brigade.

Stephanowicz is accused of having “Allowed and/or instructed MPs, who were not trained in interrogation techniques, to facilitate interrogations by ‘setting conditions’ which were neither authorized and [sic] in accordance with applicable regulations/policy. He clearly knew his instructions equated to physical abuse.” (Italics added for emphasis.) That is exactly what Frederick and Graner reported that they had been encouraged to do by these civilians who seemed to be in charge of the main action of Tier 1A: to get actionable intelligence through detainee interrogation by any means necessary.

The effect of the negative modeling of the “evil of inaction” is also revealed by Taguba’s admonition of Sergeant Snider for “Failing to report a Soldier, who under his direct control, abused detainees by stomping on their bare hands and feet in his presence.”

Before we leave the Taguba Report to move on to some of the findings in several other independent investigations, we must note its powerful conclusion about the culpability of some military officers and civilian workers who have not yet been tried, or even charged, for the abuses at Abu Ghraib:



Several US Army Soldiers have committed egregious acts and grave breaches of international law at Abu Ghraib/BCCF and Camp Bucca, Iraq. Furthermore, key senior leaders in both the 800th MP Brigade and the 205th MI Brigade failed to comply with established regulations, policies, and command directives in preventing detainee abuses at Abu Ghraib (BCCF) and at Camp Bucca during the period August 2003 to February 2004 . . . .

Specifically, I suspect that COL Thomas M. Pappas, LTC Steve L. Jordan, Mr. Steven Stephanowicz, and Mr. John Israel were either directly or indirectly responsible for the abuses at Abu Ghraib (BCCF) and strongly recommend immediate disciplinary action as described in the preceding paragraphs as well as the initiation of a Procedure 15 Inquiry to determine the full extent of their culpability. [Italics added for emphasis.]



The Milolashek Report Blames Only the Few

Lieutenant General Paul T. Milolashek, Army inspector general, reviewed ninety-four confirmed cases of detainee abuse in Afghanistan and Iraq and the conditions contributing to these violations of U.S. military policy; (the report was issued on February 10, 2004). Even though the report identifies the many instances of flawed decisions by senior commanders and military officers that contributed to the abuses, General Milolashek concluded that the abuses did not result from any military policy, nor were they the fault of any senior officers. Instead, he turned his blame laser on only low-ranking soldiers for committing these abuses. Let Milolashek’s record show that these ninety-four cases of detainee abuse in military prisons in Afghanistan and Iraq were due simply to the “unauthorized actions taken by a few individuals.” Thus, the inspector general cleanly absolved the entire chain of command of any responsibility for the damages. The ninety-four cases of abuse also go far beyond the confines of the night shift on Tier 1A.

This top-level “whitewash” should be packaged with the Ryder Report as a Tweedledee-Tweedledum boxed set. However, before moving on, it is valuable to set this general’s conclusion of no top dogs responsible against inconsistencies in his report’s other findings. The report notes that troops received “ambiguous guidance from command on the treatment of detainees” and, further, that established interrogation policies were “not clear and contained ambiguity.” It also notes that the decision by senior commanders in Iraqi prisons to rely on the Guantánamo Bay Prison (“Gitmo”) guidelines was wrong. The detainees at Gitmo were considered high value “alien combatants” who may have had actionable intelligence necessary to extract in order to combat terrorism and insurgency. Secretary Rumsfeld outlined a set of stiff interrogation tactics to be used on those detainees; however, they were somehow transported overseas to Iraq prisons and to run-of-the-mill detainees. Milolashek’s report states that this action by senior military officers “appears to contradict the terms of Rumsfeld’s decision, which explicitly stated that the guidelines were applicable only to interrogations at Guantánamo; and this led to the use of ‘high risk’ interrogation techniques that left considerable room for misapplication, particularly under high-stress combat conditions.”

The Fay/Jones Report Scales the Blame Upward and Outward7

Lieutenant General Anthony R. Jones assisted Major General George R. Fay in leading an investigation of allegations that the 205th Military Intelligence Brigade was involved in detainee abuse at Abu Ghraib. They also investigated whether any organizations or personnel higher than that brigade command were involved in those abuses in any way.8 Although their report advances the standard dispositional attribution of putting the blame on the individual perpetrators of the abuses—once again that “small groups of morally corrupt soldiers and civilians”—it does extend the causation to situational and systemic factors in revealing ways.

“The events at Abu Ghraib cannot be understood in a vacuum,” is the Fay/Jones lead-in to outlining how the “operational environment” contributed to those abuses. Compatible with the social psychological analysis that I have been proposing, their report goes on to detail both the powerful situational and systemic forces operating within and around the behavioral setting. Consider the significance of the following three paragraphs extracted from the final report:



LTG Jones found that while senior level officers did not commit the abuse at Abu Ghraib they did bear responsibility for lack of oversight of the facility, failing to respond in a timely manner to the reports of the International Committee of the Red Cross and for issuing policy memos that failed to provide clear, consistent guidance for execution at the tactical level.

MG Fay has found that from 25 July 2003 to 6 February 2004, twenty-seven 205 MI BDE [Brigade] Personnel allegedly requested, encouraged, condoned or solicited Military Police (MP) personnel to abuse detainees and/or participated in detainee abuse and/or violated established interrogation procedures and applicable laws and regulations during interrogation operations at Abu Ghraib. [Italics added for emphasis.]

The leaders from units located at Abu Ghraib or with supervision over Soldiers and units at Abu Ghraib failed to supervise subordinates or provide direct oversight of this important mission. These leaders failed to properly discipline their Soldiers. These leaders failed to learn from their mistakes and failed to provide continued mission-specific training . . . . The absence of effective leadership was a factor in not sooner discovering and taking actions to prevent both the violent/sexual abuse incidents and the misinterpretation/confusion incidents . . . . Abuses would not have occurred had doctrine been followed and mission training conducted. [Italics added for emphasis.]



The joint report of these generals summarizes multiple factors that they found as having contributed to the abuses at Abu Ghraib. Seven factors are identified as primary contributors to the abuses:



• “Individual criminal propensities” (the alleged dispositions of the reserve MPs)

• “leadership failures” (systemic factors)

• “dysfunctional command relationships at brigade and higher echelons” (systemic factors)

• “multiple agencies/organizations involvement in interrogation operations at Abu Ghraib” (systemic factors)

• “failure to effectively screen, certify, and then integrate contractor interrogators/analysts/linguists” (systemic factor)

• “lack of a clear understanding of the MP and MI roles and responsibilities in interrogation operations” (situational and systemic factors)

• “lack of safety and security at Abu Ghraib” (situational and systemic factors)



The Fay/Jones Report thus specifies six of seven contributing factors to the abuses as traceable to systemic or situational factors, and but one to dispositional factors. It then proceeds to expand on this overview by highlighting numerous systemic failures that played key roles in facilitating the abuses:



Looking beyond personal responsibility, leader responsibility and command responsibility, systemic problems and issues also contributed to the volatile environment in which abuse occurred. The report lists several dozen specific systemic failures ranging from doctrine and policy concerns to leadership and command and control issues to resource and training issues.




Cooperating with Illegal CIA Activities as “Teamwork”

I was surprised to discover in this report open, public criticism of the CIA’s role in the abusive interrogations, which was supposed to be clandestine:



The systematic lack of accountability for interrogator actions and detainees plagued detainee operations at Abu Ghraib. It is unclear how and under what authority the CIA could place prisoners like DETAINEE-28*3 in Abu Ghraib because no memorandums of understanding existed on the subject between the CIA and CJTF-7. Local CIA officers convinced COL Pappas and LTC Jordan that they should be allowed to operate outside the established local rules and procedures. [Italics added for emphasis.]



Let’s pause for a moment to let that statement resonate before considering how this matter of the military’s links with the CIA was resolved. Fay/Jones noted that “When COL Pappas raised the issue of CIA use of Abu Ghraib with COL Blotz, COL Blotz encouraged COL Pappas to cooperate with the CIA because everyone was all one team. COL Blotz directed LTC Jordan to cooperate [as well].”


Creating an Unhealthy Work Environment

The way in which such “above and beyond the law” undercover work by CIA operatives contributed to a cancerous environment is elaborated in Fay/Jones with a psychological analysis:



The death of DETAINEE-28 and incidents such as the loaded weapon in the interrogation room, were widely known within the US community (MI and MP alike) at Abu Ghraib. Speculation and resentment grew out of a lack of personal responsibility, of some people being above the laws and regulations. The resentment contributed to the unhealthy environment that existed at Abu Ghraib. The death of DETAINEE-28 remains unresolved.



The operational use of anonymity as a protective shield to get away with murder is noted in passing: “CIA officers operating at Abu Ghraib used alias [sic] and never revealed their true names.”


When the Self-Serving Claims of the MPs Turn Out to Be True

The Fay/Jones investigation offers support for the claims by Chip Frederick and other night shift MPs that many of their abusive actions were encouraged and supported by a variety of individuals working for military intelligence in their unit:



The MPs being prosecuted claim that their actions came at the direction of MI. Although self-serving, these claims do have some basis in fact. The environment created at Abu Ghraib contributed to the occurrence of such abuse and the fact that it remained undiscovered by higher authority for a long period of time. What started out as nakedness and humiliation, stress and physical training [exercise], carried over into sexual and physical assaults by a small group of morally corrupt and unsupervised Soldiers and civilians. [Italics added for emphasis.]



These investigating generals repeatedly make evident the major roles played by systemic and situational factors in the abuses. However, they cannot give up the dispositional attribution of the perpetrators as the few “morally corrupt” individuals, the so-called bad apples in an otherwise flawless barrel filled to the brim with “the noble conduct of the vast majority of our Soldiers.”


Decent Dogs Doing Dirty Deeds

The Fay/Jones Report was one of the first to detail and fault some of the “accepted” tactics used to facilitate effective interrogations. For example, it notes that the use of dogs was imported by Major General Geoffrey Miller from Gitmo prison in Cuba, but the report adds, “The use of dogs in interrogations to ‘fear up’ detainees was utilized without proper authorization.”

Once muzzled dogs were officially made available to induce fear in prisoners, it did not take long to unofficially unmuzzle them in order to rev up the fear factor. The Fay/Jones Report identifies a civilian interrogator [number 21, a private CACI employee] who used an unmuzzled dog during an interrogation and who yelled to MPs where a dog was being used against a detainee to “take him home.” To show that the dogs could chew things up, that dog had just torn apart the detainee’s mattress. Another interrogator (Soldier 17, 2nd MI Battalion) is accused of failing to report the improper use of dogs that he saw when the handler allowed the dog to “go nuts” in scaring two juvenile detainees by sending an unmuzzled dog into their cell. This interrogator also failed to report the dog handlers discussing their competition to scare detainees to the point that they would defecate in their pants. They claimed to have already made several detainees urinate on themselves when threatened by their dogs.


Naked Prisoners Are Dehumanized Prisoners

The use of nudity as an incentive to maintain detainee cooperation was imported from prisons in Afghanistan and Guantánamo. When it came time to use that tactic at Abu Ghraib, the Fay/Jones Report noted “the lines of authority and the proper legal opinions blurred. They simply carried forward the use of nudity into the Iraqi theater of operations. The use of clothing as an incentive [nudity] is significant in that it likely contributed to an escalating ‘de-humanization’ of the detainees and set the stage for additional and more severe abuses to occur [by the MPs].”


When Segregation Becomes Isolation

Although Lieutenant General Sanchez had approved the tactic of “isolation” over extended periods of time for specific detainees, it appears that he really meant “segregation” of them from fellow prisoners. However, at the Abu Ghraib hard site, Sanchez was taken at his word, and many detainees were totally isolated and completely removed from all outside contact, as in solitary confinement, “other than the required care and feeding by MP guards and interrogation by MI.” The Fay/Jones Report notes that “These cells had limited or poor ventilation, no light, and were often made excessively hot or cold. Use of isolation rooms in the Abu Ghraib Hard Site was not closely controlled or monitored. Lacking proper training, clear guidance, or experience in this technique, both MP and MI stretched the bounds into further abuse; sensory deprivation and unsafe or unhealthy living conditions.”


Assigning Blame: Officers, MI, Interrogators, Analysts, Interpreters, Translators, and Medics

The Fay/Jones Report concludes by declaring as culpable all those its investigation found responsible for detainee abuse at Abu Ghraib—fully twenty-seven individuals by name or identity code. What is significant to me is the number of people who knew of the abuses, witnessed them, even participated in them in various ways and did nothing to prevent, stop, or report them. They provided “social proof” to the MPs that it was acceptable to continue doing whatever they wanted to do. Their smiling, silent faces provided social support from the surrounding network of the general interrogation team that gave thumbs up to abuses that should have received reprimands. Once again, we see the evil of inaction facilitating the evil of action.

Medics and nurses often were guilty of not helping victims in distress, of observing brutality and looking the other way, and worse. They signed off on false death certificates and lied about the nature of wounds and broken limbs. They violated their Hippocratic oath and “sold their souls for dross,” according to professor of medicine and bioethics Steven H. Miles, in his book Oath Betrayed.9

At the top of the Fay/Jones blame list is again the inept Colonel Pappas, with twelve separate charges against him, and again Lieutenant Colonel Steven Jordan (director of the Joint Interrogation Debriefing Center). The following officers, not on Taguba’s hit list, are singled out by Fay and Jones as also culpable: Major David Price (operations officer at that center), Major Michael Thompson (deputy operations officer at that center), and Captain Carolyn Wood, officer in charge of Interrogation Control Element (ICE) at that center.

Before reviewing some of the reprehensible actions of the lower-level cast of characters who played both directors and audience for the “Abu Ghraib Seven” perpetrators, it is well to stop for a moment to consider the fate of Captain Carolyn Wood. As leader of the 519th Military Intelligence Brigade when she was only a lieutenant, Wood had an important role to play, but she misplayed it badly. At Bagram Prison in Afghanistan, Wood authorized new, tougher interrogation guidelines that somehow ended up in detainees being severely beaten; one was killed, and a female detainee was sexually assaulted by three of her MI interrogators. The Fay/Jones Report notes that “CPT Wood should have been aware of the potential for detainee abuse at Abu Ghraib,” given her knowledge of prior abuses by her MI soldiers. However, Wood received a Bronze Star for Valor after her duty in Afghanistan and another Bronze Star, along with a promotion, following revelation of the abuses in Abu Ghraib.10 If such leadership wins high distinctions, what, then, constitutes bad leadership in that military corps?

Failures of bystander intervention by numerous observers of the abuse on Tier 1A helped to perpetuate that abuse. Among those who were identified as witnessing abuses and doing nothing about them were the following:



• Soldier 15, MI interrogator, and Soldier 22 (who also heard MPs say they were using detainees as “practice dummies” by striking them unconscious)

• Soldier 24, intelligence analyst (present during abuse of detainees in many photographs)

• Soldier 25, interrogator (who “thought it was funny” when dog handlers scared detainees into running into their cells as dogs attacked; she was also present when a pyramid of naked prisoners was formed)

• Soldier 20, Medic (who witnessed prisoner abuse and saw photos of the naked pyramid)

• Soldier 01, Medic (she also saw the human pyramid when called to provide medical treatment).



Also included are those mentioned earlier who watched the dog attacks and never challenged the dog handlers or reported the abuses.

Not content to observe in silence, many others eagerly joined the fray. One Army analyst (Soldier 10) threw water on three naked detainees; one interrogator (Soldier 19) actively participated in the abuse of three detainees depicted in the photographs, threw foam balls at their genitals, poured water over them, and gave instructions to MPs to abuse a detainee who was later found “naked and hooded on the floor whimpering.” The Fay/Jones Report identifies another personally involved interrogator: “Soldier-29 saw Graner slap a detainee; she saw a computer screen saver with the image of seven naked detainees in a human pyramid; she saw the photos being taken; she knew that MPs gave a detainee a cold shower, made him roll in dirt, and then forced him to stand in the cold until he was dry; she stripped a prisoner naked and walked him outside in the cold on a winter night.”

Most tellingly in support of Chip Frederick’s defense, this female interrogator is charged with giving MPs instructions to mistreat and abuse detainees. It was proven that she told that to SSG Frederick when detainees had not cooperated in an interrogation—which “appeared to result in [their] subsequent abuse” (according to Fay and Jones).

This thorough investigation by two Army generals should lay to rest any claims that the MPs on the night shift of Tier 1A abused and tortured the prisoners solely out of their personally deviant motivations or sadistic impulses. Instead, the picture that is emerging is one of complex multiple causality. Many other soldiers and civilians are identified and implicated in various ways in the torture and abuse process. Some were perpetrators, some facilitators, and some observers who failed to report abuses. In addition, we see that a legion of officers is also fingered as responsible for these abuses by their failures of leadership, and by creating the chaotic, impossible situation in which Chip Frederick and those serving under him found themselves enmeshed.

However, General Sanchez was not directly implicated in any wrongdoing by this investigation. Yet, he was not entirely off the hook, according to General Paul J. Kern, who told reporters, “We did not find General Sanchez culpable but we found him responsible for what did or did not happen.”11 Now, that is really elegant wordplay: General Sanchez is not “culpable” but merely “responsible for” everything! We will not be as charitable to this officer.

Next we turn to a special investigation ordered by Rumsfeld and headed not by another general, but by former defense secretary James Schlesinger. This committee did not conduct new, independent investigations; rather, they interviewed top military and Pentagon leaders, and their report offers us many important features for the case we are building.

The Schlesinger Report Identifies Culpability12

This is the final investigative report we will present. It offers valuable evidence to our case for the situational and systemic influences contributing to the abuses at Abu Ghraib. Of special interest are its specification of many shortfalls in the detention center operation, its pointing out leadership and command culpabilities, and its revelation of the cover-up of the photos of abuse by the military after Joe Darby took the photo CD to a military criminal investigator.

What struck me as most unexpected, and what was much appreciated in this report, is the section devoted to detailing the relevance of social psychological research to understanding the abuses at Abu Ghraib. Unfortunately, it is tucked away in an Appendix (G) and is therefore likely not to be widely read. This addendum to the Schlesinger Report also presents the apparent parallels between the Abu Ghraib situation and the abuses that occurred during the Stanford Prison Experiment.


Widespread Military Abuses

First, the report notes the widespread nature of “abuse” across all U.S. military facilities. (The term “torture” is never used.) At that time, November 2004, there were three hundred incidents of alleged detainee abuse in joint operation areas, with sixty-six established as “abuse” by forces at Guantánamo and in Afghanistan, and fifty-five more in Iraq. A third of these incidents were related to interrogation, and at least five deaths of detainees were reported as having happened during interrogation. Two dozen additional cases of detainee deaths were still under investigation at that time. This grim account seems to fill up the “vacuum” that Fay and Jones referred to in their report about the abuses on Tier 1A. Albeit they were the most visible instance of the abuses perpetrated by soldiers, they may have been less horrible than the murders and mayhem in other military detention facilities that we will visit later.


Major Problem Areas and Exacerbating Conditions

The Schlesinger Report identified five areas as major problems that fed into the context of the abuses. They are:



• Inadequate mission-specific training of MPs and MI soldiers

• Equipment and resources shortfalls

• Pressure on interrogators to produce “actionable intelligence” (with inexperienced, untrained personnel and detainees who were in custody for as long as ninety days before being interrogated)

• Leadership that was “weak,” inexperienced, and operating within a confused, overly complex structure

• The CIA operating under its own rules, without accountability to anyone in the military command structure



The report also specifies a number of prevailing conditions that exacerbated the difficult task facing the soldiers in the Abu Ghraib Prison, notably those on the hard site in Tier 1A. It lists the following conditions that impacted the MPs and MIs on that tier:



• The fear besetting MPs given that the facility was under frequent hostile fire from mortar and rocket-propelled grenades

• Detainee escape attempts were numerous

• Several riots in the prison

• MI and MP seriously underresourced

• MI and MP lack of unit cohesion and midlevel leadership

• Reserve MI and MP units had lost senior NCOs and other personnel through rotation back to the United States and/or reassignment

• 372nd MP soldiers were not trained for prison guard duty

• Thinly stretched in dealing with the large number of detainees

• 800th MP was among the lowest units in priority and did not have the capability to overcome the shortfalls it confronted

• Lack of discipline and standards of behavior were not established or enforced

• No clear delineation of responsibility between commands and little coordination; lax and dysfunctional command structure

• Weak and ineffective leaders; top leaders failed to ensure that subordinates were properly trained and supervised

• Some medical personnel failed to report detainee abuses that they had witnessed and provided tacit approval as bystanders

• “Secretary Rumsfeld publicly declared he directed one detainee be held secretly at the request of the Director of Central Intelligence.” That action provided a model of deception at the highest levels of command, which was emulated in various ways by others in command at Abu Ghraib.




What We Have Here Is Again a Failure of Leadership

Again and again, this report makes evident the total failure of leadership at every level and its contribution to the abuses by the MPs on the notorious night shift:



The aberrant behavior on the night shift in cell block 1 at Abu Ghraib would have been avoided with proper training, leadership, and oversight.

These abuses . . . represent deviant behavior and a failure of leadership and discipline.

There were other abuses not photographed during interrogation sessions and abuses during interrogation sessions elsewhere than Abu Ghraib.

Still, the abuses were not just the failure of some individuals to follow known standards. And they are more than the failure of a few leaders to enforce proper discipline. There is both institutional and personal responsibility at higher levels. [Italics added for emphasis.]

At the tactical level, we concur with the Jones/Fay investigations conclusion that military intelligence personnel share responsibility for the abuses at Abu Ghraib.

The unclear command structure at Abu Ghraib was further exacerbated by the confused relationships up the chain.

The unclear chain of command established by CJTF-7 combined with the poor leadership and lack of supervision contributed to the atmosphere at Abu Ghraib that allowed the abuses to take place.

At the leadership level there was friction and a lack of communication between the 800th MP Brigade and the 205th MI Brigade through the summer and fall of 2003 . . . . There was a lack of discipline and standards of behavior were not established or enforced. A lax and dysfunctional command climate took hold.

There were serious lapses of leadership in both units from junior noncommissioned officers to battalion and brigade levels. The commanders at both brigades knew, or should have known, abuses were taking place and taken measures to prevent them.

By not communicating standards, policies, and plans to soldiers, their leaders conveyed a tacit approval of abusive behaviors toward prisoners.

Weak and ineffectual leadership of the Commanding General of the

800th MP Brigade, and the Commanding Officer of the 205 MI Brigade, allowed the abuses at Abu Ghraib.

We concur with the Jones finding that LTG Sanchez and MG Wojdakowski failed to insure proper staff oversight of detention and interrogation operations.

The Independent Panel finds BG Karpinski’s leadership failures helped set the conditions at the prison which led to the abuses.




Cover-up of the Abuse Photos

The Schlesinger Panel also mentions in passing how the military responded to the revelation of abuse and torture in the “trophy photos.” Interestingly, the committee uses language that takes all the officials off the hook for negligence and malfeasance. There was an attempt at a cover-up by downplaying the meaning and significance of this damning photographic evidence of torture and abuse:



“The officials who saw the photos on January 14, 2004, not realizing their likely significance, did not recommend the photos be shown to more senior officials.” Based on the interim report to CJTF-7 and CENTCOM commanders in mid-March 2004, “their impact was not appreciated by these officers or their staff officers as indicated by the failure to transmit them in a timely fashion to more senior officials. Again, the reluctance to move bad news up the chain of command was a factor impeding notification of the Secretary of Defense.



General Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, tried to delay public showing of the photos by CBS Television in April 2004, so he must have realized that they had some “likely significance.” Nevertheless, as I have mentioned previously, this top general felt free to say publicly that he knew these events were not “systematic” but rather were due to the criminal actions of a “few bad apples.”

The Social Psychology of Inhumane Treatment of Others

Among the dozen investigations of abuses in military detention facilities, the Schlesinger Report is unique in offering a detailed consideration of the ethical issues involved and in summarizing the psychological stressors and the situational forces operating in Abu Ghraib Prison. Unfortunately, both of these special features are tucked away at the end of the report in Appendices H, “Ethics,” and G, “Stressors and Social Psychology,” when they should have been highlighted.

Of personal relevance is the committee’s identification of parallels between the Stanford Prison Experiment and the Abu Ghraib abuses. Let’s briefly review the main points raised in this section of the Schlesinger Report:



The potential for abusive treatment of detainees during the Global War on Terrorism was entirely predictable based on a fundamental understanding of the principle of social psychology principles [sic] coupled with an awareness of numerous known environmental risk factors . . . . Findings from the field of social psychology suggest that the conditions of war and the dynamics of detainee operations carry inherent risks for human mistreatment, and therefore must be approached with great caution and careful planning and training.



However, the report noted that most military leaders are unacquainted with such important risk factors. In addition, the Schlesinger Report made clear that understanding the psychological foundations of the abusive behaviors does not excuse the perpetrators—as I have stated previously throughout this book: “Such conditions neither excuse nor absolve the individuals who engaged in deliberate immoral or illegal behaviors” even though “certain conditions heightened the possibility of abusive treatment.”

The Lessons of the Stanford Prison Experiment

The Schlesinger Report boldly proclaimed that the “landmark Stanford study provides a cautionary tale for all military detention operations.” In contrasting the Abu Ghraib environment to the relatively benign environment of the Stanford Prison Experiment, the report makes it evident that “in military detention operations, soldiers work under stressful combat conditions that are far from benign.” The implication is that those combat conditions might be expected to generate even more extreme abuses of power by military police than were observed in our mock prison experiment. The Schlesinger Report continues to explore the central issue we have been dealing with throughout our Lucifer Effect journey.

“Psychologists have attempted to understand how and why individuals and groups who usually act humanely can sometimes act otherwise in certain circumstances.” Among the concepts the report outlined to help explain why abusive behaviors occur among ordinarily humane individuals are the following: deindividuation, dehumanization, enemy image, groupthink, moral disengagement, social facilitation, and other environmental factors.

One such environmental factor singled out was the widespread practice of stripping detainees. “The removal of clothing as an interrogation technique evolved into something much broader, resulting in the practice of groups of detainees being kept naked for extended periods of time at Abu Ghraib.” In its very sensitive analysis of why this practice of enforced nakedness played a causal role in the abuses of detainees by MPs and others in Tier 1A, the Schlesinger Report noted that the initial intention was to make detainees feel more vulnerable and to become more compliant with interrogators. However, it describes how this tactic eventually fostered dehumanizing conditions on that tier.

Over time, “this practice is likely to have had a psychological impact on guards and interrogators as well. The wearing of clothes is an inherently social practice, and therefore the stripping away of clothing may have had the unintended consequence of dehumanizing detainees in the eyes of those who interacted with them . . . . Dehumanization lowers moral and cultural barriers that usually preclude . . . the abusive treatment of others.”

Common to these investigative reports, and the others not included here, are two key elements: they specify a variety of situational and environmental contributors to the abuses at Abu Ghraib; they also identify many systemic and structural contributors to those abuses. However, because top military brass or the secretary of defense, Donald Rumsfeld, commissioned them, the authors of these dozen reports stop short of attributing blame to higher levels in the chain of command.

For a clearer focus on that bigger picture, we leave this evidentiary foundation for our case and turn next to a recent report from Human Rights Watch, the largest such organization that works to defend human rights worldwide. (See www.hrw.org.)


HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORT: “GETTING AWAY WITH TORTURE?”13

“Getting Away with Torture?” is the provocative title of the Human Rights Watch (HRW) report (April 2005), which stresses the need for a truly independent investigation of the many abuses, tortures, and murders of prisoners by U.S. military and civilian personnel. It calls for an investigation of all those who were the architects of such policies that have led to wanton violations of human rights.

We can think of the torture dungeon at Abu Ghraib and similar facilities at Gitmo and other military prisons in Afghanistan and Iraq as having been designed by the senior “architects” Bush, Cheney, Rumsfeld, and Tenet. Next came the “justifiers,” the lawyers who came up with new language and concepts that legalized “torture” in new ways and means—the president’s legal counselors Alberto Gonzales, John You, Jay Bybee, William Taft, and John Ashcroft. The “foremen” on the torture construction job were the military leaders, such as Generals Miller, Sanchez, Karpinski, and their underlings. Finally, came the technicians, the grunts in charge of carrying out the daily labor of coercive interrogation, abuse, and torture—the soldiers in military intelligence, CIA operatives, civilian contract and military interrogators, translators, medics, and military police, including Chip Frederick and his night shift buddies.

Shortly after the photographic revelations of abuses at Abu Ghraib, President Bush vowed that the “wrongdoers will be brought to justice.”14 However, the HRW report points out that only the lowly MPs were brought to justice and that none of those who created the policies and provided the ideology and permission for those abuses to take place ever were. “In the intervening months,” the HRW report concludes:



It has become clear that torture and abuse have taken place not solely at Abu Ghraib but rather in dozens of detention facilities worldwide, that in many cases the abuse resulted in death or severe trauma, and that a good number of the victims were civilians with no connection to al-Qaeda or terrorism. There is also evidence of abuse at controlled “secret locations” abroad and of authorities sending suspects to third-country dungeons around the world where torture was likely to occur. To date, however, the only wrongdoers being brought to justice are those at the bottom of the chain-of-command. The evidence demands more. Yet a wall of impunity surrounds the architects of the policies responsible for the larger pattern of abuses.

As this report shows, evidence is mounting that high-ranking civilian and military leaders—including Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, former CIA Director George Tenet, Lieutenant General Ricardo Sanchez, formerly the top commander in Iraq, and Major General Geoffrey Miller, the former commander of the prison camp at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba—made decisions and issued policies that facilitated serious and widespread violations of the law. The circumstances strongly suggest that they either knew or should have known that such violations took place because of their actions. There is also mounting data that, when presented with evidence that abuse was in fact taking place, they failed to act to stem the abuse.

The coercive methods approved by senior officials and widely employed over the last three years include tactics that the United States has repeatedly condemned as barbarity and torture when practiced by others. Even the Army field manual condemns some of these methods as torture.

Although much relevant evidence remains secret, a series of revelations over the past twelve months, brought together here, already makes a compelling case for a thorough, genuinely independent investigation of what top officials did, what they knew, and how they responded when they became aware of the widespread nature of the abuses.



As upsetting as were the images of abuse and torture by the Tier 1A night shift MPs, they pale in comparison to the many murders of detainees by soldiers, CIA, and other civilian personnel. “If the United States is to wipe out the stain of Abu Ghraib, it needs to investigate those at the top who ordered or condoned abuse and come clean on what the president has authorized,” said Reed Brody, special counsel for Human Rights Watch. He adds, that “Washington must repudiate, once and for all, the mistreatment of detainees in the name of the war on terror.”15

Many Abusers, Few Punished, Officers Get Free Ride

Let’s set the record straight on the extent of abuses of detainees in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. A recent Army statement indicates that more than 600 accusations of abuse of detainees have been reported since October 2001. Of those, 190 have never been investigated or there is no known investigation of them—the “ghost abusers.” At least 410 other accusations have been investigated with the following consequences: 150 faced disciplinary action, 79 were court-martialed, 54 were found guilty, 10 were sentenced to more than one year in prison, 30 were sentenced to less than one year, 14 got no prison time, 10 were acquitted, 15 cases are still pending or charges were dropped, 71 were administratively disciplined or nonjudicially disciplined. If one does the addition, that leaves at least 260 investigations closed or whose ongoing status was unclear as of April 2006, the time the report was published.16 One of the dog handlers, Sergeant Michael Smith, was sentenced to six months in prison for using his unmuzzled dog to torment prisoners. He maintained that he had been “following orders to soften up prisoners for interrogation.” He is also reported to have said that “Soldiers are not supposed to be soft and cuddly,” and he was not that.17

As of April 10, 2006, there was no evidence that the military has even attempted to prosecute a single officer under the doctrine of command responsibility for personally directed abuses or for those of their subordinates. In the detailed report of all investigated abuses only five officers have been criminally charged, none under the command responsibility doctrine. One Army captain was charged with dereliction of duty for the deaths of two detainees in Afghanistan; the charges were dropped. A Navy lieutenant was charged with assault and dereliction of duty in the death of a ghost detainee Manadel al-Jamadi; he was acquitted. Three other officers, a lieutenant, a captain, and a major, were convicted at court-martial of detainee abuse, either directly participating in abusing prisoners or ordering their troops to do so; one received a sentence of only 45 days in prison, another got two months, and the third was discharged with no prison sentence at all. The military command goes soft on its errant officers by using nonjudicial hearings and administrative reprimands that are usually meant for minor offenses and carry weak sentences. This is so even in more than 70 cases of serious criminal abuse, including 10 homicides and 20 assault cases. Such leniency extends also to CIA operatives in at least 10 abuse cases and 20 civilian contractors working for the CIA or the military. Thus, it becomes evident that detainee abuse was widespread far beyond Abu Ghraib and further that there is a general failure of command responsibility in any of the many cases of abuse and torture. (See the Notes for access to the full report of the abuses and failures of prosecution of guilty officers.18)

HRW Goes up the Command Chain

After its detailed documentation of the widespread abuses perpetrated by soldiers in MP and MI brigades, the CIA, and civilian contractors serving as interrogators, the HRW goes nearly all the way up the chain of command in its accusation of criminal responsibility for war crimes and torture:



While there are obviously steep political obstacles in the way of investigating a sitting defense secretary and other high-ranking officials, the nature of crimes is so serious, and mounting evidence of wrongdoing is now so voluminous, that it would be an abdication of responsibility for the United States not to push this to the next level. Unless those who designed or authorized the illegal policies are held to account, all the protestations of “disgust” at the Abu Ghraib photos by President George W. Bush and others will be meaningless. If there is no real accountability for these crimes, for years to come the perpetrators of atrocities around the world will point to their treatment of prisoners to deflect criticism of their own conduct. Indeed, when a government as dominant and influential as the United States openly defies laws against torture, it virtually invites others to do the same. Washington’s much-needed credibility as a proponent of human rights was damaged by the torture revelations and will be further damaged if torture continues to be followed by complete impunity for the policy-makers.19



Stripping Away Immunity for the Architects of Illegal Policy

Both U.S. and international law recognize the principle of “command responsibility” or “superior responsibility,” by which individuals in civilian or military authority may be criminally liable for crimes committed by those under their command. Three elements are required for such liability to be established. First, there must be a clear superior-subordinate relationship. Second, the superior must have known or had reason to know that the subordinate was about to commit a crime or had already committed a crime. Third, the superior must have failed to take necessary and reasonable measures to prevent the crime or to punish the perpetrator.

War crimes and torture are punishable under the terms of the War Crimes Act of 1996, the Anti-Torture Act of 1996, and the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). Human Rights Watch goes on record arguing that a prima facie case exists that warrants the opening of criminal investigations with respect to four officials: Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, former CIA director George Tenet, Lieutenant General Ricardo Sanchez, and Major General Geoffrey Miller.

Here I can only outline some of the justifications for holding each of these officials liable for the acts of torture and abuse committed under their watch—a full description and supporting evidence is provided in the HRW report.

On Trial: Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld

Rumsfeld told the Senate Armed Services Committee: “These events occurred on my watch. As Secretary of Defense, I am accountable for them. I take full responsibility.”20

HRW asserts that “Secretary Rumsfeld should be investigated for war crimes and torture by US troops in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Guantánamo under the doctrine of ‘command responsibility.’ Secretary Rumsfeld created the conditions for troops to commit war crimes and torture by sidelining and disparaging the Geneva Conventions.21 He did so by approving interrogation techniques that violated the Geneva Conventions as well as the Convention against Torture and by approving the hiding of detainees from the International Committee of the Red Cross.” HRW continues:



From the earliest days of the war in Afghanistan, Secretary Rumsfeld was on notice through briefings, ICRC reports, human rights reports, and press accounts that troops were committing war crimes, including acts of torture. However, there is no evidence that he ever exerted his authority and warned that the mistreatment of prisoners must stop. Had he done so, many of the crimes committed by forces could have been avoided.

An investigation would also determine whether the illegal interrogation techniques that Secretary Rumsfeld approved for Guantánamo were actually used to inflict inhuman treatment on detainees there before he rescinded his approval to use them without requesting his permission. It would also examine whether Secretary Rumsfeld approved a secret program that encouraged physical coercion and sexual humiliation of Iraqi prisoners, as alleged by the journalist Seymour Hersh. If either were true, Secretary Rumsfeld might also, in addition to command responsibility, incur liability as the instigator of crimes against detainees.



Rumsfeld authorized a list of interrogation methods that violated the Geneva Convention and the Convention against Torture used on detainees at Guantánamo, which then migrated to other military prisons in Afghanistan and Iraq. Among his directives for preparing detainees for interrogation were the following:



The use of stress positions (like standing) for a maximum of four hours in isolation up to 30 days

The detainee may also have a hood placed over his head during transportation and questioning

Deprivation of light and auditory stimuli

Removal of all comfort items (including religious items)

Forced grooming (shaving of facial hair, etc)

Removal of clothing

Using detainees’ individual phobias (such as fear of dogs) to induce stress



In addition, standard operating procedures advocated exposing detainees to extremes of heat, cold, light, and noise.

The Department of Defense was repeatedly warned about torture and abuse of detainees by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in May and July 2003 (prior to the public exposé at Abu Ghraib) and again in February 2004.22

The ICRC reported on hundreds of allegations of prisoner abuse at a number of military venues, making repeated requests to take immediate steps to correct these abuses. These concerns were ignored, the abuses worsened, and inspections by the ICRC were curtailed. In its February 2004 report, presented confidentially to officials of the Coalition forces, the following violations against “protected persons deprived of their liberty” during their internment by Coalition forces, the ICRC highlighted the following:



• Brutality upon capture and initial custody, sometimes causing death or serious injury

• Physical or psychological coercion during interrogation to secure information

• Prolonged solitary confinement in cells devoid of light

• Excessive and disproportionate use of force resulting in death or injury during their period of internment



The ICRC report concludes with a stern warning that the secretary of defense should have heeded but apparently did not: “The practices described in this [twenty-four-page] report are prohibited under International Humanitarian Law. They warrant serious attention by CF [Correctional Facilities]. In particular, CF should review their policies and practices, take corrective action and improve the treatment of prisoners of war and other protected persons under their authority.”

Amnesty International has also weighed in with its own in-depth report on detention and torture in Iraq. It calls upon the Iraqi, U.S., and U.K. authorities to “take urgent, concrete steps to ensure that the fundamental human rights of all detainees in Iraq are respected. In particular, these authorities must urgently put in place adequate safeguards to protect detainees from torture or ill-treatment.”23

Mark Danner, a journalism professor at the University of California, Berkeley, reviewed all the relevant documents for his book Torture and Truth: America, Abu Ghraib and the War on Terror. Danner concludes from his detailed investigation that “When you read the documents, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld was involved very personally in approving procedures that went beyond the line of what is allowed in military law, and for that matter, in civilian law, when it comes to what can be done to prisoners.”24

On Trial: Former CIA Director George Tenet

HRW accuses former CIA director George Tenet of a variety of violations. Under George Tenet’s direction, and reportedly with his specific authorization, the CIA tortured detainees through “waterboarding” (the near drowning of a suspect) and by withholding their medicines. Other tactics reportedly used by the CIA include feigning suffocation, making prisoners hold “stress positions,” light and noise bombardment, sleep deprivation, and making detainees believe they are in the hands of foreign governments known to torture routinely. Under Director Tenet, the CIA “rendered” detainees to other governments, which tortured the detainees. Under Director Tenet’s direction, the CIA also put detainees beyond the protection of the law, in secret locations in which they were rendered completely defenseless, with no resource or remedy whatsoever, with no contact with the outside world, and completely at the mercy of their captors. These detainees, in long-term incommunicado detention, have effectively been “disappeared.”

Recall that the Fay/Jones investigation concluded that “CIA detention and interrogation practices led to a loss of accountability, abuse, reduced interagency cooperation and an unhealthy mystique that further poisoned the atmosphere at Abu Ghraib.” In effect, the CIA operated under its own rules and beyond the law.

Under Director Tenet, the CIA also developed the widespread practice of using “ghost detainees.” How many? We will never know for sure, but General Paul Kern, the senior officer who oversaw the Fay/Jones inquiry, told the Senate Armed Services Committee, “The number [of ghost detainees] is in the dozens, perhaps up to 100.” The CIA kept a number of detainees off the books at Abu Ghraib, hiding them from the ICRC.

Army Lieutenant Colonel Steven Jordan, who was second in command of the intelligence-gathering effort at Abu Ghraib while the abuse was occurring, told military investigators that “other government agencies” and a secretive elite task force “routinely brought in detainees for a short period of time” and that the detainees were held without internment numbers, with their names kept off the books. Such practices are violations of international law.25


The “Ice Man” Goeth

The Fay/Jones Report mentions one of these “ghosted” cases: In November 2003 an Iraqi detainee by the name of Manadel al-Jamadi, brought to the prison by Navy SEALs and interrogated by a CIA agent, was never formally registered. Jamadi was “tortured to death,” but the cause of his death was concealed in a most unusual way.

The investigative reporter Jane Mayer has shed light on the sinister role the CIA played in this homicide and its grisly cover-up. Her fascinating account “A Deadly Interrogation” in The New Yorker magazine (November 14, 2005) raises the question “Can the CIA legally kill a prisoner?”

The al-Jamadi case is especially important for us in our effort to understand the behavioral context at Abu Ghraib in which Chip Frederick and his other “rogue soldiers” worked. They were enmeshed in an environment where they observed ghost detainees routinely being brutalized, tortured, and some even murdered. They witnessed perpetrators literally “getting away with murder.”

By comparison with what happened to the ghost detainee Manadel al-Jamadi, the so-called Ice Man, what they did to the run-of-the-mill detainees must have seemed much more like just “fun and games.” They knew him to have been battered, suffocated to death, and then iced away.

Al-Jamadi was a so-called high-value target for interrogation because he allegedly supplied explosives to insurgents. A team of Navy SEALs captured him at his home outside Baghdad on November 4, 2003, at 2 A.M. He ended up with a black eye, a cut on his face, and perhaps half a dozen fractured ribs following a violent struggle. The SEALs turned al-Jamadi over to CIA custody at Abu Ghraib for interrogation, led by Mark Swanner. This CIA operative, accompanied by a translator, took al-Jamadi into a holding cell in the prison, stripped him naked, and began yelling at him to tell him where the weapons were.

According to Mayer’s New Yorker story, Swanner told the MPs to take the prisoner to Tier 1 Alpha, into the shower room for interrogation. Two of the MPs were ordered (by this anonymous civilian) to shackle the prisoner to the wall, even though he was by now totally passive. They were told to hang him from his arms in a torture position known as “Palestine Hanging.” (First practiced during the Spanish Inquisition, when it was known as strappado.) After they left the room, one MP recalled, “we heard a lot of screaming.” Less than an hour later, Manadel al-Jamadi was dead.





Walter Diaz, the MP on guard duty, said that there was no need to hang him up like that, given that he was handcuffed and offered no resistance. When the MPs were told by Swanner to take the dead man down from the wall, “blood came gushing out of his nose and mouth, as if a faucet had been turned on,” Diaz reported.

Now the problem for the CIA was what to do with the victim’s body. Captain Donald Reese, the MP commander, and Colonel Thomas Pappas, the MI commander, were alerted to this “unfortunate incident” on their shift. They needn’t have worried, because the CIA took matters into its own stealthy hands. Al-Jamadi was kept in the shower room until the next morning, packed in ice and bound with clear tape to retard decomposition of the corpse. The next day a medic inserted an IV into the “Ice Man’s” arm and had him carried out of the prison on a stretcher as if he were alive but merely ill, so as not to upset the other detainees, who were told he had had a heart attack. A local taxi driver carted the corpse away to an unknown destination. All evidence was destroyed, and there was no paper trail because al-Jamadi had never officially been registered. The Navy SEALS were exonerated for their part in manhandling al-Jamadi, the medic was not identified, and, several years later, Mark Swanner continues to work for the CIA, with no criminal charge against him! Case almost closed.

Among all the other horror images in Corporal Graner’s digital camera were several photos of that very same “Ice Man” that were recorded for posterity. First, there was a photo of an attractive, smiling Specialist Sabrina Harman bending over al-Jamadi’s battered body with a thumbs-up sign. Then Graner got into the mix to add his approving smile to hers, before the “Ice Man” melted away. For sure, Chip and the other night shift MPs knew what had just gone down. If such things could happen and be so deftly handled, then the dungeon of Tier 1 Alpha was the “Romper Room,” where anything went. Had they not taken those photos and had Darby not sounded the alarm, the world might never have learned what had happened in that once secret place.

Nonetheless, the CIA continues unshackled in any way by laws that should restrain its agents from torturing and murdering people, even in its global war on terrorism. Ironically, Swanner has admitted that he obtained no useful information from this murdered ghost detainee.

This involvement of the CIA in torture is nothing new and is evident in the analysis by the historian Alfred McCoy in his recent book documenting its role from the Cold War to the Terror War. According to McCoy, the shocking photographs of abuse from Abu Ghraib are nothing new. In his view:



If we look closely at these grainy images, we can see the geneology of CIA torture techniques, from their origins in the 1950s to their present-day perfection. Indeed, the photographs from Iraq illustrate standard interrogation practice inside the global gulag of secret CIA prisons that have operated, on executive authority, since the start of the war on terror. These photos, and later investigations they prompted, offer telltale signs that the CIA was both the lead agency at Abu Ghraib and the source of systematic tortures practiced in Guantánamo, Afghanistan, and Iraq. In this light, the nine soldiers court-martialed for the abuse at Abu Ghraib were simply following orders. Responsibility for their actions lies much higher, much higher, up the chain of command.26



On Trial: Lieutenant General Ricardo Sanchez

Like Rumsfeld, Lieutenant General Ricardo Sanchez also loudly acknowledged his responsibility: “As senior commander in Iraq, I accept responsibility for what happened at Abu Ghraib.”27 However, such responsibility should bear appropriate consequences and not be employed as photo op public gesturing. Human Rights Watch includes this top commander among the big four who should stand trial for torture and war crimes. Its report states:



Lt. Gen. Sanchez should be investigated for war crimes and torture either as a principal or under the doctrine of “command responsibility.” Gen. Sanchez authorized interrogation methods that violate the Geneva Conventions and the Convention against Torture. According to Human Rights Watch, he knew, or should have known, that torture and war crimes were committed by troops under his direct command, but failed to take effective measures to stop these acts.



I am putting General Sanchez on trial in this book because of the fact that, in the words of the HRW report, “he promulgated interrogation rules and techniques that violated the Geneva Conventions and the Convention against Torture, and further that he knew or should have known about torture and war crimes committed by troops under his command.”

Given the lack of “actionable intelligence” being gathered at Guantánamo Bay Prison despite months of interrogations, there was pressure on everyone to get the goods on the terrorists, and to do so immediately, by all means necessary. Mark Danner reported an e-mail sent by the military intelligence officer Captain William Ponce to his colleagues, urging them to provide an “interrogation wish list” by mid-August 2003. The captain infused his message with an ominous fore-shadowing of what was to come at Abu Ghraib: “The gloves are coming off gentlemen regarding these detainees.” His message continued, “Col Boltz [the second-ranking MI commander in Iraq] has made it clear that we want these individuals broken. Casualties are mounting and we need to start gathering info to help protect our fellow soldiers from any further attacks.”28

General Geoffrey Miller, then recently put in charge of the detention facilities at Gitmo, headed a visiting team of specialists to Iraq from August to September 2003. His mission was to spread the new get-tough interrogation policies to Generals Sanchez, Karpinski, and other officers. “General Miller put his finger in Sanchez’ chest and told him he wanted the information,” according to Karpinski.29 Miller was able to push these other officers around only with obvious support from Rumsfeld and other high-ranking generals, based on his so-called successes at Gitmo.

Sanchez formalized his rules for interrogation in a memo on September 14, 2003, introducing more extreme measures than had been practiced by his MPs and MIs.30 Some of his explicitly stated goals were to “create fear, disorient detainees and capture shock.” These newly approved techniques that came by way of Rumsfeld via Miller, included:



Presence of Military Working Dog: Exploits Arab fear of dogs while maintaining security during interrogations. Dogs will be muzzled and under control of . . . handler at all times to prevent contact with detainee.



Sleep Management: Detainee provided minimum 4 hours of sleep per 24 hour period, not to exceed 72 continuous hours.



Yelling, Loud Music and Light Control: Used to create fear, disorient detainee and prolong capture shock. Volume controlled to prevent injury.





Stress Positions: Use of physical postures (sitting, standing, kneeling, prone, etc.) for no more than 1 hour per use. Use of technique(s) will not exceed 4 hours and adequate rest between use of each position will be provided.



False Flag: Convincing the detainee that individuals from a country other than the United States are interrogating him.



The Schlesinger Report indicated that a dozen of Sanchez’s techniques went beyond those acceptable in Army Field Manual 34-52 and were even more extreme than those that had been approved for Guantánamo. Sanchez’s memo was released publicly in March 2005 in response to a FDIA lawsuit. It came about a year after General Sanchez had lied to Congress in sworn testimony (in May 2004) that he had never ordered or approved the use of intimidation by dogs, sleep deprivation, excessive noise, or inducing fear. He should be tried for all the reasons outlined above.

One soldier’s view about the extent to which there was direct involvement of the military command in directing abuses against detainees comes from Joe Darby, our heroic whistleblower: “Nobody in command knew about the abuse, because nobody in command cared enough to find out. That was the real problem. The entire command structure was oblivious, living in their own little worlds. So it wasn’t a conspiracy—it was negligence, plain and simple. They were fucking clueless.”31 General Sanchez has been forced to retire early (November 1, 2006) by the top military brass because of his role in the Abu Ghraib scandal. He admitted, “That’s the key reason, the sole reason, that I was forced to retire.” (Guardian Unlimited, November 2, 2006, “U.S. General Says Abu Ghraib Forced Him Out.”)

On Trial: Major General Geoffrey Miller

Human Rights Watch asserts that “Major General Geoffrey Miller, as commander at the tightly-controlled prison camp at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, should be investigated for his potential responsibility in the war crimes and acts of torture committed against detainees there.” Furthermore, he “knew or should have known that troops under his command were committing war crimes and acts of torture against detainees at Guantánamo.” Additionally, “Gen. Miller may have proposed interrogation methods for Iraq that were the proximate cause of the torture and war crimes committed at Abu Ghraib.”

General Miller was commander of Joint Task Force–Guantánamo ( JTF–GTMO) from November 2002 until April 2004, when he became the deputy commanding general of Detention Operations in Iraq, the position he held until 2006. He was sent to Gitmo to replace General Rick Baccus, who higher-ups considered was “coddling” prisoners by insisting that the Geneva Conventions guidelines be strictly followed. In short order, “Camp X-Ray” was transformed into “Camp Delta” with 625 inmates, 1,400 MIs and MPs, and lots of tension.

Miller was an innovator and developed specialized interrogation teams that for the first time integrated military intelligence (MI) personnel with the military police (MP) guard force—blurring a line that had previously been impermeable in the Army. To get inside the heads of the prisoners, Miller relied on experts. “He brought in behavioral scientists, who were psychologists and psychiatrists [both civilian and military]. And they were looking for psychological vulnerabilities, soft spots, ways to manipulate the detainees to kind of get them to cooperate, and looking for sort of psychic vulnerabilities and cultural vulnerabilities.”32

Using prisoners’ medical records, Miller’s interrogators tried to induce depression, to disorient detainees, and to break them. The prisoners resisted: there were hunger strikes, at least fourteen prisoners committed suicide early on, and over the next few years, several hundred prisoners attempted suicide.33 Recently, three Gitmo detainees committed suicide by hanging themselves in their cells with bedsheets; none had been formally charged after having been held there for many years. Instead of recognizing such acts as signs of desperation, one government spokesperson derided them as a public relations move to gain attention.34 A Navy rear admiral contended that they had not been acts of desperation but rather “an act of asymmetrical warfare against us.”

Miller’s new interrogation teams were encouraged to get more aggressive, given Secretary Rumsfeld’s official authorization of the harshest techniques ever sanctioned for use by U.S. soldiers. Abu Ghraib was to become Miller’s new experimental laboratory to test his hypotheses about the means necessary to get “actionable intelligence” from resistant prisoners. Rumsfeld went to Gitmo with his aide Stephen Cambone to meet with Miller and be sure they were all playing the same game.

Recall that General Karpinski said that Miller told her, “You have to treat the prisoners like dogs. If . . . they believe that they’re any different than dogs, you have effectively lost control of your interrogation from the very start . . . . And it works. This is what we do down at Guantánamo Bay.”35

Karpinski is also on record as saying that Miller “came up there and told me that he was going to “Gitmo-ize” the detention operation (at Abu Ghraib).”36 Colonel Pappas reported that Miller told him the use of dogs at Gitmo had proven effective in setting the atmosphere for getting information from prisoners and that the use of dogs “with or without a muzzle” was okay.37

To be certain that his orders were followed, Miller wrote a report and saw to it that his team left behind a compact disc with detailed instructions to be followed. General Sanchez then authorized his tough new rules, which elaborated on many of the techniques being used in Guantánamo. The veteran Army general Paul Kern made evident the problems created by such application of Gitmo-approved tactics to Abu Ghraib: “I think it became confusing. I mean, we found in computers in Abu Ghraib SECDEF [Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld’s] memos that were written for Guantánamo, not for Abu Ghraib. And that caused confusion.”38 For all the reasons outlined above, General Geoffrey Miller is added to our list of defendants on trial for their crimes against humanity.39

In its accusations, Human Rights Watch stopped short of going up to the pinnacle of system responsibility for the abuses and torture at Abu Ghraib: Vice President Dick Cheney and President George W. Bush. I will not be so hesitant. A bit later, I will add these two to our list of defendants put on trial here. They will be accused for their role in setting the agenda that redefined the nature of torture, suspended protections afforded prisoners under international law, and encouraged the CIA to engage in a series of illegal and lethal tactics because of their obsession with the so-called war on terror.

However, first we need to explore further the question of whether the Tier 1A abuses were an isolated incident by those few rotten apples or whether their offensive behavior was part of a broader pattern of tacitly approved, and widely practiced, abuses by many in the military and civilian cadre involved with capture, detention, and interrogation of suspected insurgents. My contention will be that this barrel of apples began rotting from the top down.


TORTURE, TORTURE EVERYWHERE, WITH MAYHEM ON THE SIDE

As he did on the day after the abuse photos were first revealed publicly, General Richard Myers, the Joint Chiefs chairman, continues to deny any systemwide involvement in the abuses; instead he continues to lay all the blame on the “Abu Ghraib Seven MPs.” He said publicly (on August 25, 2005), “I think we’ve had at least fifteen investigations on Abu Ghraib, and we’ve dealt with that. I mean, just a little snapshot—if it was only the night shift at Abu Ghraib, which it was, it was only a small section of the guards that participated in this, it’s a pretty good clue that it wasn’t a more widespread problem.”40

Did he ever read any of those reports? From only the sections of the independent investigative reports that I have summarized here, it could not be clearer that the abuses went well beyond those few MPs emerging in the images from Tier 1A. Those investigations implicate the military leadership, civilian interrogators, military intelligence, and the CIA in creating the conditions that spawned the abuses. Even worse, they participated in other, even more deadly abuses.

You will recall that the Schlesinger panel detailed fifty-five cases of detainee abuse throughout Iraq, as well as twenty instances of detainee deaths still under slow investigation. The Taguba Report found numerous instances of wanton criminal abuses constituting “systematic and illegal abuse of detainees” at Abu Ghraib (my italics). Another Pentagon report documented forty-four allegations of such war crimes at Abu Ghraib. The International Committee of the Red Cross told the government that its treatment of detainees in many of its military prisons has involved psychological and physical coercion that is “tantamount to torture.”

Further, it reports that such methods being used by interrogators at Abu Ghraib “appeared to be part of the standard operating procedures by military intelligence personnel to obtain confessions and extract information.” And we have just reviewed the more recent statistics of more than six hundred cases of abuse reported throughout the U.S. military prisons in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Cuba. Does this sound like only “a few bad apples” in one bad dungeon, in one bad prison?

Revelations of Widespread Prisoner Abuses Before Abu Ghraib
