
Although both military and civilian administrative commands sought to isolate the abuses and tortures in Iraq to an aberration of a few bad soldiers working the night shift in Tier 1A in the fall of 2003, new Army documents belie such assertions. On May 2, 2006, the ACLU released Army documents revealing that senior government officials were aware of extreme cases of detainee abuse in Iraq and Afghanistan two weeks before the Abu Ghraib scandal broke. An information paper entitled “Allegations of Detainee Abuse in Iraq and Afghanistan,” dated April 2, 2004, detailed sixty-two ongoing investigations of abuse and homicides of detainees by U.S. forces.

Cases include assaults, punching, kicking and beating, mock executions, sexual assault of a female detainee, threatening to kill an Iraqi child to “send a message to other Iraqis,” stripping detainees, beating them and shocking them with a blasting device, throwing rocks at handcuffed Iraqi children, choking detainees with knots of their scarves, and interrogations at gunpoint. At least twenty-six cases involved detainee deaths. Some of the cases had already gone through a court-martial proceeding. The abuses went beyond Abu Ghraib and touched Camp Cropper, Camp Bucca, and other detention centers in Mosul, Samarra, Baghdad, and Tikrit in Iraq, as well as Orgun-E in Afghanistan (see Notes for the full report by the ACLU).41

A Pentagon report of the twelfth investigation into military abuses, led by Army brigadeer general Richard Formica, noted that U.S. Special Operations troops continued to use a set of harsh, unauthorized interrogation tactics against detainees during a four-month period in early 2004. This was long after the 2003 Abu Ghraib abuses, and after approval for their use had been rescinded. Some were given only crackers and water for as long as seventeen days, kept naked, locked in cells so small they could neither stand or lie down for a week, frozen, deprived of sleep, and subjected to sensory overload. Despite these findings, none of the soldiers received even a reprimand. Formica believed the abuse was not “deliberate” or due to “personal failure,” but to “inadequate policy failure.” He also added to this whitewash that, based on his observations, “none of the detainees seemed to be the worse for wear because of the treatment.”42 Amazing!

Marines Murder Iraqi Civilians in Cold Blood

I have focused on understanding the nature of the bad barrel of prisons that can corrupt good guards, but there is a larger, more deadly barrel, that of war. In all wars, at all times, in every country, wars transform ordinary, even good men into killers. That is what soldiers are trained to do, to kill their designated enemies. However, under the extreme stresses of combat conditions, with fatigue, fear, anger, hatred, and revenge at full throttle, men can lose their moral compass and go beyond killing enemy combatants. Unless military discipline is strictly maintained and every soldier knows he bears personal responsibility for his actions, which are under surveillance by senior officers, then the furies are released in unimaginable orgies of rape and murder of civilians as well as enemy soldiers. We know such loss was true at My Lai and in other less well-known military massacres, such as those of the “Tiger Force” in Vietnam. This elite fighting unit left a seven-month-long trail of executions of unarmed civilians.43 Sadly, the brutality of war that spills over from the battlefield to the hometown has become true again in Iraq.44

Military experts warn that as soldiers have to fight more against elusive enemies in asymmetrical warfare it will become increasingly difficult for them to maintain discipline under such stresses. Wartime atrocities occur in all wars and are committed by most occupying forces, even high tech ones. “Combat is about stress, and criminal behavior toward civilians is a classic combat stress symptom. If you get enough soldiers into enough combat, some of them are going to murder civilians,” according to a senior official at a Washington military think tank.45

We must acknowledge that soldiers are well-trained killers who have successfully completed an intense learning experience in boot camp, with the battlefield as their testing ground. They must learn to suppress their prior moral training guided by the commandment “thou shalt not kill.” New military training that works to rewire their brains to accept killing in wartime as a natural response is known as the science of “killology.” This term, coined by retired lieutenant colonel Dave Grossman, now a West Point professor of military science, is elaborated in his book On Killing and in his website.46

However, sometimes the “science of creating killers” can get out of hand and make murder become ordinary. Consider the reactions of a twenty-one-year-old soldier who just killed a civilian in Iraq who refused to stop at a traffic check. “It was like nothing. Over here, killing people is like squashing an ant. I mean, you kill somebody, and it’s like, ‘All right, let’s go get some pizza. I mean, I thought killing somebody would be this life-changing experience. And then I did it, and it was like, ‘All right, whatever.’”47

On November 19, 2005, a roadside bomb went off in the town of Haditha, Iraq, killing a U.S. Marine and injuring two other soldiers. In the following hours, fifteen Iraqi civilians are reported to have been killed by an improvised explosive device, according to a Marine investigation. Case closed, as many Iraqis are killed in this way almost every day. However, a townsperson (Taher Thabet) made a videotape of the bullet-ridden bodies of the dead civilians and turned it over to the Time magazine bureau in Baghdad. That prompted a more serious investigation into the murders of twenty-four civilians by that Marine battalion. It appears that the Marines entered three homes and methodically killed most of the occupants, including seven children and four women, by gunshots and grenades. They also shot dead a taxi driver and four students who had stopped their taxi on the road nearby.

There was clearly an attempted cover-up by senior Marine officers when they realized that these were unprovoked murders of civilians by Marines who had abandoned the rules of engagement. In March 2006 the battalion commander and two of his company commanders were relieved of command; one said that he was a “political casualty.” Several more investigations are under way at this writing and may even find more senior commanders culpable. It is important to add to this terrible tale that these Marines from the 3rd Platoon, Kilo Company, were experienced soldiers, on their second and third tour of duty. They had engaged in fierce fighting earlier in Fallujah where nearly half their buddies were killed or seriously wounded in combat. So, there was a lot of anger and feelings of revenge building up before the Haditha massacre.48

War is hell on soldiers, but it is always worse on civilians and especially children in battle zones, when the soldiers stray off the moral path, acting cruelly against them. In another recent incident under investigation, U.S. forces killed as many as thirteen civilians in the hamlet of Ishaqi, Iraq. Some were found tied up and shot in the head, including several children. U.S. military officials, acknowledging that “noncombatants” had been killed, called the casualties “collateral deaths” (again this is an instance of euphemistic labeling associated with moral disengagement).49

Imagine what happens when a senior officer gives soldiers permission to kill civilians. Four soldiers accused of killing three unarmed Iraqi men during a house raid in the city of Tikrit, Iraq, were told by their brigade commander, Colonel Michael Steele, to “kill all the male insurgents, terrorists.” The soldier who reported this new rule of engagement was threatened by his colleagues if he told anyone about the shooting deaths.50

One of the worst horrors of war is the rape of innocent civilian women by soldiers, as was documented in the massacre of the Tutsi women by Hutu militia in Rwanda, described in chapter 1. A new allegation of similarly horrible brutality has surfaced in Iraq, where a group of U.S. soldiers (101st Airborne Division) are accused in federal court of raping a fourteen-year-old girl after killing her parents and four-year-old sister, then shooting her in the head and burning all the bodies. The evidence is clear that they intended this bloody assault by first changing out of uniform (so as not to be identified) after eyeing the young girl at their traffic checkpoint and proceeding to murder her family before abusing her. The military had initially blamed the murders on insurgents. 51

This suspension of self-constraints against cruelty that is all too common among soldiers in combat zones is not limited to the U.S. military. British soldiers were videotaped as they beat up Iraqi youths. The cameraman, a corporal in that unit, can be heard laughing as he urges his comrades to enjoy their abuses. Obviously, the prime minister, Tony Blair, has promised a probe into what one of his military spokesmen describes as the actions limited to a “tiny number of soldiers.”52 At least he had the decency not to use the “bad apples” metaphor.

Let us next go beyond abstract generalizations, statistics, and military investigations to listen to the confessions of several U.S. Army interrogators about what they saw and what they themselves did in abusing detainees. As we will see, they go on record as reporting on the widespread abuse and patterns of torture they witnessed and which they personally practiced.

We will also briefly review the recently revealed program at Gitmo that enabled young female interrogators, nicknamed “torture chicks” by the media, to employ a variety of sexual lures in their arsenal of interrogation tactics. Their presence and tactics must have been done with commanders’ approval; they did not just decide to “sex out” in Cuba on their own initiative. We will learn that not only did the lowly Army Reserve MPs on Tier 1A engage in despicable acts of abuse, but even elite soldiers and military officers performed many even more brutal acts of violence against prisoners.

Finally, we will see the scope of torture as virtually boundless, because the United States “outsources” torture to other countries in programs known as “renditions,” “extraordinary renditions,” and even “reverse renditions.” We will discover that not only did Saddam torture his people, the United States did so, and the new Iraqi regime also has been torturing its countrymen and women in secret prisons throughout Iraq. One can only feel sorrow for Iraqis when their torturers come packaged in so many different guises.

Next Up: Witnesses for the Prosecution

Specialist Anthony Lagouranis (retired) was an Army interrogator for five years (2001 to 2005) with a tour of duty in Iraq during 2004. Although first stationed at Abu Ghraib, Lagouranis was assigned to a special intelligence-gathering unit that serviced detention facilities throughout Iraq. When he talks about the “culture of abuse” that permeated interrogations throughout Iraq, his database is countrywide and not Tier 1A–specific.53

Then there is Sergeant Roger Brokaw (retired), who worked at Abu Ghraib for six months as an interrogator, starting in spring 2003. Brokaw reports that few of those with whom he talked, maybe only 2 percent, were dangerous or were insurgents; most had been brought in or singled out by Iraqi police who had a grudge against somebody or simply didn’t like him. Both men say that one of the reasons intelligence gathering was so ineffective was that detention facilities were overflowing with people who had no good information to give. Many had been picked up in roundups of all the males in entire families in an area of insurgent activity. Because there were relatively few trained interrogators or translators available, by the time these detainees were interviewed any information they might have had was cold and outdated.

A lot of frustration arose from expending so much effort for so few solid results. That frustration also led to a lot of aggression, as the old frustration-aggression hypothesis would predict. Time was running; the insurgency was growing; pressure was building from the military commanders, who were feeling the heat from their civilian bosses up the command chain. Extraction of information was vital.

Brokaw: “Because they were picking up people for anything, just the drop of a hat. There was [sic] quotas, quotas on interrogating so many people per week and sending reports up the chain of command.”

Lagouranis: “We rarely got good intel from the prisoners, and I blame that on that we were getting prisoners who were innocent and didn’t have intel to give us.”

Brokaw: “And ninety-eight percent of the people I talked to had no reason being in there. They would just take them at face value and go in and raid this house and pull these people out and throw them in the detention camps. Colonel Pappas [said], there was pressure from him to get information. Get information. ‘Let’s get this information, save another GI’s life. If we have, you know, if we find these weapons, if we find these insurgents, we’ll save soldiers’ lives.’ And I think that led to this idea of condoning whatever the interrogators or the MPs wanted to do to these people to soften them up.”

Brokaw also reported that the message about “taking the gloves off” spiraled down the chain of command to give meaning to that boxing metaphor.54

Brokaw: “I heard the phrase, ‘We’re going to take the gloves off.’ Colonel Jordan said that one night in one of our meetings. ‘We’re taking the gloves off. We’re going to show these people, you know, that we’re in charge.’ And he was talking about the detainees.”

As the insurgency against the Coalition forces became ever more lethal and extensive, pressure on the MIs and MPs to get that elusive actionable intelligence was ever greater. An anonymous interviewee told PBS Frontline (October 18, 2005):

“Most of the abuses around Iraq are not photographed, and so they’ll never get any outrage out of it. And this makes it even harsher because around Iraq, in the back of a Humvee or in a shipping container, there’s no camera. There are no cameras. There are [sic] no still photography. There’s no video cameras. And there’s no one looking over your shoulder, so you can do anything you want.”

Lagouranis added some details: “Now it’s all over Iraq. It’s—as I said, people are torturing people in their homes. The infantry units are torturing people in their homes. They were using things like, as I said, burns. They would smash people’s feet with the back of an axe-head. They would break bones, ribs. You know, that was—that was serious stuff.” He added, “When the units would go out into people’s homes and do these raids, they would just stay in the house and torture them.” Brokaw witnessed some of the same abuses: “I saw black eyes and fat lips, and some of them had to be treated for bad abrasions on legs and arms.”

Just how far were MIs and MPs allowed to go in their quest for information?

Lagouranis: “Part of it is, they were trying to get information, but part of it is also just pure sadism. You just kept wanting to push and push and push and see how far you could go. It’s natural for people to reach an intense level of frustration when you’re sitting there with somebody that you feel you have total control over and total power over, and you can’t get him to do what you want. And that you do that all day, every day. And at some point, you want to start raising the stakes.”

What happens when you add high fear and revenge as psychological catalysts to the volatile mix?

Lagouranis: “If you’re really angry because you’re getting mortared all the time—I mean, rockets, they’re shooting RPGs [rocket-propelled grenades] at us, there’s nothing you can do. And people are dying around you because of this unseen enemy. And so you get in the interrogation booth with this guy who you think might be doing this stuff, and you know, you want to go as far as you can.”

How far did they actually go?

Lagouranis: “I remember the chief warrant officer in charge of the interrogation facility. He’d heard about how the SEALs were using just ice water to lower the body temperature of the prisoner. And they would give him—you know, they would take his rectal temperature to make sure he didn’t die. They would keep him hovering on hypothermia.” The reward for giving up the information demanded was de-icing the prisoner before he died!

Social modeling, another potent psychological tactic, was put into practice when this interrogator used a similar strategy throughout the night inside a cold metal shipping container that served as the interrogation cell.

Lagouranis: “So we were keeping them hovering around hypothermia in this environment of what they call ‘environmental manipulation,’ with the [loud blaring] music and strobe lights. And then we would bring in military working dogs and use those on the prisoners. Even though it was controlled—like, the dogs were muzzled, they were being held by a handler. But the prisoner didn’t know that because he was blindfolded. These are big German shepherds. So, when I would ask the prisoner a question and I didn’t like the answer, I would cue the handler, so the dog would bark and jump on the prisoner, but he wasn’t able to bite him . . . . sometimes they wet their jumpsuits because they were so scared, you know? Especially because they’re blindfolded. They can’t figure out—you know, that’s a pretty terrifying position to be in. That was something I was ordered to do, and I made the chief warrant officer sign off on every single thing that I was asked to do.”

Moral disengagement facilitates behaving in ways that would ordinarily be self-censured by moral people.

Lagouranis: “It is because you really do feel like you’re outside of normal society, you know? Your family, your friends, they’re not there to see what’s going on. And everybody is sort of participating in this I don’t know what—psychosis, or for want of a better word, this delusion about what you’re doing there. And what becomes OK as you look around gets broken down, you know? And I mean, I felt it myself. I remember being in that shipping container in Mosul. You know, I’d been with a guy [an interrogated prisoner] all night long. And you just feel so isolated, and morally isolated, that you felt like you could do whatever you want to this guy, and maybe you even want to.”

This young interrogator, who must live the rest of his life with the knowledge of the evil he did as part of his service to his country, describes how violence has a way of escalating, of feeding upon itself.

Lagouranis: “You just kept wanting to push and push and push, and see how far you could go. And it seems like that’s just part of human nature. I mean, I’m sure you’ve read studies conducted in American prisons where you put a group of people in charge of another group of people, and give them control over them, and pretty soon it turns into cruelty and torture, you know? So it’s pretty common.” [Can we assume that he is referring to the prison at Stanford University? If so, the SPE has assumed an urban-myth status as a “real prison.”]

The need for strong leadership to curtail abuse is essential:

Lagouranis: “And I saw it [cruelty and abuse] in every detention facility I went to. If there wasn’t really strong, strong leadership that said, ‘We’re not going to tolerate abuse,’ . . . in every facility there would have been abuse. And even among people like the MPs who aren’t trying to get intel—they just do it because it’s something people do there, if they’re not controlled either inwardly or from above.”

After seeing even worse cases of “abuse coming out of the Force Recon Marines in North Babel,” Lagouranis couldn’t take it anymore. He began writing reports about the abuses, documenting them with photos of the wounds and sworn prisoner statements, and then sent all this information through the Marine chain of command. How were his charges received? As with the complaints that Chip Frederick raised to his superiors about the dysfunctional conditions at Abu Ghraib, no one in the Marine command responded to the complaints of this interrogator.55

Lagouranis: “Nobody ever came to look at that stuff; no one ever came to talk to me about it. I just felt like I was sending these abuse reports to nowhere. And no one was investigating them, or they had no way to investigate them, or maybe no desire.” [Such official silence adds its fecal touch to all dissent.]

Perhaps a reason for higher-ups failing to respond to this young interrogator’s pleas for help and redress in dealing with his assignment was the uncertainty and conflict going on at top agency levels. There were disagreements about just how far “torture” should be allowed to go in coercive interrogations.

The FBI clashed with the CIA over what it considered wrongheaded ways of dealing with suspects, especially “high-value” ones. One such critical report of CIA tactics is found in an FBI memo:



To FBIHQ. I entered interview rooms to find a detainee chained hand and foot in the fetal position to the floor, with no chair, food, or water. Most times, they had urinated or defecated on themselves, and had been left there for 18 to 24 hours or more.



A special case that points out just how far an interrogation team at Guantánamo Prison would go is that documented for “Prisoner 063.” His name was Mohammed al-Qahtani, believed to be “the twentieth hijacker” from the 9/11 terrorist attacks. He was abused in almost every imaginable way. He was made to urinate on himself, was deprived of sleep and food for days on end, and was terrorized by a fierce attack dog. His continued resistance was met with further abuse. Prisoner 063 was forced to wear a woman’s bra and had a woman’s thong placed on his head. Interrogators made fun of him, calling him a homosexual. They even put on a dog leash and made him do animal tricks. A female interrogator straddled al-Qahtani in the hope of sexually exciting him and then castigated him for violating his religious beliefs. Investigative reporters for Time magazine have revealed in vivid detail the hour-by-hour, even minute-by-minute log book of al-Qahtani’s month-long secret interrogation.56 It is a mixture of crude and brutal tactics with some sophisticated ones combined with many that are simply silly or stupid. Any experienced police detective could have gotten more out of this prisoner in less time using less immoral tactics.

On learning of this interrogation, Navy General Counsel Alberto Mora was appalled by what he considered unlawful practices not worthy of any military or a government that condones it. In an eloquent statement that provides the essential frame for appreciating what it means to condone such abusive interrogations, Mora said:



If cruelty is no longer declared unlawful, but instead is applied as a matter of policy, it alters the fundamental relationship of man to government. It destroys the whole notion of individual rights. The Constitution recognizes that man has an inherent right, not bestowed by the state or laws, to personal dignity, including the right to be free of cruelty. It applies to all human beings, not just in America—even those designated as “unlawful enemy combatants.” If you make this exception, the whole Constitution crumbles. It’s a transformative issue.”57



What I ask you to consider now, dear reader, in your role as juror, is the comparison of some of these planned tactics with those supposedly originating from the allegedly “perverted minds” of the Tier 1A MPs as shown in their photos. In addition to the many photos of detainees with women’s panties over their heads is the horrific image of Lynndie England dragging a prisoner along the ground with a dog leash around his neck. It now seems reasonable to conclude that the panties on the head, the leash, and that dehumanizing scenario were all borrowed from their earlier use by the CIA, by General Miller’s special Gitmo interrogation teams, and had become generally accepted interrogation tactics being practiced throughout the war zones. But no photography allowed!

Elite Soldiers Do It: 82nd Airborne Break Bones, Burn Photos

Perhaps the most impressive witness for my case against the entire command structure is Captain Ian Fishback, a decorated West Point graduate and captain of an elite airborne unit serving in Iraq. His recent letter to Senator John McCain complaining of rampant abuses being perpetrated against prisoners began:



I am a graduate of West Point currently serving as a Captain in the Army Infantry. I have served two combat tours with the 82nd Airborne Division, one each in Afghanistan and Iraq. While I served in the Global War on Terror, the actions and statements of my leadership led me to believe that United States policy did not require application of the Geneva Conventions in Afghanistan or Iraq.



During a number of interviews with Human Rights Watch, Captain Fishback revealed in specific detail the disturbing consequences of that confusion over the legal limits imposed on interrogators. His account is supplemented by two sergeants in his unit at the Forward Operating Base (FOB) of Camp Mercury near Fallujah.58 (Although mentioned in the previous chapter, here I will provide a fuller version of and context for Captain Fishback’s revelations.)

In his letter to Senator McCain, Fishback testified to habitual beatings to the face and body of prisoners before interrogation, the pouring of burning chemicals on prisoners’ faces, their routine shackling in positions that led to physical collapse, and forced exercises that led them to lose consciousness. They even stacked prisoners in pyramids, à la Abu Ghraib. Such abuses occurred before, during, and after the scandal erupted about the abuses at Abu Ghraib.



When we were at FOB Mercury, we had prisoners that were stacked in pyramids, not naked but they were stacked in pyramids. We had prisoners that were forced to do extremely stressful exercises for at least two hours at a time . . . . There was a case where a prisoner had cold water dumped on him and then he was left outside in the night. [Again, as Lagouranis reported, here is the tactic of exposure to extreme elements.] There was a case where a soldier took a baseball bat and struck a detainee on the leg hard. This is all stuff that I’m getting from my NCOs [Non-Commissioned Officers].



Fishback testified that commanders directed and condoned the abuse: “I would be told, ‘These guys were IED [improvised explosive device] trigger men last week.’ So we would fuck them up. Fuck them up bad . . . But you gotta understand, this was the norm.” (Recall our earlier discussion of emergent norms in particular situations where some new practice quickly becomes the standard that must be complied with and conformed to.)

One of Fishback’s sergeants testified, “Everyone in camp knew if you wanted to work out your frustration you show up at the PUC tent [prisoners were called PUCs, “persons under control”]. In a way, it was sport. One day [another sergeant] shows up and tells a PUC to grab a pole. He told him to bend over and broke the guy’s leg with a mini–Louisville slugger, a metal bat. As long as no PUCs came up dead, it happened. We kept it to broken arms and legs.”

Amazingly, Fishback reports that his soldiers also digitally documented their prisoner abuses.



[At FOB Mercury] they said that they had pictures that were similar to what happened at Abu Ghraib, and because they were so similar to what happened at Abu Ghraib, the soldiers destroyed the pictures. They burned them. They [the soldiers at Abu Ghraib] were getting in trouble for the same things we were told to do, so we destroyed the pictures.



Finally, Captain Fishback started a seventeen-month-long campaign of reporting his concerns and complaints to his superiors—with the same absence of reaction that Interrogator Anthony Lagouranis and Sergeant Ivan Frederick had received. He went public with his letter to Senator McCain, which helped to fortify McCain’s opposition to the suspension of the Geneva Conventions by the Bush administration.

Of course, Fishback’s heroic whistle-blowing has not endeared him to his superiors. He was brought home to Fort Bragg, North Carolina, and sequestered there for interrogation by the military. However, he is unlikely to yield to their pressure, as can be inferred from the last sentence in his letter to Senator McCain:



If we abandon our ideals in the face of adversity and aggression, then those ideals were never really in our possession. I would rather die fighting than give up even the smallest part of the idea that is “America.”



“Torture Chicks” Lap Dance Prisoners in the Gitmo Confessional

Our next witness reveals a new wrinkle in depravity that the military (probably in alliance with the CIA) developed in its Gitmo prison. “Sex was used as a weapon to create a wedge between the detainee and his Islamic faith,” reported Erik Saar, a military translator working at that prison camp. This young soldier went to Guantánamo Bay full of patriotic fervor, believing he could help in the war on terrorism. However, he soon realized that he was not helping at all; that what was happening there was all “a mistake.” In a radio interview on Amy Goodman’s Democracy Now show on April 4, 2005, Saar offered vivid details about the sexual tactics used against prisoners, tactics he witnessed firsthand. He elaborated on this interview in a book-length exposé, Inside the Wire: A Military Intelligence Soldier’s Eyewitness Account of Life at Guantanamo.59

During the six months he served there, Saar, who is fluent in Arabic, had to translate for the prisoner what the official interrogator asked and said and then repeat the prisoner’s replies to the interrogator in English. He was in a “Cyrano-type role” demanding that he use precisely the proper words to convey the exact meaning of both the interrogator’s and prisoner’s intentions to each other. The new trick involved the use of a seductive female interrogator. Saar reported: “The female interrogator would sexually entice prisoners being interrogated to make them feel unclean . . . . She would rub her breast on his back, talk about her body parts . . . . The prisoner was shocked and infuriated.”

Saar quit his post because he became convinced that such an interrogation strategy “was totally ineffective and not in keeping with the values of our democracy.”60 The New York Times columnist Maureen Dowd coined the nickname “Torture Chicks” for the female interrogators at Gitmo who used sexual lures on prisoners to gain information and confessions.61 Let us go “inside the wire” for fuller details of what such an interrogation was like.

Saar reports one particularly dramatic encounter that could be classified under the military rubric “Invasion of Space by Female.” The victim was a twenty-one-year-old Saudi of “high value” who spent a great deal of time praying in his cell. Before the procedure began, the female interrogator, “Brooke,” and Saar were both “sanitized” by taping over their names on their uniforms to preserve their anonymity. Then Brooke said, “The detainee we’re going to talk to is a piece of shit and we might have to turn things up a bit” because, as she made evident, “I’m starting to take shit from above because he’s not talking. We need to try something new tonight.” This Saudi detainee was believed to have taken flight lessons with the 9/11 hijackers, so was very high value. Saar noted “that when military interrogators were questioning a detainee who was uncooperative, they very quickly wanted to ‘turn up the heat’: shout, be confrontational, play the bad cop, forget building rapport.”

Interrogator Brooke continued: “I just need to make him feel that he absolutely must cooperate with me and has no other options. I think we should make him feel so fucking dirty that he can’t go back to his cell and spend the night praying. We have to put up a barrier between him and his God.”62 When the prisoner did not respond to her questioning, the interrogator decided to turn up the heat.

“To my surprise,” Saar exclaimed, “she started to unbutton her top slowly, teasingly, almost like a stripper, revealing a skin-tight brown Army T-shirt stretching over her chest . . . . She walked slowly behind him and began rubbing her breasts against his back.” She taunted the prisoner: “Do you like these big American tits, Fareek? I see that you are starting to get hard. How do you think Allah feels about that?” She then moved around to sit right in front of him and placing her hands over her breasts, teased the prisoner with “Don’t you like these big tits?” When the prisoner looked away toward Saar, she challenged his masculinity: “Are you gay? Why do you keep looking at him? . . . . He thinks I have great tits. Don’t you?” (Saar nods affirmatively.)

The prisoner resists, spitting at her. Unfazed, the interrogator turns up the screw another notch. As she unbuttons her pants, she asks the prisoner:



“Fareek, did you know that I am having my period? . . . How do you feel about me touching you now?” [As she withdrew her hand from her panties, it appeared as if it were covered with her blood. She asked him one last time who told him to learn to fly, who sent him to flight school.] “You fuck,” she hissed, wiping what he believed was menstrual blood on his face . . . . “What do you think your brothers will think of you in the morning when they see an American woman’s menstrual blood on your face?” Brooke said, standing up, “By the way, we’ve shut off the water to your cell for tonight, so the blood will still be there tomorrow,” she tossed out as we left the booth . . . . She had done what she thought was best to get the information her bosses were asking for . . . . What the fuck did I just do? What the fuck were we doing in this place?



Yes, indeed, a very good question. However, there was never a clear answer for Saar or for anyone else.

Other Revelations of Gitmo Crimes and Misdemeanors

Erik Saar reveals a number of other practices that were deceptive, unethical, and illegal. He and the others on the interrogation teams were under strict orders never to speak to the International Red Cross observers. He was ordered to stay away from them. Of “ghost detainees” he says, “There were a chunk of them, we had no idea how or why they came to Gitmo. There was no evidence of their culpability. Many were despondent.” He also reported, “There were also young children at Gitmo, kept outside of the main Camp Delta. They had no interrogation value, but were kept there for a long time.” No one has ever reported on children prisoners at Gitmo, who had to have been brought there from Iraq and Afghanistan.

“False setups” were arranged when visiting dignitaries were scheduled to visit to observe a “typical” interrogation. A fictional setting was arranged that would make the scene look normal and ordinary. It was reminiscent of the model Jewish camp created by the Nazis in their concentration camp at Teresienstadt, Czechoslovakia, where they fooled the International Red Cross observers and others into believing the inmates were all happy with their relocation. Erik Saar describes that everything was sanitized in the “A-OK” setup:



One of the things I learned when I joined the intelligence team was that when a V.I.P. visit would take place, meaning it could be a general or could be an executive from the senior government service, one of the intelligence agencies, maybe, or even a Congressional delegation, there was a concerted effort to explain to the interrogators that they were to find a detainee who had previously been cooperative and put him in the interrogation booth at the time when the V.I.P. would be visiting and sitting in the observation room. Essentially, they were to find someone who had been cooperative, who they were able to sit across a table with and have a regular dialogue, and someone who would also had in the past provided adequate intelligence, and then they were to replay that interrogation for the visiting VIP’s.

And essentially, as an intelligence professional, this was insulting. And I don’t think I was alone in feeling this way, to be honest with you, because in the intelligence community your whole existence is in order to provide policymakers with the right information to make the right decisions. So, that’s really the existence of the intelligence community, to simply provide the right information. And this concept of creating this fictitious world so Gitmo [would look] like one thing to those visiting, when in reality it was something far different, completely undermined everything that we, as professionals, were trying to do in intelligence.



It was possible for supervisors to watch any interrogation through a one-way mirror in each room, but “they rarely did so,” according to Saar. Important sessions with high-value detainees were supposed to be recorded on concealed video cameras. If they had been, senior officers might have been as distressed as this translator was by such sexually perverse tactics and put a stop to them. Not so, says Saar:



There were also cameras in the booths, but the sessions were not recorded; General [Geoffrey] Miller thought taping could only cause legal problems. The video was simply fed to a screen in the observation room. For the overwhelming majority of sessions, the only ones who ever knew what took place in the booth [were] the interrogator, the linguist, and the detainee.



“Outsourcing” Torture

Additional evidence of the spread of stealth torture as a means of forcing intelligence from resistant suspects is revealed in secret CIA programs that whisked prisoners to foreign countries that had agreed to do the dirty job for the United States. In a policy known as “renditions,” or “extraordinary renditions,” dozens, perhaps hundreds, of “high-value terrorists” (HVTs) were taken to a number of foreign countries, often in business jets leased by the CIA.63 President Bush apparently authorized the CIA to have detainees in custody “disappeared” or “rendered” to countries where the use of torture is well-known (and documented by Amnesty International).64 Such prisoners were kept incommunicado in long-term secret detention facilities in “undisclosed locations.” In “reverse renditions,” foreign authorities arrested “suspects” in noncombat, nonbattlefield settings and transferred them into custody, usually to Guantánamo Bay Prison, without the basic legal protections afforded by international law.

The president of the Center for Constitutional Rights, Michael Ratner, said of this program:



I call it outsourcing torture. What it really means is that in the so-called war on terror, the C.I.A. picks up people anywhere in the world that it wants, and if it doesn’t want to engage in the torture itself, or in the interrogation, whatever term you want to use, it will send them to another country that our intelligence agencies have a close relationship with. That can be Egypt, it can be Jordan.65



One CIA senior officer in charge of this rendition program was Michael Scheuer. He reports matter-of-factly:



We took people to the countries of their origin in the Middle East, if those countries had a legal process outstanding for them and were willing to take them. That person would be treated according to the laws of that country, not to the laws of the United States, but to the laws of, take your pick, Morocco, Egypt, Jordan.66



Obviously, the interrogation tactics used in those countries would include torture techniques that the CIA did not want to know about, as long as there was any useful “intel” coming out of them. However, it is difficult in our high-tech era to keep such a program concealed for long. Some of America’s allies have led a probe into at least thirty flights suspected of being engaged by the CIA in the outsourcing-torture program. The investigation has revealed that key suspects were transported to Soviet-era compounds in Eastern Europe.67

In my judgment, these programs of outsourcing torture indicate not that the CIA and military intelligence operatives were reluctant to torture prisoners but that they believed that agents in those countries knew how to do it better. They have been perfecting the practice of the “third degree” longer than the Americans have. I have outlined here only a small sample of the far more extensive abuses heaped upon all sorts of detainees in American military prisons in order to refute the administration’s assertion that such abuse and torture were not “systematic.”

Autopsies and death reports on detainees held in facilities in Iraq and Afghanistan reveal that nearly half of the forty-four deaths reported occurred during or after interrogations by Navy SEALs, military intelligence, or the CIA. These homicides resulted from abusive interrogation tactics that included hooding, gagging, strangulation, beating with blunt objects, water boarding, sleep deprivation, and extreme temperature manipulations. The executive director of the ACLU, Anthony Romero, has made it clear that “There is no question that interrogations have resulted in deaths. High-ranking officials who knew about the torture sat on their hands and those who created and endorsed these policies must be held accountable.”68


TAKING IT TO THE TOP: HOLDING DICK CHENEY

AND GEORGE W. BUSH ACCOUNTABLE



As became increasingly obvious in the months after the [Abu Ghraib] photos came to public light, this pattern of abuse did not result from the acts of individual soldiers who broke the rules. It resulted from decisions made by the Bush administration to bend, ignore, or cast rules aside. Administration policies created the climate for Abu Ghraib and for abuse against detainees worldwide in a number of ways.



This summary statement by Human Rights Watch in its report “United States: Getting Away with Torture?” focuses our attention at the very top of the long chain of command—all the way up to Vice President Dick Cheney and President George W. Bush.

The War on Terror Framed the Torture Paradigm Shift

In line with previous presidential failures—in their “War on Nouns”—on Poverty and Drugs—the Bush administration declared a “War on Terror” following the attacks of September 11, 2001. The central premise of this new war was that terrorism is the primary threat to “national security,” and to the “homeland,” and that it must be opposed by all means necessary. This ideological foundation has been used by virtually all nations as a device for gaining popular and military support for aggression, as well as repression. It was used freely by right-wing dictatorships in Brazil, Greece, and many other nations in the 1960s and ’70s to justify torture and death-squad executions of their citizens who were positioned as the “enemies of the state.”69 Italy’s right-wing Christian Democrats used the “strategy of tension” during the late 1970s to exaggerate the fear of terrorism by the Red Brigades (radical Communists) as a means of political control. Of course, the classic example is that of Hitler’s labeling Jews the originators of Germany’s economic collapse of the 1930s. They were the internal threat that justified an external program of conquest and demanded their extermination both in Germany and in all the countries the Nazis occupied.

Fear is the State’s psychological weapon of choice to frighten citizens into sacrificing their basic freedoms and rule-of-law protections in exchange for the security promised by their all-powerful government. Fear was the linchpin that gained the majority support of the U.S. public and Congress first for a preemptive war against Iraq and later for the mindless maintenance of a variety of Bush administration policies. First, fear was spread in Orwellian fashion by predicting a nuclear attack against the United States and its allies by Saddam Hussein’s arsenal of “weapons of mass destruction.” For example, on the eve of the congressional vote on the Iraq War resolution, President Bush told the nation and Congress that Iraq was an “evil nation” that threatened America’s security. “Knowing these realities,” Bush remarked, “Americans must not ignore the threat gathering against us. Facing clear evidence of peril, we cannot wait for the final proof—the smoking gun—that could come in the form of a mushroom cloud.”70 That mushroom cloud was spread over America not by Saddam but by Bush’s team.

Over the next several years, all key members of the Bush administration echoed such dire warnings in speech after speech. A report was prepared by the Special Investigations Division of the Committee on Government Reform for Representative Henry A. Waxman on the Bush administration’s public statements on Iraq. It used a public database of all such statements by Bush, Cheney, Rumsfeld, Secretary of State Colin Powell, and National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice. According to the report, these five officials made 237 specific “false and misleading” statements on the Iraqi threat in 125 public appearances, an average of about 50 for each disciple. In the month of September 2002, the first anniversary of the 9/11 attacks, the Bush administration is on record as having made nearly 50 misleading and deceptive statements to the public.71

In his investigative analysis, Pulitzer Prize–winning author Ron Suskind traces much of the Bush administration’s framing of the war on terror to Cheney’s statement right after 9/11. Cheney defined it: “If there’s a 1% chance that Pakistani scientists are helping al-Qaeda build or develop a nuclear weapon, we have to treat it as a certainty in terms of our response. It’s not about our analysis . . . it’s about our response.” Suskind writes in his book The One Percent Doctrine, “So, now spoken, it stood: a standard of action that would frame events and responses from the Administration for years to come.” He goes on to note that unfortunately, the vast federal government does not operate efficiently or effectively under new forms of stress, like this war on terror, and under cognitive dissonance from the unexpected insurgency and rebellion of captive peoples. “It has protective urges, competing agendas, rules for who does what and who represents actions to the citizenry, the sovereign, the bosses; it accomplishes a great deal, yes, but is defined often by its dysfunctions. And that means it lies and dissembles, hides what it can, and sometimes out of self-preservation, because without your trust [of citizens] it is nothing but office space.”72

A different method of fearmongering can be seen in the politicization of the terror alarm (color code) warning system by the Bush administration’s Department of Homeland Security. I believe that initially its intention was to serve, as all disaster warnings do, to mobilize citizens to prepare for a threat. However, over time, the eleven vague warnings never carried any realistic advice for citizen action. Warned of a hurricane, people are told to evacuate; warned of a tornado, we know that we must retreat to the storm cellar; but warned of a terrorism attack coming sometime, somewhere, we are told simply to be “more watchful,” and, of course, to go about our business as usual. There was never any public explanation or debriefing when each of these many threats failed to materialize despite their alleged “credible sources.” Mobilizing national forces for each rise in threat level costs at least a billion dollars a month and creates unnecessary anxiety and stress in the population. In the end, broadcasting the color-coded threat levels was less a valid warning system than the government’s costly way of ensuring and sustaining the nation’s fear of terrorists—in the absence of any terror attacks.

French existentialist author Albert Camus has pointed out that fear is a method; terror makes fear, and fear stops people from thinking rationally. It makes people think in abstractions about the enemy, the terrorists, the insurgents who threaten us, who thus must be destroyed. Once we begin thinking of people as a class of entities, as abstractions, then they meld into “faces of the enemy,” and primitive impulses to kill and torture them surface even among ordinarily peaceful people.73

I am on record with my criticism of these “phantom alarms” as dysfunctional and dangerous, but there is evidence that increases in Bush’s poll ratings were closely correlated with the sounding of these warnings.74 The issue here is that by arousing and sustaining fear of an enemy at our gates, the Bush administration was able to position the president as the Almighty Commander in Chief of a nation at war.

By calling himself “commander in chief” and vastly expanding the powers granted him by Congress, President Bush and his advisers came to believe that they were above national and international law and that therefore any of their policies were legal simply by asserting them in a newly recast official legal interpretation. The seeds for the flowers of evil that blossomed in that dark dungeon of Abu Ghraib were planted by the Bush administration in its triangular framing of national security threats, citizen fear and vulnerability, and interrogation/torture to win the war on terror.

Vice President Dick Cheney as “The Vice President of Torture”

A Washington Post editorial called Dick Cheney “The Vice President of Torture” because of his efforts to defeat and finally to modify the McCain amendment to the Department of Defense’s budget authorization bill.75 That amendment demanded the humane treatment of prisoners in American military custody. Cheney had lobbied hard to get an exception to the law granted for the CIA in order to enable it to use whatever means it deemed necessary to extract information from its suspects. Cheney argued that such a bill would tie the hands of CIA operatives and expose them to potential prosecution for their efforts in the global war on terror. (And we have gotten a glimpse of how extremely brutal and lethal their efforts can be.)

The legislation proposed by Senator John McCain, a former prisoner of war in Vietnam who himself experienced the horrors of torture, bans the use of torture and cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment by any government agency. It also requires all military interrogations to conform to the Army’s Field Manual on Intelligence Interrogation (FM 34-52). Not only was the bill passed 90 to 9 in the Senate, it was endorsed strongly in a personal letter to McCain by more than a dozen top military commanders from the Marines, Army, and Navy. They asserted that the Army field manual is the tried and true “gold standard” that should be followed consistently.

As a postscript, these generals and admirals believe that “when agencies other than DoD [Department of Defense] detain and interrogate prisoners, there should be no legal loopholes permitting cruel and degrading treatment.”76

McCain takes a broad perspective on torture and the need to right America’s moral compass. In a Newsweek magazine essay on “The Truth About Torture,” McCain held that:



This is a war of ideas, a struggle to advance freedom in the face of terror in places where oppressive rule had bred the malevolence that creates terrorists. Prisoner abuses extract a terrible toll on us in this war of ideas. They inevitably become public, and when they do they threaten our moral standing . . . . The mistreatment of prisoners harms us more than our enemies.77



It is unlikely that passage of this legislation will dim Cheney’s passionate support for the CIA’s use of all the means at its disposal to get confessions and intelligence from secretly held terror suspects. This must be so when we consider Cheney’s steadfast adherence to the beliefs he expressed shortly after the 9/11 attacks. In a televised interview on NBC’s Meet the Press, Cheney made a remarkable statement:



We also have to work, though, sort of the dark side, if you will. We’ve got to spend time in the shadows in the intelligence world. A lot of what needs to be done here will have to be done quietly, without any discussion, using sources and methods that are available to our intelligence agencies, if we’re going to be successful. That’s the world these folks operate in, and so it’s going to be vital for us to use any means at our disposal, basically, to achieve our objective.78



In an NPR interview, the former chief of staff for Secretary of State Colin Powell, Colonel Lawrence Wilkerson, charged that the Cheney-Bush team of neo-conservatives issued directives that led to the prisoner abuses by soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan. Wilkerson outlined the path such directives took:



It was clear to me that there was a visible audit trail from the vice president’s [Cheney’s] office through the secretary of defense [Rumsfeld] down to the commanders in the field that in carefully couched terms—that to a soldier in the field meant two things: We’re not getting enough good intelligence and you need to get that evidence—and, oh, by the way, here’s some ways you can probably get it.



Wilkerson also referred to David Addington, Cheney’s counsel, as “a staunch advocate of allowing the president in his capacity as commander in chief to deviate from the Geneva Conventions.”79 This leads us right up to the pinnacle of power.

President George W. Bush as “The Commander in Chief of War”

As commander in charge of an open-ended war on global terrorism, President George W. Bush has relied on a team of legal advisers to establish a legitimate basis for a preemptive war of aggression against Iraq, to redefine torture, to create new rules of engagement, to restrict citizens’ freedoms through the so-called PATRIOT Act, and to authorize illegal eavesdropping, wiretapping, and spying on the phone calls of American citizens. As usual, all this is done in the name of protecting the sacred homeland national security in the global war against you-know-what. Bush’s legal advisory team consisted of: Alberto R. Gonzalez, counsel to the president (subsequently promoted to attorney general); John You, deputy assistant attorney general, and Jay S. Bybee, assistant attorney general (both of the Department of Justice); Attorney General John Ashcroft; and William H. Taft IV, legal adviser, State Department.

Alberto Gonzales offered the following legal judgment to the president (memo, January 25, 2002): “The nature of the new war places a high premium on other factors, such as the ability to quickly obtain information . . . . In my judgment, this new paradigm renders obsolete Geneva’s strict limitations on questioning of enemy prisoners.”

The Torture Memos

An August 1, 2002, Department of Justice memo, referred to in the press as the “Torture Memo,” narrowly defined “torture” in terms not of what it constitutes but only in terms of its most extreme consequences. It held that physical pain must be “equivalent in intensity to the pain accompanying serious physical injury, such as organ failure, impairment of bodily function, or even death.” In line with this memo, in order to prosecute anyone charged with torture crimes, it is necessary that it must have been the “specific intent” of the defendant to cause “severe physical or mental pain or suffering.” “Mental torture” was narrowly defined to include only acts that would result in “significant psychological harm of significant duration, e.g., lasting for months or years.”

The memo went on to assert that the earlier ratification of the 1994 anti-torture statute could be considered unconstitutional because it would interfere with the president’s power as commander in chief. Other guidelines from the Justice Department’s lawyers gave the president the power to reinterpret the Geneva Conventions to suit the administration’s purposes in the war on terror. Belligerents captured in Afghanistan, Taliban soldiers, al-Qaeda suspects, insurgents, and all those rounded up and taken into custody would not be considered POWs, and therefore not granted any of the legal protections to which a prisoner of war is entitled. As “enemy noncombatants,” they could be held indefinitely at any facility in the world, without counsel or specific charges leveled against them. In addition, the president apparently approved the CIA’s program of “disappearing” high-value terrorists.

The evidence is circumstantial, but it is convincing. For example, in his book State of War: The Secret History of the C.I.A. and the Bush Administration, James Risen concludes that there is “a secret agreement among very senior administration officials to insulate Bush and to give him deniability” in regard to the CIA’s involvement in the extreme new interrogation tactics.80

A less gracious description of the relationship between President Bush and his team of legal advisers came from the legal scholar Anthony Lewis, after he had thoroughly reviewed all the available memoranda:



The memos read like the advice of a mob lawyer to a mafia don on how to skirt the law and stay out of prison. Avoiding prosecution is literally a theme of the memoranda . . . . Another theme in the memoranda, an even more deeply disturbing one, is that the President can order the torture of prisoners even though it is forbidden by a federal statute and by the international Convention Against Torture, to which the United States is a party.81



Readers are invited to read all the relevant materials I have outlined here (the investigative reports, ICRC report, and more) along with all twenty-eight “torture memos” by President Bush’s legal advisers, Rumsfeld, Powell, Bush, and others that prepared the way for the legitimization of torture in Afghanistan, Guantánamo, and Iraq. In a remarkable 1, 249-page volume, The Torture Papers: The Road to Abu Ghraib, edited by Karen Greenberg and Joshua Dratel, the full paper trail of memoranda is laid out, exposing the perversion of legal skills by government lawyers.82 It provides us with an insight into how such “skills that have done so much to protect Americans in this most legalized of countries—can be misused in the cause of evil.”83 The editors conclude in no uncertain terms what the significance of these documents should be for citizens to understand the motives and intentions of their elected leaders and other government officials:



While the proverbial road to hell is paved with good intentions, the internal government memos collected in this publication demonstrate that the path to the purgatory that is Guantánamo Bay, or Abu Ghraib, has been paved with decidedly bad intentions. The policies that resulted in rampant abuse of detainees first in Afghanistan, then at Guantánamo Bay, and later in Iraq, were the product of three pernicious purposes designed to facilitate the unilateral and unfettered detention, interrogation, abuse, judgment, and punishment of prisoners: (1) the desire to place the detainees beyond the reach of any court or law; (2) the desire to abrogate the Geneva Convention with respect to the treatment of persons seized in the context of armed hostilities; and (3) the desire to absolve those implementing the policies of any liability for war crimes under U.S. and international law.

Indeed, any claim of good faith—that those who formulated the policies were merely misguided in their pursuit of security in the face of what is certainly a genuine terrorist threat—is belied by the policy makers’ more than tacit acknowledgment of their unlawful purpose . . . . The message that these memoranda convey in response is unmistakable: these policy makers do not like our system of justice, with its checks and balances, and rights and limits, that they have been sworn to uphold. That antipathy for and distrust of our civilian and military justice systems is positively un-American.84



Law Professor Jordan Paust (former captain, U.S. Army Judge Advocate General’s Corps) wrote of George W. Bush’s legal advisers, who prepared these justifications for torture against detainees, “Not since the Nazi era have so many lawyers been so clearly involved in international crimes concerning the treatment and interrogation of persons detained during war.”

Heading that list of advisers is Attorney General Alberto Gonzales, who helped develop a legal memo that reinterpreted “torture” as noted above. Not until the Abu Ghraib photos were disclosed did Gonzales and President Bush repudiate this memo offering the most extreme conception of torture. Gonzales’s dedication to expanding presidential powers within the framework of the war on terror has been compared to that of the influential Nazi lawyer Carl Schmitt. Schmitt’s ideas about freeing the nation’s executive from legal constraints in times of emergency helped suspend Germany’s constitution and gave Hitler total power. Gonzales’s biographer noted that Gonzales is a likable man who comes across as an “ordinary man” without sadistic or psychopathic tendencies.85 However, in his institutional role, Gonzales’s legal memos have been responsible for suspension of civil liberties and brutal interrogation of terror suspects in violation of international law.86

Gitmo Interrogations Opposed by the Defense Department’s Criminal Investigation Task Force

According to a recent MSNBC report, leaders of the Defense Department’s Criminal Investigation Task Force said that they had repeatedly warned senior Pentagon officials (beginning in early 2002 and continuing for years after) that the harsh interrogation techniques used by a separate intelligence team would not produce reliable information, could constitute war crimes, and would embarrass the nation when they became public knowledge. The concerns and advice of these experienced criminal investigators were largely ignored by all those in the chain of command directing the interrogations at Gitmo and Abu Ghraib in favor of their preferred intense, coercive forms of interrogation. Alberto J. Mora, the former general counsel of the Navy, has gone on record supporting the members of this task force: “What makes me intensely proud of all these individuals was that they said, ‘We will not be party to this, even if we are ordered to do so.’ They are heroes, and there’s no other way to describe them. They demonstrated enormous personal courage and personal integrity in standing up for American values and the system we all live for.” In the end, these investigators were not able to stop the abuses, but only to slow them down by getting Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld to roll back some of his harshest interrogation tactics.87

Obsession with the War on Terror

We can see that Bush’s obsession with the war on terror has propelled him further down the dangerous path laid out in the late Senator Barry Goldwater’s dictum “Extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice . . . moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue.” Accordingly, President Bush has authorized domestic surveillance of American citizens by the National Security Agency (NSA) without legally mandated warrants. In what amounts to a large data-mining operation, a huge volume of telephone and Internet traffic has been gathered by the NSA and sent to the FBI for analysis—actually overwhelming its capacities for effective processing of such information.88

Such surveillance requires “backdoor access” to the major telecommunications switches on American soil that route international calls and the secret cooperation of the nation’s largest telecommunications companies, according to a detailed New York Times report of January 2006.89 The Times’ exposé has revealed the excesses inherent in vesting such power in the president without the restraints of legal or congressional checks and balances. A case has been made for comparing Bush’s sense of being above the law with that of President Richard Nixon, who “unleashed the dogs of domestic surveillance in the 1970s” and defended doing so by his assertion “When the President does it, that means it is not illegal.”90 Bush now says the very same thing with the same sense of impunity.

This sense of being above the law is seen also in Bush’s unprecedented use of “signing statements.” In the process of approving a law passed by Congress, the president affirms his prerogative not to follow the law he has just signed. President Bush has used this tactic more than any other president has in U.S. history, more than 750 times, to disobey statutes passed by Congress when they conflict with his interpretation of the Constitution. This included placing this personal restraint on the McCain Amendment against torture.91

However, President Bush’s assertion of executive power has been challenged in a recent decision of the Supreme Court that limits his authority. It repudiated the Bush administration’s plans to put Guantánamo detainees on trial before military commissions (tribunals), because they were unauthorized by federal statute and they violated international law. According to The New York Times, “The ruling marked the most significant setback yet for the administration’s broad expansion of presidential power.”92

Paradoxically, in its desire to rid the world of the evil of terrorism, the Bush administration has itself become a glaring exemplar of “administrative evil.” It is an organization that inflicts pain and suffering unto death while willingly using formal, rational, and efficient procedures to disguise the substance of what it does—ignoring the means to justify what its members consider to be higher-order ends.93

Other examples of this mechanism of administrative evil at work include the Nazis’ extermination of Jews in the Holocaust, NASA’s role in the Challenger disaster, the promotion of addictive cigarettes by American tobacco company executives and their hired “scientific experts,” and the deceptive business practices of Enron and other crooked companies. Administrative evil is systemic, in the sense that it exists beyond any one person once its policies are in place and its procedures take control. Nevertheless, I would argue, organizations must have leaders, and those leaders must be held accountable for creating or maintaining such evil.

I believe that a system consists of those agents and agencies whose power and values create or modify the rules of and expectations for “approved behaviors” within its sphere of influence. In one sense, the system is more than the sum of its parts and of its leaders, who also fall under its powerful influences. In another sense, however, the individuals who play key roles in creating a system that engages in illegal, immoral, and unethical conduct should be held accountable despite the situational pressures on them.

President Bush and his advisers have been able to alter the War Crimes Act (of 1996) by pushing Congress to pass the United States Military Commissions Act of 2006 (Senate Bill 3930) that he signed on October 17, 2006. It was drafted in part to rebuff the Supreme Court’s decision on Hamdan v. Rumsfeld that has challenged the administration’s use of military tribunals in trials of detainees at Guantánamo Prison. This new Military Commissions Act provides for a host of controversial practices relating to the U.S. government’s detention and treatment of “unlawful enemy combatants.” All those so designated are afforded neither the military rights of soldiers nor those of civilians in civil law. The president is given broad war-time powers to designate anyone as fitting that category, including American citizens, thereby losing their right of habeas corpus and protections provided by the Geneva Conventions. They may be imprisoned indefinitely, tried only by a military tribunal whose judge may use hearsay evidence even when obtained without a search warrant, and whose finding of guilt requires only a two-thirds majority of tribunal members. In addition, it harbors at least two more objectionable features: permitting many interrogation tactics that qualify as only “humiliating,” and retroactively protecting all government officials who may have been involved in “crimes against humanity,” including the murder of interrogated detainees by CIA operatives and others. (Thus, virtually all the abuses by the MPs at Abu Ghraib are now allowable because they would qualify as merely “humiliating,” not as torture.)

Upholding the War Crimes Act and the Geneva Conventions should be indispensable for all civilized nations that choose to live by the rule of law and not by the rule of power and tyranny. The Military Commissions Act is “a tyrannical law that will be ranked with the low points in American democracy, our generation’s version of the Alien and Sedition Acts,” according to a New York Times editorial (September 28, 2006). Where is the outrage by citizens and freedom loving people everywhere?94


MEMBERS OF THE JURY, YOUR VERDICT, PLEASE

You have read here the testimony of many eyewitnesses as well as key sections of the summary reports by the major independent investigative panels, along with parts of the extensive analyses by Human Rights Watch, the Red Cross, the ACLU, Amnesty International, and PBS’s Frontline about the nature of the abuse and torture of prisoners in the custody of the U.S. Military.

Do you now believe that the mistreatment of detainees in Abu Ghraib’s Tier 1A by Sergeant Ivan “Chip” Frederick and the other MPs on night shift duty was an aberration, an isolated incident caused solely by a few “bad apples,” allegedly “rogue soldiers”?

Further, do you now believe that such abuse and torture was or was not part of a “systematic” program of coercive interrogation? Did the extent of the abuses and torture in these interrogations go far deeper and well beyond the limited time, place, and set of actors in the Abu Ghraib Tier 1A night shift?

Given the acknowledged guilt of those MPs charged with the photographed abuses, do you now believe that there were sufficient situational forces (a “bad barrel”) and system pressures (“bad barrel makers”) acting on them that should have mitigated the extent of their prison sentences?

Are you willing and ready to make a judgment of complicity in the abuses at Abu Ghraib and many other military facilities and secretly run CIA jails of each of the following high-ranking members of the military command: Major General Geoffrey Miller, Lieutenant General Ricardo Sanchez, Colonel Thomas Pappas, and Lieutenant Colonel Steven Jordan? 95

Are you willing and ready to make a judgment of complicity in the abuses at Abu Ghraib and many other military facilities and secretly run CIA jails of each of the following top members of the political command: former CIA director George Tenet and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld?

Are you willing and ready to make a judgment of complicity in the abuses at Abu Ghraib and many other military facilities and secretly run CIA jails of each of the following top members of the political command: Vice President Dick Cheney and President George W. Bush?

The Prosecution Rests

(However, you might also want to look at a note about a recent tribunal that tried the Bush administration for its “crimes against humanity.”96)



While you are deliberating, consider this final section about a positive attempt by the military system to acknowledge the necessity of proper guard training and effective institutional constraints on abuses of power in interrogating prisoners. Had such procedures been in place from the start, it is likely that the abuses at Abu Ghraib would not have happened.


THE SPE GOES TO ABU GHRAIB AS A TRAINING GUIDE

AGAINST POWER OVERLOAD AND HUMANITY OUTAGES

On the long flight from Hawaii to Baghdad, Army Colonel Larry James watched the DVD of the Stanford Prison Experiment, Quiet Rage, over and over, maybe “as many as twenty-four times.” “What did Zimbardo do wrong?” “What should he have done differently to prevent the abuses in his prison?” He raised these questions because he was en route to a special mission: Fix Abu Ghraib! Dr. James is a distinguished clinical psychologist, who for years was chair of the Department of Psychology, Walter Reed Army Medical Center. He was given this unique task in May 2004, at the command of Major General Geoffrey Miller, with whom he had worked in the Guantánamo Bay Prison. (Yes, the very same general whose earlier strategies and tactics had done so much damage in the prisons in both Cuba and Iraq.)

As chief behavioral science director, James reported directly to Major General Miller. As one of the highest-ranking officers in the prison, James was able to get his policies and procedures enacted almost immediately. I had given James several sets of our newly made DVD when I learned he was headed to Abu Ghraib. He had suggested that I join him on the mission, but I was too fearful of the danger to go with him. I would have gladly joined him had it not been for the lethal environment that existed in that prison and throughout Iraq. I interviewed James upon his return, asking him what he had decided would be the best set of prevention strategies to safeguard against new abuses.97

In general, his goal was to set up procedures that would create and maintain good order and discipline in this prison setting and would meet the criteria of the American Correctional Association. He arranged for site visits at Abu Ghraib Prison and also at Camp Bucca by an Army lieutenant colonel who was the chief of the Behavioral Science Department, Disciplinary Barracks (Leavenworth, Kansas), and also by a site reviewer for the American Correctional Association. All of their findings and recommendations were implemented. Because of their survey of conditions, a mental health hospital was built for the prisoners and a large team of mental health professionals was detailed to Abu Ghraib to provide services to detainees—for the first time.

Next, he established some basic ground rules for himself:



1. Do no harm.

2. Keep everything safe; physically and psychologically; health care should mirror the standards adopted by the American Correctional Association.

3. Keep everything legal; meet all principles of the Uniformed Code of Military Justice.

4. Keep everything ethical; be sure no one is ever harmed, and continually ask, “Did I do anything to violate the ethical standards of the American Psychological Association?”

5. Make interrogations effective; create conditions that transform “interrogations” into detectivelike “interviews” of inmates that are designed to acquire the intelligence necessary to save American lives in nonabusive ways.



Colonel James walked the grounds at night and at random times, talking with guards and staff, always being cognizant of abuses, wrongdoing, or conduct inconsistent with good order and discipline. He worked personally to stop problems or misconduct, or, if he could not resolve any issue, reported his concerns directly to the general.

After examining every aspect of the prison, Colonel James established the following seven layers of Prison Oversight and Rules Governing the Treatment and Interrogation of Prisoners at Abu Ghraib Prison, presumably to be extended to other facilities:



1. There must be supervision by senior officers at all times, including night shifts.

2. “Interrogations” must be replaced by “interviews” following the model of a U.S. detective investigation at a police headquarters. One person alone must never conduct the interviews; there must be at least two present in the interview booth, the interviewer and translator, at a minimum. This way they can check on each other and have dual feedback available.

3. A written “no-go” policy must make explicit what actions are prohibited and what are permitted during these prisoner interviews, eliminating any ambiguity about what can and cannot be done or justified.

4. Mandatory “mission-specific training” must be required of all those involved in these interviews.

5. Interview booths must be open to surveillance through one-way observation mirrors enabling viewing from hall corridors by officers and others, and all interviews must be videotaped for subsequent analysis and administrative review.

6. Military police will regularly rove the entire facility at random intervals, reporting regularly to higher-ups and making guards and interviewers aware that they are always under surveillance. (James also arranged for two military psychologists to be his “roving ambassadors” in this way.)

7. Multiple layers of supervision and oversight are required, with medical inspection of each prisoner interviewed, pre- and again postinterview, to report any signs of changed medical status as a consequence of the interview procedure. Similarly, a military attorney must review all procedures, along with other layers of regular supervision built into the system.



Although it was not part of these official procedures, Larry James encouraged the MPs to watch Quiet Rage: The Stanford Prison Experiment and discuss its message about abuse of power as it might relate to their new role of being a guard within that prison setting.

Would he have been able to install such strong oversight procedures before the revelation of the abuses? It’s hard to say, but I think it is unlikely that anyone would have even thought to create this mission. Had this set of procedures been in place, is it less likely the abuses would have occurred? That seems certainly to be so because such conditions would have eliminated the confusion and the diffusion of responsibility, while also making it apparent that everyone’s behavior was under surveillance. (Of course, that also extends to what should have been happening at the SPE.)

It’s good that many seemingly effective practices are in place, but have they made a difference? James’s answer was “My dependent variable is there have been no abuses since these rules have been put in place [as of November 2005].”

Since then, the Pentagon has decided to shut down the prison at Abu Ghraib, releasing some of its detainees and transferring others to Camp Cropper, near the Baghdad airport. Britain’s top legal adviser has recently called for the United States to close the prison at Guantánamo Bay (which over the years has held a total of 759 prisoners, according to the Department of Defense).98 He believes that this detention center has become an international symbol of injustice. Attorney General Peter Goldsmith said that the reliance of that camp on military tribunals does not meet the British commitment to the principle of “a fair trial in accordance with international standards.”99 Spain’s most prominent investigative magistrate, Baltasar Garzón, also called on the United States to shut down this prison, as “an insult to countries that respect laws.” He says Spain learned the lesson from the evils of the Inquisition that “torture and degradation do not work as investigative techniques.”100

Colonel Larry James was awarded the Bronze Star for this special military service. It is a great pleasure for me to be able to end this chapter celebrating this singular accomplishment of my colleague and friend. I wish that he had been empowered to do so a few years earlier.


LET THE SUNSHINE IN

Well, we’ve made it to the end of our long journey together. I appreciate your staying power to continue on despite these confrontations with some of what is worse in human nature. It has been especially difficult for me to revisit the scenes of abuse in the Stanford Prison Experiment. It has also been tough to face up to my ineffectiveness in helping achieve a better resolution in the case of Chip Frederick. As a perennial optimist, facing all the evils of genocide, massacres, lynchings, torture, and other horrible things that people do to other people is starting to dim my positive outlook on the human condition.

In the final phase of our journey, we will let the sunshine in to illuminate these dark corners of the human psyche. It is time to accentuate the positive and eliminate the negative. I shall do so in two ways. First, you will get some well-reasoned advice on how to resist the social influences that you don’t want and don’t need but that bombard you, and most of us, daily. While acknowledging the power of situational forces to influence most of us to behave badly in many contexts, I also make evident that we are not slaves to their power. It is through understanding how such forces operate that we can resist, oppose, and prevent them from leading us into undesirable temptation. Such knowledge can liberate us from subjugation to the mighty grasp of conformity, compliance, persuasion, and other forms of social influence and coercion.

Having explored the weaknesses, frailties, and all-too-easy transformations of human character throughout our journey, we end on a most positive note by celebrating heroism and heroes. By now I hope you are willing to accept the premise that ordinary people, even good ones, can be seduced, recruited, initiated into behaving in evil ways under the sway of powerful systematic and situational forces. If so, are you also ready to endorse the reverse premise: that any of us is a potential hero waiting for a situation to arise that will enable us to show that we have “the right stuff”? Let’s now learn how to resist temptation and celebrate heroes.





