CHAPTER SIX

Wednesday Is Spiraling Out of Control

On this fourth day of the experiment, I am looking forward to a less frenetic time than Tuesday’s endless troubles had created. Our daily schedule seems filled with enough interesting events to contain the volatility that has been bursting the seams of our prison. A priest who had been a prison chaplain is coming to visit this morning to give me a sense of how realistic our prison simulation is to provide a benchmark, the actual prison experience, against which to measure ourselves. He is reciprocating an earlier favor I did for him, providing some references for a paper he was writing on prisons for a summer school course. Although his visit was arranged prior to the start of our study, it will do double duty by also partially satisfying the Grievance Committee’s demand for church services, sort of. Afterward there will be the first Parole Board hearing for prisoners requesting to be paroled. The Board is going to be headed by our prison consultant on this project, Carlo Prescott. It will be interesting to see how he deals with this total role inversion: from a former prisoner who had repeatedly requested parole and been rejected, to the head of a parole board.

The promise of another Visiting Night after dinner should help to contain the distress of some prisoners. I also plan to admit a replacement prisoner, in uniform number 416, to fill the vacancy of troublesome Doug-8612. A lot of action is on today’s agenda, but it is all in a good day’s work for the superintendent of the Stanford County Jail and his staff.





A PRIESTLY PUZZLE


Father McDermott is a big man, about six feet, two inches tall. He is slim and trim; looks as if he does regular gym time. His receding hairline gives his face more territory to show off his big smile, finely crafted nose, and ruddy complexion. He stands straight, sits erect, and has a good sense of humor. McDermott is an Irish Catholic priest in his late forties who has had experience as a pastoral counselor in an East Coast prison.1 With his starched collar and neatly pressed black suit, he is the movie version of the jovial yet firm parish priest. I am amazed at the fluidity with which he slips into and out of his priestly role. Now he is the serious scholar, now the concerned priest, now someone making a professional contact, but always he returns to his leading role as “the Priest-Man.”

In the Superintendent’s Office, we go over the long list of references with annotations that I have prepared for him to help on a report he is doing on interpersonal violence. He is obviously impressed that I’m taking so much time with him and pleased by the reference list, so he asks, “What can I do to help you?”

I respond, “All I would like is for you to talk with as many of the student subjects in our experiment as possible in the time you have available and then, on the basis of what they tell you and what you observe, give me your honest evaluation of how realistic their prison experience seems to you.”

“Sure, pleased to reciprocate. I will use as my comparison base the prisoners I worked with in a Washington, D.C., correctional facility I was assigned to for several years,” the father tells me.

“Great—I very much appreciate your assistance.”

Now it’s time for me to switch hats: “The warden has invited any inmates who want to talk with a minister to register for that privilege. A number of them do want to talk with you, and some want to request that religious services be held here this weekend. Only one prisoner, number 819, is feeling sick and wants more sleep so he won’t be talking with you.”

“Okay, let’s go, it should be interesting,” says Father McDermott.

The warden has set a pair of chairs against the wall between Cells 2 and 3 for the priest and each inmate who comes to him. I bring over another for me to sit on next to the priest. Jaffe is at my side, looking very serious as he personally escorts each inmate from his cell to the interview. Jaffe is obviously relishing the mock reality of this scenario with a real priest enacting his pastoral role with our mock prisoners. He really gets into it. I am more concerned about the prisoners’ likely complaints and what the good father is likely to do to correct them. I ask Jaffe to be sure that Curt Banks is getting this on video as close up as possible, but the low level quality of our video camera doesn’t allow close-ups as tight as I would like.

Most interactions take the same form.

The priest introduces himself, “Father McDermott, Son, and you?”

The prisoner responds, “I’m 5486, sir,” or “I’m 7258, father.” Only a few respond with their names; the rest just give him their numbers instead of their names. Curiously, the priest does not flinch; I am very surprised. Socialization into the prisoner role is clearly taking effect.

“What are you charged with?”

“Burglary” or “armed robbery” or “breaking and entering” or “459 Code violation” are the usual replies.

Some add, “But I am innocent” or “I was charged with . . . but did not do it, sir.”

The priest then says, “Good to see you, young man” or says the prisoner’s first name. He inquires about where he lives, about his family, about visitors.

“Why is the chain on your leg?” asks Father McDermott of one prisoner.

“I think it’s to prevent us from moving around that freely” is the response.

Some he asks about how they are being treated, how they are feeling, whether they have any complaints, and whether he can offer any assistance. Then our priest goes beyond any of my expectations with basic questions about the legal aspect of their confinement.

“Anybody post bond for you?” He asks one of them. Alternatively, of 4325 he seriously inquires, “How does your lawyer feel about your case?”

For variety’s sake, he asks others, “Have you told your family about the charges against you?” or “Have you seen the public defender yet?”

Suddenly, we are all in the “Twilight Zone.” Father McDermott himself has slipped deeply into the role of prison chaplain. Apparently, our mock prison has created a very realistic situation that has drawn the priest in, just as it has the prisoners and the guards and me.

“We weren’t allowed to make a phone call, and we have not yet been brought to trial; no trial date has even been mentioned, sir.”

The priest says, “Well, someone has got to take your case. I mean, you can fight it from here, but what good does it do to simply write the criminal court chief justice? It is going to be very slow to get a response. You want your family making this contact with a lawyer because you don’t have much pull at all in your current state.”

Prisoner Rich-1037 says that he plans to “be my own lawyer, because I will be a lawyer soon after I finish law school in a few years.”

The priest smiles sardonically. “It is my general observation that a lawyer who tries his own case tends to be too emotionally involved. You know the old saying ‘Anyone who represents himself has a fool for an attorney.’”

I tell 1037 that his time is up and motion to the warden to replace him with the next prisoner.

The priest is taken aback by Sarge’s excessive formality and his refusal to consider getting legal counsel because “it is only fair that I serve the time I have coming for the crime I am alleged to have committed.” “Are there others like him, or is he a special case?” McDermott asks. “He’s our special case, Father.” It is hard to like Sarge; even the priest treats him in a patronizing manner.

Prisoner Paul-5704 slickly exploits this opportunity to bum a cigarette from the priest, knowing that he is not allowed to smoke. As he lights up and takes a deep puff, he gives me a shit-eating grin and a big “victory” sign—his nonverbal “Gotcha.” The head of the Grievance Committee is making the most of this pleasant respite from the prison routine. I expect him next to ask for another smoke for later. However, I notice that Guard Arnett is duly taking note of this affront and know that he will make the prisoner pay dearly for the contraband cigarette and his wise-aleck smirk.

As the interviews proceed one after another in small talk, complaints about mistreatment, and violations of the rules, I am becoming ever more agitated and confused.

Only Prisoner 5486 refuses to be sucked into this scenario, namely to playacting that this is a real prison and he is a real prisoner who needs a real priest’s help to get his freedom back. He is the only one who describes the situation as an “experiment”—one that is getting out of control. Jerry-5486 is the most level-headed guy in the mix but the least demonstrative. I realize that he has been a shadow until now, not usually called upon by the guards on any shift for special action and rarely even noticeable in any count, the rebellion or disturbances so far. I will keep my eye on him from now on.

The next prisoner, by contrast, is eager to have the priest help get him legal assistance. However, he is stunned by the awareness that it costs big money. “Well, suppose your attorney wanted five hundred dollars as a retainer right now. Do you have five hundred dollars on you? If not, your parents are going to have to come up with that and more—right away.”

Prisoner Hubbie-7258 accepts the priest’s offer of assistance and gives him his mother’s name and phone number so that she can arrange for legal help. He says that his cousin is in the local public defender’s office and he might be available to bail him out. Father McDermott promises to follow through on this request, and Hubbie lights up as if he were Santa Claus giving him a new car.

The whole production is becoming ever more weird.

Before leaving, and after having talked in earnest with seven of our inmates, the priest, in best priestly fashion, asks about the one reluctant prisoner, who might need his help. I ask Guard Arnett to encourage 819 to take a few minutes to talk with the priest; it might help him feel better.

During a lull, while Prisoner 819 is being prepared for his meeting with the pastoral counselor, Father McDermott confides in me, “They are all the naive type of prisoner. They don’t know anything about prison or what a prison’s for. It’s typical of the educated people that I see. These are the people you want to try to change the prison system—tomorrow’s leaders and today’s voters—and they are the ones who are going to shape community education. They just don’t know enough about what prisons are and what they can do to a person. But what you are doing here is good, it’ll teach them.”

I take this as a vote of confidence, register his homily for the day, but am no less confused.

Prisoner Stew-819 is looking terrible, to say the least: dark circles under his eyes, uncombed hair going in every direction but down. This morning, Stew-819 did a bad thing: In a rage, he messed up his cell, tearing open the pillow and throwing the feathers everywhere. He was put in the Hole and his cellmates had to clean up the mess. He has been depressed following his parents’ visit last night. One of his buddies told a guard that while his parents thought that they had had a great talk with him, he felt otherwise. They had not listened to his complaints, and they had not cared about his condition, which he had tried to explain to them, but they had just talked on and on about some damn play they had just seen.

Priest: “I wonder if you discussed the idea that your family might get a lawyer for you.”

819: “They knew I was a prisoner. I told them what I was doing here, about the numbers, the regulations, the hassles.”

Priest: “How do you feel now?”

819: “I have a bad headache; I need a doctor.”

I intervene, trying to discover the basis of his headache. I ask him whether it was a typical migraine; or maybe had been caused by exhaustion, hunger, heat, stress, constipation, or vision problems.

819: “I just feel kind of drained. Nervous.”

Then he breaks down and starts to cry. Big tears, big heaving sighs. The priest calmly gives him his handkerchief to wipe the tears away.

“Now there, it can’t be all that bad. How long have you been in this place?”

“Only three days!”

“You’re going to have to be less emotional.”

I try to comfort 819, arranging for him to take a time-out in the restroom off the Yard, actually behind the partition where we are doing our tape recording. I tell him that he can rest comfortably and I will get him some good food. Then we’ll see if the headache goes away by this afternoon. If not, I will take him to Student Health for a checkup. I end by getting him to promise not to try to escape, because I am taking him to a minimum-security area. I ask him whether he is really feeling so bad that he should be released now. He insists that he wants to continue and agrees not to try any funny business.

Priest to 819: “Maybe you are responding to the smell of this place. The air here is oppressive. There’s an unpleasant smell, it takes time to get used to it. Nevertheless, it’s there, it has sort of a toxic quality, maybe that’s too strong, but the stench brings home the reality of prison. [McDermott is smelling the urine and feces odor now clinging to our prison, to which we are habituated and don’t notice until it is called to our attention.] You have to get your balance, plenty of prisoners learn to handle it.”

As we walk off the Yard, down the hall to my office, the priest tells me that the study is working like a real prison and specifically that he is seeing the typical “first-offender syndrome”—one filled with confusion, irritability, rage, depression, and overemotionalization. He assures me that such reactions change after a week or so because it does not aid a prisoner’s survival to be so effeminate. He adds that he thinks this situation is more real for 819 than the boy is willing to admit. We agree that he needs counseling. I note that although 819’s lips were trembling, hands shaking, and eyes tearing, he still could not admit that he cannot make it here, that he wants out. I think that he cannot accept the idea that he is chickening out, that his masculinity might be threatened, so he wants us—wants me—to insist that he leave as a way of saving face. “Maybe so. That is an interesting possibility,” Father McDermott adds, reflecting on all that has just transpired.

While I bid him adieu, I add in passing that the good father is not really going to call the parents, right? “Of course I am, I must. It is my duty.”

“Sure, how stupid of me, your duty, that’s right.” (Just what I need is parents and lawyers to deal with because a priest made a promise he is obligated to keep in his role as a real priest even though he knows this is not a real prison and they are not real prisoners, but what the hell, the play must go on.)

The priest’s visit highlights the growing confusion here between reality and illusion, between role-playing and self-determined identity. He is a real priest in the real world with personal experience in real prisons, and although he is fully aware that ours is a mock prison, he so fully and deeply enacts his assumed role that he helps to transform our show into reality. He sits erect, holds his hands in a particular way, gestures just so, leans forward to give personal advice, nods knowingly, pats shoulders, scowls at prisoners’ foolishness, and talks in tones and cadences that take me back to my childhood in Sunday school at Saint Anselm’s Catholic Church. He could not present a more perfect image of a priest had he been sent from Central Casting. While he was doing his priestly thing, it was as though we were on a bizarre movie set, and I admired how well this actor performed his role. If anything, the priestly visit further transformed our simulated experiment into an ever-more-realistic prison. This was especially so for those prisoners who had been able to sustain the realization that this is all “just an experiment.” The priest has made his message a new medium. Is our scenario now in the hands of Franz Kafka or Luigi Pirandello?

Just then, an eruption booms from the Yard. The prisoners are shouting. They are chanting loudly something about Prisoner 819.

Arnett: “Prisoner 819 did a bad thing. Say it ten times, loudly.”

Prisoners: “Prisoner 819 did a bad thing” (Over and over many times.)

Arnett: “What is happening to Prisoner 819 for doing the bad thing he did, Prisoner 3401?”

3401: “Prisoner 819 is being punished.”

Arnett: “What is happening to Prisoner 819, 1037?”

1037: “I’m not sure, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Arnett: “He’s being punished. From the top, 3401.”

3401 repeats the mantra, as 1037 adds even louder, “Prisoner 819 is being punished, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

1037 and each of the other prisoners is asked the same question in turn, and each responds identically, individually and then collectively.

Arnett: “Let’s hear it five times to make sure you remember it. Because of the bad things that Prisoner 819 did, your cells are a mess. Let’s hear it ten times.”

“Because of what Prisoner 819 did, my cell is a mess.”

The prisoners chant the phrase repeatedly, but 1037, the one who plans to be a lawyer, is no longer joining in. Guard John Landry gestures menacingly at him with his billy club to get with the program. Arnett stops the chant to ask what is wrong; Landry informs him of 1037’s disobedience.

Prisoner 1037 challenges Arnett: “I have a question, Mr. Correctional Officer. Are we supposed to never tell lies?”

Arnett, in his most formal, unflustered, totally authentic style, replies, “We’re not interested in your questions now. The task has been assigned, now let’s hear it. ‘Because of what Prisoner 819 did, my cell is a mess’ ten times.”

Prisoners chant the phrase but lose track and do so eleven times.

Arnett: “How many times were you told to do that, Prisoner 3401?”

3401: “Ten times.”

Arnett: “How many times did you do it, Mr. 3401.”?

3401: “Ten times, Mr. Correctional Officer”

Arnett: “Wrong, you all did it eleven times. Do it over again, do it properly, do it ten times, as I have commanded you to do: ‘Because of what Prisoner 819 did, my cell is a mess’—ten times.”

They shout it out in precision exactly ten more times.

Arnett: “Everyone assume the position.”

Without a moment’s hesitation, everyone falls to the ground for push-ups. “Down, up, down, up. 5486, these aren’t belly rolls, they are push-ups, keep that back straight. Down, up, down, up, down, and stay down. Roll over on your backs for leg lifts.”

Arnett: “Six inches is the important feature of this, men. Everybody goes six inches, and everybody’s leg will stay there until everybody’s leg is six inches.”

Guard J. Landry measures to determine whether each prisoner’s legs are lifted exactly six inches above the ground.

Arnett: “All together, ten times, ‘I will not make the mistake that 819 did, Mr. Correctional Officer.’”

Arnett: “Now at the absolute top of your lungs, ‘I will not make any mistakes, Mr. Correctional Officer!’”

They all obey in perfect unison. Prisoner 1037 refuses to shout but goes along with the chanting nevertheless, while Sarge is delighting in the chance to shout out his obedience to this authority. Then all sing out very politely in response to the officer’s final command: “Thank you very much for this nice count, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

The precise unison of the prisoners would be the envy of any choirmaster or Hitler Youth rally leader, I think to myself. Moreover, how far have they—or we—come since Sunday’s giggling counts and the playful antics of the new prisoners?


YOU’RE NOT 819: IT’S TIME TO GO HOME, STEWART

When I realize that 819 might be hearing all of this in the R&R Room on the other side of thin partition, I rush to check on him. What I find is 819 hunched over into a quivering mass, hysterical. I put my arms around him trying to comfort him, assuring him that he will be all right once he has left and gone home. To my surprise, he refuses to leave with me to see a doctor and then go home. “No, I can’t leave. I have to go back in there,” he insists through his tears. He can’t leave knowing that the other prisoners have labeled him a “bad prisoner,” that messing up his cell has made all this harassment come down upon them. Even though he is clearly distressed, he is willing to go back into that prison to prove that he is not really a bad guy.

“Listen carefully to me, now, you’re not 819. You are Stewart, and my name is Dr. Zimbardo. I am a psychologist, not a prison superintendent, and this is not a real prison. This is just an experiment, and those guys in there are just students, like you. So it’s time to go home, Stewart. Come with me now. Let’s go.”

He stops sobbing, wipes away the tears, straightens up, and looks into my eyes. He looks like a small child awakening from a nightmare, assured by his parent that it is not a real monster and that everything will be fine once he fully accepts that truth. “Ok, Stew, let’s go.” (I have broken through his illusion, but mine is still clinging on.)





On the way to getting his civilian clothes and mustering Stew out of service, I recall that his day started out with a lot of trouble that set the stage for this emotional breakdown.

819 Messes Up Early On

The Warden’s Log reports that 819 refused to get up at the 6:10 A.M. wake-up. He was put in the Hole and later given only half the time in the bathroom that the others got. All, including 819, were present for the fifteen-minute number count at 7:30, reciting it forward and in reverse repeatedly. However, during the exercise period, 819 refused. A guard came up with the social punishment of forcing the other prisoners to stand with their arms outstretched until 819 yielded.

819 would not yield, and the other prisoners’ strength gave out as their arms dropped to their sides. 819 was put back in the Hole, where he ate his breakfast in the dark but refused to eat his egg. He was released for work duty to clean out the toilets with his bare hands and move boxes back and forth endlessly and mindlessly along with all the prisoners. When he returned to his cell, 819 locked himself in. He refused to clean off the stickers from a blanket thrown into his cell. His cellmates, 4325 and the replacement, 8612, were forced to do extra work until he complied. They moved boxes back and forth from one closet to the other. He did not relent but demanded to see a doctor. They were getting angry at his obstinence, for which they were suffering.

Ceros’s Guard Shift Report notes, “A prisoner locked himself in his cell. We got our clubs and proceeded to get him out. He wouldn’t come out. We made everyone stand up against the wall with their arms straight out. He lay back in his cell and laughed. I didn’t think he would do it. We gave up. The rest of the prisoners hated us. I just smiled and did my job.”

Guard Varnish in his report notes the psychological importance of this prisoner’s behavior: “819’s apparent indifference to the troubles of his fellow inmates upsets them.” Varnish goes on to complain in his report about the lack of clear guidelines for what he could do to the prisoners. “I felt I was uncertain as to the amount of force we could in fact use, and this bothered me as I felt the limits on this case were not clearly defined.”2

Vandy reports a different reaction: “I continued to become more involved than on the preceding day. I enjoyed harassing the prisoners at 2:30 A.M. It pleased my sadistic senses to cause bitterness between us.” That is a rather remarkable statement, one that I am sure he would never have made four days earlier.

Stern Guard Arnett adds in his report: “The only time I felt I could not properly play my role was with 819 and 1037, when they were in such obvious difficulty on some occasions. At these times, I was not as tough as I should have been.”3

“Basically the really oppressive thing about the prison experience is being totally at the mercy of other people who are trying to make things as difficult and unenjoyable for you as possible,” Stew-819 later told me. “I simply can’t stand being abused by other people. I developed a strong resentment of the fascist guards and a strong liking for the compassionate ones. I was pleased with the rebelliousness of some prisoners and angered at the complacency and total obedience of others. My sense of time was also affected, since each day’s torturous moment seemed quite a bit longer than it would have been if one were enjoying oneself. The worst thing about this experience was the total depression that set in from being constantly hassled and the fact that there was no way of getting out. The best thing was finally being set free.”4

Betrayal by Our Very Own Spy

Recall that David, who took over 8612’s uniform, was brought into the prison as our spy. Unfortunately, for us, he was not providing any useful information because he had become sympathetic to the prisoners’ cause and had transferred his allegiance to them in almost a heartbeat. I released him that morning in order to debrief him and get his assessment of what was going on. In his interview with the warden and me, our failed informer made clear his disdain for the guards and his frustration at not being able to mobilize the prisoners to disobey orders. He said that that morning, one guard had told him to fill the coffeepot with hot water in the bathroom but then another guard had dumped it out and made him fill it with cold water, admonishing him for disobeying orders. He hated this “chicken-shit” hazing. He also told us of the time distortion that expanded and contracted events and had confused him when he was awakened several times during the night for interminable counts. He reported a mental dullness like a fog surrounding everything.

“The arbitrariness and idiot work by the guards grates on you.” In his new role as informer-turned-prisoner-revolutionary, he told us of his plan to energize his mates for action. “Today, I decided to be a shitty prisoner. I wanted to get some sort of spirit of resistance going among the prisoners. The punishment of making others do more if any prisoner refuses to work or to come out of his cell works only if the others are willing to do more. I tried to make them resist. But everyone was willing to do what they were told, even to the humiliating task of transferring the contents of one closet to the other and back again, or cleaning the toilet bowls with our bare hands.”

David reported that nobody is angry with me or the warden, who is mostly just a crackling voice over the loudspeaker, but he and the others are pissed at the guards. He told one of them this morning, “Mr. Correctional Officer, do you think that when this job ends you’re going to have enough time to become a human being again?” For which of course he got Hole time.

He was upset that he failed in this attempt to get the other prisoners to refuse to keep their arms lifted in collective punishment for 819’s mess-up. Their arms dropped down eventually, but from fatigue, not disobedience. David’s frustrations at not being an effective labor organizer are evident in his report to us:



Communication lines are severely limited when everybody’s screaming so loudly, you can’t stop it. But during silent periods I try to talk with my cellmates, but 819 is always in the Hole, and the other guy, 4325 [Jim] is a drag and not much to talk to. And you know at meals, when it would be a good time to talk to all the guys about not giving in so easily to the guards, you can’t talk. It’s kind of like the energy stays within you and doesn’t really ever get organized into action. I got depressed when one guy tells me, “I want to get paroled. Don’t bug me. If you want to stick out your neck, that’s cool, but I’m not gonna!”5



David did not give us “actionable intelligence,” such as about escape plans or where the keys to the handcuffs were hidden. His personal reflections did, however, make evident that a powerful force was operating on the minds of the prisoners to suppress group action against their oppression. They had begun to focus inward to selfishly consider what they had to do singly to survive and maybe score an early parole.


WELCOME THE NEW PRISONER ON THE BLOCK

To replenish our depleted rank of prisoners, we admit a replacement, new prisoner number 416. This latecomer will soon play a remarkable role. We see him first on the video in the corner of the Yard. He has come into the prison wearing a shopping bag over his head; he is carefully stripped naked by Guard Arnett. He is really skinny, “all skin and bones,” as my mother used to say: you could count each of his rib bones from a distance of ten feet. He is a rather pathetic sight, and he has not yet begun to realize what is in store for him.

Arnett sprays 416 slowly and systematically all over his body with the alleged delousing powder. On Day 1, this task was rushed because the guards had to process so many incoming prisoners. Now, given ample time, Arnett turns it into a special cleansing ritual. He pulls the number 416 smock over his head, chains his ankle, and tops him off with a new stocking cap. Voilà! The new prisoner is ready for action. Unlike the others, who were gradually acclimated to the daily escalations of arbitrary and hostile guard behavior, 416 is being thrust into this crucible of madness headfirst with no time for adjustment.



I was stunned by the arrest procedure. As a standby, I was never booked by the police, as the others had been. Called by a secretary to get my papers and report to the lobby of the Psychology Department before noon. I was really pleased to get the job, glad I had gotten a chance to do it. [Remember, these volunteers were being paid for two weeks on the job.] As I was waiting, a guard came out and after I told him my name, he immediately handcuffed me, put a paper bag over my head, brought me down a flight of stairs and I had to stand for a while with my hands on the wall, spread eagled. I had no idea what was going on. I think that I accepted being miserable, but it was much worse than I had expected. I didn’t expect to come in and right off be stripped and deloused and struck on my legs with a baton. I decided that I would stay as mentally removed from the guards as I could while watching the other prisoners playing these social games. I said to myself, that I will do my best to keep out of that, but as time went on, I forgot my reasons for being here. I’d come in with reasons, like it’ll make me money. Suddenly, 416 has been transformed into a prisoner—and one who is extremely dazed and upset.6



“Amazing Grace”: In the Key of Irony

The new prisoner arrives just in time to hear Arnett dictating a letter that the prisoners must send to their prospective visitors for the next Visiting Night. As the guard reads out the text, they write it out on the prison stationery provided. Then he asks each of them to repeat parts of it aloud. One formula letter as dictated says:



Dear Mother,

I’ve been having a marvelous time. The food is great and there’s always lots of fun and games. The officers have treated me very well. They are all swell guys. You would like them, Mother. No need to visit, it’s seventh heaven. And put the name there that your mother gave you, whatever that may be.


Yours truly,

Your Loving Son



Guard Markus collects them all for later mailing—after, of course, first screening them for forbidden information or incendiary complaints. The prisoners put up with such nonsense because visits have become so important to them—after a relative few days without seeing family and friends. That link to the other world needs to be maintained as an assurance that this basement world is not all there is.

New trouble starts to percolate around a problem with the door lock in Cell 1. 5704, the wise guy who shamelessly bummed a cigarette from the priest earlier today, keeps opening the door to show that he is free to go in and out at any time. In silky smooth style, Guard Arnett gets a rope and ties it around the bars and across the wall to connect it to Cell 2. He does so methodically, as if it were for a Boy Scout merit badge for knot tying. He whistles the “Blue Danube Waltz” as he rings the rope around the bars of one cell and back to the other cell to prevent either from being opened from inside. Arnett whistles well. John Landry comes into view, using his billy club to twist the rope taut. The two guards smile approvingly at each other for a job well done. Now no one can go in to or out of those two cells until the guards have figured out how to fix that defective lock, which 5704 probably broke.

“No cigarettes for you, 5704, as long as the cell door is blockaded. You’re going to be in solitary when you get out.”

Rich-1037 yells out threateningly from Cell 2, “I have a weapon!”

Arnett challenges him: “You don’t have a weapon. We can get that cell open anytime we want.”

Someone calls out, “He has a needle!”

“That’s not a very good thing for him to have. We will have to confiscate it and duly punish him.” Landry pounds his club hard on the doors of all the cells to remind them of who is in charge. Arnett adds his slam on the bars of Cell 2, almost smashing the hands of one of the prisoners, who pulls back just in time. Then, as in the rebellion in the morning of Day 2, John Landry begins to spray the fire extinguisher with its skin-chilling carbon dioxide exhaust into Cell 2. Landry and Markus push their clubs into the cell bars to keep the inmates away from the barred opening, but a prisoner in Cell 2 steals one of their clubs away. They all start mocking the guards. New bedlam is about to break out now that the prisoners have a weapon.

Arnett maintains his cool demeanor, and, after some discussion, the guards arrange to take a lock from a vacant office and install it on Cell 1. “Actually, men, it’s a one-way street in the last analysis, it’s just a matter of how long it takes,” he tells them patiently.

Eventually the guards triumph again; forcing their way into both cells and hauling big bad boy 5704 back into solitary. This time they are taking no chances. They tie him up hands and feet, using their cord taken off the cell doors, before dumping him into the Hole.

This uprising forfeits the privilege of lunch for all the prisoners. Too bad for 416, the new guy. He has had only a cup of coffee and a cookie for breakfast. He is hungry and has done nothing but look on in amazement as these bizarre events unfold around him. Would be nice to eat something warm, he thinks. Instead of lunch, the prisoners are all lined up against the wall. Paul-5704 is hauled out of solitary but remains bound up and helpless lying on the floor of the Yard. He is on display as a lesson against further thoughts of rebellion.

Guard Markus orders everyone to sing while doing jumping jacks, to the tune of “Row, Row, Row Your Boat.”

“Since you guys are in such good voice, we’re going to sing ‘Amazing Grace,’” Arnett tells them. “We’re just going to do one verse, I’m not going to strain God’s credulity.” As the rest of the prisoners assume the position on the floor for push-ups, 416 is singled out for his first public notice: “Here you go. You better memorize this, 416. ‘Amazing Grace, How sweet the sound, to save a wretch like me, I once was blind, but now I see, in the first hour since God, I’m free.’”

Arnett resists the correction about “in the first hour since God” that Paul-5704 offers him from the floor. “That’s the way you’re going to do it. That line might not be exactly it, but that’s the way you’re going to do it.” Then he inexplicably changes the last line to “since the first hour I’ve seen God, I’m free.”

Arnett, who obviously knows he is a good whistler, then whistles “Amazing Grace” once through, and whistles it all again in perfect tune. Prisoners applaud him in a nice, spontaneous gesture of appreciation for his talent, despite despising him for his attitude and assorted cruelty against them. As Guards Landry and Markus lounge back on the table, the prisoners sing the song, but clearly they are out of key and out of unison. Arnett is upset: “Did we scrape these people up from the Sixth Street ghetto in San Francisco, or something? Let’s hear it again.” Troublemaker 5704 makes another attempt to correct the inaccurate wording, but Arnett uses the opportunity to make his point loud and clear: “Of course there is a discrepancy here; you’re to do the prison version of ‘Amazing Grace.’ It does not matter if it’s wrong, because the guards are always right. 416, you stand up, everybody else in the push-up position. 416, while they do push-ups, you sing ‘Amazing Grace,’ as I have dictated it.”

Only a few hours after being imprisoned, 416 is moved to center stage by Arnett, who isolates him from the other prisoners and forces him to perform a mindless task. The video captures this saddest of moments as the scrawny new prisoner sings in a high-pitched voice this song of spiritual freedom. His slackened shoulders and downward glance make evident his extreme discomfort, which worsens when he is corrected and has to repeat the song while the others are forced to keep pushing up and down and up and . . . the irony of being ordered to sing a song of freedom in this oppressive atmosphere where his song provides the cadence for mindless push-ups is not lost on 416. He vows not to be crushed by Arnett or any other guard.

It is not clear why Arnett has singled him out this way. Maybe it’s just a tactic to get him into the pressure cooker faster. Alternatively, maybe there is something about 416’s shabby and scrawny appearance that is offensive to a guard who tends to be meticulous and always well turned out.

“Now that you are in a singing mood, 416 will sing ‘Row, Row, Row Your Boat’ while everyone is on their back with legs up in the air. I want it loud enough so that 5704’s loved one, Richard Nixon, can hear it, wherever the fuck he is. Legs up. Up! Up! Let’s hear it a few more times, especially emphasizing that last line, ‘Life is but a dream.”

Prisoner Hubbie-7258, still hanging on to the ironic moment, asks if they can sing “Prison life is but a dream.” The prisoners are literally screaming the song at this point, their chests heaving with each word. Life here is ever stranger.

Return of the TV Cameraman

Sometime this afternoon we had a visit from the TV cameraman from local San Francisco station KRON. He was sent down to do a brief follow-up on his Sunday shoot, which had sparked some interest at the station. I restricted him to shooting from behind our observation window and to talking only with the warden and me about the progress of the study. I did not want to have external interference upsetting the dynamic that was emerging between the prisoners and the guards. I wasn’t able to see the TV coverage he made that night, because we were all enmeshed in too many more urgent matters that took our full attention—and then some.7


FAREWELL, DAY SHIFT, GOOD EVENING, NIGHT SHIFT

“Time to get ready for Sunday services,” Arnett tells the prisoners, even though it is only Wednesday. “Everyone get in a circle and hold hands, like a religious ceremony. Say, ‘Hi, 416, I’m your buddy, 5704.’ Then each of you welcome your new comrade.”

They continue these greetings around the circle in what amounts to a very tender ceremony. I am surprised that Arnett thought to include this sensitive communal activity. But then he goes and spoils it by having everyone skip around in a circle singing “Ring Around the Rosy,” with 416 standing alone in the center of the sorry circle.

Before leaving for the day, Arnett throws in one more count, in which John Landry takes over dictating how it will be sung. It is 416’s first count, and he shakes his head in disbelief at how the others follow every command in haunting unison. Arnett continues his dehumanizing treatment until the very last minute of his shift time.

“I’ve had enough of this, go back to your cage. Clean up your cells so when visitors come, they won’t be nauseated by the sight of it.” He leaves whistling ‘Amazing Grace.’ As a parting shot, he adds, “See ya, folks. See ya tomorrow, my fans.”

Landry adds his two cents: “I want you to thank your correctional officers for the time they spent with you today.” They give a reluctant “Thank you, Mr. Correctional Officers.” John Landry is not buying that “shitty thank-you” and makes them shout it louder as he strides off the Yard along with Markus and Arnett. As they exit stage right, in comes the night shift, featuring John Wayne and his eager crew.

The new prisoner, 416, later told us about his fear of the guards:



I was terrified by each new shift of guards. I knew by the first evening that I had done something foolish to volunteer for this study. My first priority was to get out as soon as possible. That is what you did in prison if you had the vaguest possibility of it. And this was a real prison, run by psychologists and not by the State. I met this challenge by going on a hunger strike, to refuse to eat anything, to get sick and they would have to release 416. That is the plan that I stuck to no matter what the consequences.8



At dinner, although he was now very hungry, 416 followed his plan to refuse to eat anything.

Hellmann: “Hey guys, we got nice hot sausages for your dinner tonight.”

416 (glibly): “Not for me, sir, I refuse to eat any food you give me.”

Hellmann: “That is a rule violation, for which you will be punished accordingly.”

416: “It does not matter, I will not eat your sausages.”

As punishment, Hellmann puts 416 into the Hole, for his first of many visits there, and Burdan insists that he hold each of the sausages in his hands. After the others finish dinner, 416 has to sit and stare at his food, a plate of two cold sausages. This unexpected act of rebellion infuriates the night shift guards and especially Hellmann, who had thought that tonight everything was under strict control and would be flowing smoothly after last night’s problems were resolved. Now this “pain in the ass” is making trouble and might incite the others to rebel, just when it seemed as if they were totally dominated and submissive.

Hellmann: “You don’t want to eat two stinking sausages? You want me to take those sausages and cram them up your ass? Is that what you want? Do you want me to take that and cram that up your ass?”

416 remains stoic, staring down expressionless at the plate of sausages.

Hellmann realizes that it is time to put the divide-and-conquer tactic into operation: “Now, listen here, 416, if you do not eat your sausages, that is an act of prisoner insubordination that will result in all prisoners being deprived of visitors tonight. Hear that?”

“I am sorry to hear that. My personal actions should have no consequences for the others,” 416 replies in an imperious manner.

“They are not personal but prisoner reactions, and I will determine the consequences!” shouts Hellmann.

Burdan brings out Hubbie-7258 to persuade 416 to eat his sausages. 7258 says, “Just eat your sausages, okay?” Burdan adds, “Tell him why.” 7258 continues, pleading that the prisoners won’t get visiting hours if he doesn’t eat the sausages.

“Don’t you care about that? Just ’cause you don’t got no friends . . . . Eat for the prisoners, not for the guards, okay?” Burdan throws in this uppercut, pitting 416 against the other prisoners.

Prisoner Hubbie-7258 continues talking to 416, gently trying to get him to eat the sausages because his girlfriend, MaryAnn, is about to visit him soon, and he would hate to be denied that privilege because of a few lousy sausages. Burdan continues to assume more of Hellmann’s demeanor in his domineering style and substance:

“416, what’s your problem? Answer me, boy! Yeah, what’s your problem?”

416 begins to explain that he is on a hunger strike to protest the abusive treatment and contract violations.

“What the hell has that got to do with the sausages? Well, what?” Burdan is furious and slams his club down on the table with such a resounding thud that it echoes around the Yard walls in menacing reverberations.

“Answer my question, why don’t you eat those sausages?”

In a barely audible voice, 416 continues to make a Gandhi nonviolent protest statement. Burdan never heard of Mahatma Gandhi and insists on a better reason. “You tell me the connection between those two things, I don’t see it.” Then 416 breaks the illusion, reminding those within earshot that the guards are violating the contract he signed when he volunteered for this experiment. (I am stunned that this reminder is ignored by them all. The guards are now totally absorbed in their illusory prison.)

“I don’t give a damn about any contract!” Burdan yells. “You’re in here because you deserve it, 416. That’s how you got in here in the first place, you broke the law. This ain’t no nursery school. I still don’t understand why you don’t eat those damn sausages. Did you expect this to be a nursery school, 416? Do you expect to go around breaking the law and wind up in a nursery school?” Burdan rants on about 416 not going to be a happy boy when his cellmate has to sleep without a bed on the floor tonight. However, just as it seems that Burdan is about to take a swing at 416, he turns away in a fury. Instead, he slaps his club into the palm of his hand and orders 416, “Get back into that Hole.” 416 now knows the way.

Burdan bangs his fists against the door of the Hole, making a deafening sound that reverberates inside that dark closet. “Now each of you also thank 416 for his denying your visitors by banging on the Hole and saying ‘Thank you.’”

Each prisoner does so, banging on the closet door “with relish,” except for 5486, Jerry, who does so unwillingly. Hubbie-7258 is extremely angry by this unexpected twist of his fate.

To underscore the point, Hellmann pulls 416 out of the Hole, still gripping the two sausages. He then runs another tormenting count singlehandedly, not even giving Burdan a chance to participate. Good Guard Landry is nowhere in sight.

Here is Hellmann’s chance to break any possibility of prisoner solidarity and to defuse 416’s potential emergence as a rebellious hero. “Now you all are going to suffer because this prisoner refuses to do a simple thing like eat his dinner, for no good reason. It would be different if he was a vegetarian. Tell him to his face what you think about him.” Some say, “Don’t be so stupid”; others accuse him of being childish.

That was not good enough for “John Wayne”: “Tell him that he is a ‘pussy.’”

A few of them obey, but not Sarge. As a matter of principle, Sarge refuses to use any obscenity. Now, with two of them defying Hellmann at the same time, Hellman turns his wrath against Sarge, harassing him mercilessly, yelling at him that he is an “asshole” and, worse, insisting that he call 416 a “bastard.”

The harsh count continues unabated for an hour, stopping only when visitors are at the door. I come on the Yard and make it clear to the guards that visiting hours must be honored. They are not pleased with this intrusion into their power domain but reluctantly acquiesce. There is always the post-visitor time for them to continue breaking down prisoner resistance.

Obedient Prisoners Get Visitors

Two of the more obedient prisoners, Hubbie-7258 and Sarge-2093, who have friends or relatives in the vicinity, are allowed to have them visit for a short time this evening. 7258 is deliriously happy when his pretty girlfriend arrives to see him. She is giving him news about their other friends, and he is listening intently, holding his head in his two hands. All the while, Burdan is sitting above them on the table, routinely banging his small white billy club. (We had to return the big dark ones we had borrowed from the local police department). Burdan is obviously taken with her beauty and breaks into their conversation frequently with questions and comments.

Hubbie tells MaryAnn that it is important to “Try to keep yourself up, it’s not that bad in here if you just cooperate.”

Girlfriend: “Are you cooperating?”

7258 (laughing): “Yes, they are making me.”

Burdan intrudes: “Well, they had a little escape attempt.”

Girlfriend: “I heard about that.”

7258: “I didn’t enjoy the rest of this day at all. We do not have anything; no bed, no nothing.” He tells her about having to clean out stickers from dirty blankets and other nasty chores. Nevertheless, he remains upbeat and smiles and holds her hand for the full ten-minute visit. Burdan escorts her out as the prisoner returns to his lonely cell.

The other prisoner granted a visitor is Sarge, whose father comes by. Sarge is bragging about his total command of the rules. “There are seventeen rules . . . I have the rules memorized. The most basic rule is that you obey the guards.”

Dad: “Can they tell you to do anything?”

Sarge: “Yes. Well, almost anything.”

Dad: “And what right do they have to do that?” He rubs his forehead in seeming distress at his son’s plight. He is the second visitor to be clearly upset. He is much like the mother of Prisoner Rich-1037—who was right to be concerned, given that he broke down the next day. Nevertheless, Sarge appears to be made of sterner stuff.

Sarge: “They’re in charge of the running of the prison.”

Dad asks about civil rights, and then Burdan jumps in—very harshly: “He has no civil rights.”

Dad: “Well, I think that they do, maybe . . .” (We can’t hear clearly his argument to Burdan, who is not afraid of this civilian.)

Burdan: “People in prison have no civil rights.”

Dad (exasperated): “Anyway, how long do we have to talk here?”

“Only ten minutes,” Burdan replies.

The father disputes the amount of time left. Burdan relents and gives them five more minutes. Dad would like more privacy. That is not permitted for visitors in this prison, replies Burdan. Dad gets even more upset, but remarkably, he too goes by the rules and accepts this infringement on his rights by a kid playacting being a guard!

Dad asks more about the rules, Sarge talks about counts, “exercising,” chores, and lights-out.

Dad: “Is this what you expected it to be?”

Sarge: “I expected it to be worse.”

In disbelief, Dad exclaims: “Worse? Why worse?”

Burdan interjects himself again. The father is now clearly annoyed by his unwanted presence. The guard tells him that there were originally nine prisoners but now there are only five. The father asks why.

Sarge: “Two have been paroled and two are in maximum security.”9

Dad: “Maximum security where?”

He doesn’t really know. Dad asks why they are in maximum security.

Sarge: “They were disciplinary problems. Very dispositional.”

Burdan responds at the same time: “Because they were bad.”

Dad: “Do you feel like you’re in a prison?”

Sarge (laughing, sidesteps a direct answer): “Well, I’ve never been in a prison before.” (Dad laughs.)

They are alone when Burdan runs off in response to a loud noise outside.

While he is gone, they talk about Sarge’s coming up for parole, which he is sure he will get because he has been the most obedient prisoner to date. However, he still has a major concern: “I don’t know what the criteria are for getting out on parole.”

“Time’s up,” Geoff Landry announces. Father and son stand up, about to hug, but settle instead for a firm, manly handshake and a “See you soon.”

Homophobia Rears Its Ugly Head

When I return from a quick dinner at the student cafeteria, I see troublemaker 5704 standing in the center of the Yard holding a chair on his head. A chair on his head! Hellmann is yelling at Sarge, and Burdan is chiming in. Good Prisoner Jerry-5486, who has been almost anonymous, is standing passively against the wall, while 7258 does push-ups. Apparently, 416 is back in solitary. Hellmann asks 5704 why he has that chair on his head—it was he who ordered him to wear it like a hat. The prisoner answers meekly that he is simply following orders. He looks dejected; all of the old spunk seems to have drained away from 5704. Burdan tells him not to look so stupid and to put the chair away. Then Burdan bangs on the Hole door with his club. “You having a good time in there, 416?”

It is time for Hellmann to take over as director of tonight’s drama. He literally moves Burdan aside. (No sight of Good Guard Geoff Landry on the Yard following the visits.)

“While you got your hands in the air, 7258, why don’t you play Frankenstein. 2093, you can be the Bride of Frankenstein, you stand right here.”

“You go over there,” he says to Sarge.

Sarge asks whether he should act it out.

“Of course you should act it out. You be the Bride of Frankenstein, 7258, you be Frankenstein. I want you to walk over here like Frankenstein walks, and say that you love 2093.”

As 7258 starts to walk toward his bride, Burdan stops him in his tracks.

“That ain’t no Frankenstein walk. We didn’t ask you to walk like you.”

Hellmann grabs Hubbie-7258 by the arm very aggressively, pulls him back, and makes him walk the proper Frankenstein walk.

7258: “I love you, 2093.”

“Get up close! Get up close!” Shouts Burdan.

7258 is now inches away from Sarge. “I love you, 2093.”

Hellmann pushes them together, his hands on each of their backs until their bodies are touching.

Again, Hubbie-Frankenstein-7258 says, “I love you, 2093.” Hellmann berates Sarge for smiling. “Did I tell you that you could smile? This is not funny. You get down and do ten push-ups!”

With Prisoner 7258’s arms still stretched out in front of him, back to the wall, his smock lifts, revealing part of his genitals. Sarge is told to tell the other prisoner, Jerry-5486, that he loves him; he complies reluctantly.

“Well, ain’t that sweet? Ain’t that sweet?” mocks Burdan.

Hellmann now gets up in the face of 5486.

“Are you smiling? Maybe you love him too. Would you go over there and tell him so?”

Jerry-5486 does so without hesitation but says quietly, “2093, I love you.”

Hellmann is careening wildly from prisoner to prisoner with his verbal attacks.

“Put your arms down, 7258. That’s why you stink so much.”

“Now all of you stinking prisoners get down on the floor, you’re gonna play leapfrog.”

They start to play the game but are having difficulty because their shower clogs are falling off and their smocks are creeping up to expose their genitals as they jump over the bent bodies of their fellows. They can’t do it right, and Burdan seems a bit uncomfortable with this game. Perhaps he finds the action too sexual or too gay for his tastes. Hellmann simplifies the game, directing only 2093 and 5704 to play together. They continue to try to leapfrog, as Burdan emits little groans.

The homoerotic game is having a perverse impact on Hellmann.

“That’s the way dogs do it, isn’t it? Isn’t that the way dogs do it? He’s all ready, ain’t he, standing behind you, doggy style? Why don’t you make like a dog?”

When tall Prisoner Paul-5704 had brought up complaints of guards hassling prisoners, I’ll bet that the head of the Stanford County Jail Prisoners’ Grievance Committee never imagined that the guards’ insulting abuse would ever descend to this level. He is clearly upset, and he tells John Wayne that what he has been asked to do would be “a little obscene.”

Hellmann takes that remark as a slap in the face: “I think your face is a little obscene too. Why don’t you just play leapfrog and shut up.”

Geoff Landry drifts onto the scene, standing directly behind 5704 and watching everything. He is obviously interested in this turn of events, but he keeps his hands in his pockets to maintain his neutrality and pose of indifference. He is not wearing his anonymity-enhancing sunglasses, even though the warden told him to do so.

“I’m sorry to offend the better nature of this sensitive prisoner,” Hellmann says with derision.

Burdan succeeds in ending this game, which he has found distasteful from the beginning, “I’m tired of this game, this is ridiculous.” They revert to their more traditional game, the count.


SARGE REVEALS A NEW MORAL IDENTITY

Hellmann is bored. He walks up and down the line of weary prisoners. Suddenly he whirls around and turns his wrath on Sarge: “Why are you such a ass-licker?”

“I don’t know, sir.”

“Why is it you try to be obedient so much?”

Sarge is not afraid of him and plays the game: “It’s in my nature to be obedient, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

“You are a liar. You are a stinkin’ liar.”

“If you say so, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Hellmann becomes ever more obscene, maybe aroused by the previous sexual games: “What if I told you to get down on that floor and fuck the floor, what would you do then?”

“I would tell you I didn’t know how, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

“What if I told you to come over here and hit your friend 5704 in the face as hard as you could?”

Sarge holds his ground: “I am afraid I would be unable to do that, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Hellmann scoffs and turns away, only to spin about and turn on a new victim. As he opens the door to the Hole, Hellmann, like a carnival pitchman, shouts, “I got something right here for everyone. Why don’t you take a look at this man? 416, don’t you go anywhere!”

416 blinks out of the darkness at the assembled prisoners and guards who are all looking at him. He is holding a sausage in each hand!

Burdan: “How come you holdin’ on to your sausages, 416?”

“He hasn’t ate no sausages yet,” Hellmann says, his usually good grammar breaking down as he becomes more emotional. “And you know what that means for the rest of you?”

The prisoners respond knowingly in the negative, “No blanket tonight.”

“That’s right, it means no blankets tonight for all of you! Come over here one at a time and try to say something to 416 to get him to eat those sausages. Let’s start with you, 5486.”

The prisoner walks to the door, looks 416 in the eyes and tells him gently, “You eat those sausages if you want to, 416.”

“That’s sure a half-assed way to tell him to do something, 5486,” Burdan admonishes. “I guess you don’t want your blankets tonight. Next up, 7258, you tell him.”

In sharp contrast to the first prisoner in line, 7258 yells at the rebel inmate, “Eat your sausages, 416, or I’ll kick your ass!”

Hellmann is pleased at the expression of inmate enmity, and he grins from ear to ear. “Now, that’s more like it! 5486, you come over here and do it again. Tell him you gonna kick his ass if he don’t eat those sausages.”

He now meekly complies. “2093, come over here and tell him you’re gonna kick his ass.”

Sarge makes a moving statement: “I am sorry, sir, I will not use a profane word toward another human being.”

“Just what do you object to?”

“I object to the word that you used.”

Hellmann tries to get him to say “ass,” but his tricks don’t work.

“Which word? ‘Kick?’ You don’t wanna say ‘kick,’ is that what it is? Then what the hell are you talkin’ about?”

Sarge tries to clarify himself, but Hellmann cuts him off: “I gave you an order!”

Hellmann is becoming frustrated by Sarge’s refusal to follow his orders. For the first time, the seemingly mindless robot has shown he has backbone and soul.

“Now, you get over there and tell him what I told you to tell him.”

Sarge continues to apologize but remains firm. “I am sorry, Mr. Correctional Officer. I am not capable of doing it.”

“Well, you’re not capable of having a bed tonight, is that what you want to say?”

Standing his ground, Sarge makes clear his values: “I would prefer to go without a bed than to say that, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Hellmann is steaming. He paces a few steps away and then turns back toward Sarge, as though he were going to whack him for his insubordination in front of this entire audience.

Good Guard Geoff Landry sensing the eruption, offers a compromise: “Go over and say you’re gonna kick him in the end, then.”

“Yes, Mr. Correctional Officer,” says Sarge. He then walks over and says to 416, “Eat your sausages or I’ll kick you in the end.”

Landry asks, “Do you mean it?”

“Yes . . . no, Mr. Correctional Officer. I’m sorry, I don’t mean it.”

Burdan asks why he’s lying.

“I did what the correctional officer told me to say, sir.”

Hellmann comes to the defense of his fellow officer: “He didn’t tell you to lie.”

Burdan realizes that Sarge is getting the upper hand by holding fast to his high moral ground and it could have an effect on the others. He deftly turns things around and down: “Nobody wants you to do any lying in here, 2093. So why don’t you do some lying on the ground.”

He makes Sarge lie on the floor facedown with his arms spread out.

“Now start giving us some push-ups from your position.”

Hellmann joins in: “5704, you go over and sit on his back.”

After more direction from Hellmann on how he should do push-ups from such a position, Sarge is strong enough to do so.

“And don’t help him. Now do a push-up. 5486, you sit on his back too, facing the other way.” He hesitates. “Let’s go, on top of his back, now!” He complies.

Together the guards force Sarge to do a push-up with both prisoners 5486 and 5704 sitting on his back (they do so without any hesitation). Sarge struggles with all his might and pride to complete a push-up cycle.

He strains to raise himself from the floor but then collapses under the weight of this human burden. The devilish duo bursts into laugher, making fun of Sarge. They are not quite done humiliating Sarge, but 416’s stubborn resistance against eating his sausages is of greater immediate consequence to these guards. Hellmann intones: “I just don’t understand a thing like those sausages, 416. I don’t understand how we can have so many counts and so many good times, we do it so nice, and tonight we just fuck it up. Why is that?”

While Hellmann seeks a simple answer, Burdan is quietly talking with 416 about the sausages, trying another soft-sell tactic: “How do they taste? Mmmm; I know you’d like ’em once you tasted ’em.”

Hellmann repeats his question more loudly, in case any one has not heard it: “Why do we have so many good counts and then you try to fuck up tonight?”

As Hellmann goes down the line for explicit answers, 7258 responds, “I don’t know; I guess we’re just bastards, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Sarge answers, “I really wouldn’t know, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Hellmann seizes upon another chance to get back at Sarge for his earlier victorious subordination: “Are you a bastard?”

“If you say so, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

“If I say so? I want you to say it.”

Sarge is steadfast: “I’m sorry sir, I object to the use of the language, Sir. I cannot say it.”

Burdan jumps in: “You just said you couldn’t say that stuff to other human beings, 2093. But this is a different question. You can’t say it to yourself?”

Sarge counters, “I consider myself a human being, sir.”

Burdan: “You consider yourself another human being?”

Sarge: “I made the statement that I could not say it to another human being.”

Burdan: “And that includes yourself?”

Sarge replies in an even, measured, carefully phrased way, as though in a college debate, and in this situation, where he has been the target of such abuse, says, “The statement initially would not have included myself, sir. I would not think of saying it to myself. The reason is that because I would be . . .” He sighs and then trails off, mumbling, becoming emotionally battered.

Hellmann: “So that means you would be a bastard, wouldn’t you?”

Sarge: “No, Mr.—”

Hellmann: “Yes, you would!”

Sarge: “Yes, if you say so, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Burdan: “You’d be saying very nasty things about your mother, that’s what you’d be doing, 2093.”

Burdan obviously wants a piece of the action, but Hellmann wants to run the game himself and does not appreciate his sidekick’s intrusions.

Hellmann: “What would you be? What would you be? Would you be a bastard?”

Sarge: “Yes, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Hellmann: “Well, let me hear you say it.”

Sarge: “I’m sorry, sir. I will not say it.”

Hellmann: “Why the hell won’t you say it?”

Sarge: “Because I do not use any profane language.”

Hellmann: “Well, why did you apply it to yourself? What are you?”

Sarge: “I am whatever you wish me to be, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Hellmann: “Well, if you say it, if you say that you are a bastard—you wanna know something—then you just proved my point. That you was a bastard. You say so. Then why don’t you say it?”

Sarge: “I’m sorry, sir, I will not say it.”

Hellmann senses that he has lost another challenge, and he reverts to the divide-and-conquer tactic that has proven so effective before: “Now, boys, you wanna get a good night’s sleep tonight, don’t you?”

They all say, “Yes, sir!”

Hellmann: “Well, I think we gonna wait a little bit, to let 2093 think about just what a bastard he is. And then maybe he’ll tell the rest of us that he thinks so.”

(This is an unexpected power struggle between the most controlling, power-hungry guard and the prisoner who until now has been a totally obedient prisoner, so much so that he is ridiculed as “Sarge,” whom most prisoners and guards dislike as they all have considered him to be nothing more than a military robot. He is proving that he has another admirable facet to his character; he is a man of principle.)

Sarge: “I think you are perfectly accurate in your condemnation of me, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Hellmann: “Oh, I know that.”

Sarge: “But, I cannot say the word, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Hellmann: “Say what?”

Sarge: “I shall not say, with any meaning, the word ‘bastard.’”

Bells, whistles, cannons, parade music sounds.

Burdan shouts out with unbridled joy: “He said it!”

Hellmann: “Well, glory be! Yes, indeed! Did he say that, 5704?”

5704: “Yes, he did, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Hellmann: “I believe we’ve got a winner.”

Burdan: “These boys might even get to bed tonight, who knows?”

Not content to have won a partial victory, Hellmann has to demonstrate the arbitrary power he commands. “Just for swearing, 2093, you get down on the floor and do ten push-ups.”

Sarge: “Thank you, Mr. Correctional Officer,” he says as he executes perfect push-up form, despite his obvious exhaustion.

Burdan, upset that Sarge can still perform so well, derides even perfect push-ups: “2093, where do you think you are? Boot camp?”

Now laid-back Geoff Landry chimes in from the chair he has been lounging in for the past hour: “Do ten more.” For the spectators he adds, “Do the rest of you think those are good push-ups?”

They answer, “Yes, they are.” Big Landry shows an odd display of authority, perhaps to assure himself that he still has some in the eyes of the prisoners.

“Well you’re wrong. 2093, do five more.”

Sarge’s account of this confrontation is framed in a curiously impersonal style:



The guard ordered me to call another prisoner a ‘bastard,’ and call myself the same. The former I would never do, the latter of which would produce a logical paradox denying the validity of the former. He began as he always does before “punishments,” alluding to the hint in his vocal intonation that the others would be punished for my actions. In order to avoid their punishment and avoid obeying that command, I produced a reaction that would solve both by saying, “I will not use the word bastard in any meaningful way”—giving both he and myself a way out.10



Sarge is emerging as a man of considerable principle, not the blindly obedient toady he initially seemed to be. Later, he tells us something interesting about the mind-set he adopted as a prisoner in this setting:



When I entered the prison I determined to be myself as closely as I know myself. My philosophy of prison was not to cause or add to the deterioration of character on the part of fellow prisoners or myself, and to avoid causing anyone punishments because of my actions.





THE POWER OF SAUSAGE SYMBOLISM


Why have those two shriveled, filthy sausages become so important? For 416, the sausages represent challenging an evil system by doing something that he can control and cannot be forced to do otherwise. In so doing, he foils the guards’ dominance. For the guards, 416’s refusal to eat the sausages represents a major violation of the rule that prisoners must eat at mealtimes and only at mealtimes. That rule was instituted so that prisoners would not be asking for or getting food at any time other than the three scheduled mealtimes. However, this rule has now been extended to cover the guards’ power to force prisoners to eat food whenever it is served. Refusal to eat has become an act of disobedience that they will not tolerate, because such refusal could trigger further challenges to their authority from the others, who until now had traded rebellion for docility.

For the other prisoners, 416’s refusal to knuckle under should have been seen as a heroic gesture. It might have rallied them around him to take a collective stand against their continuing and escalating abusive treatment by the guards. The strategic problem is that 416 did not first share his plan with the others to get them on his side by understanding the significance of his dissent. His decision to go on a hunger strike was private and thus did not engage his peers. Sensing 416’s tenuous social position in the jail as the new guy who has not suffered as much as the others, the guards intuitively set about framing him into a “troublemaker” whose obstinance will only result in punishment or loss of privileges for them. They also characterize his hunger strike as a selfish act because he does not care that it can curtail prisoner-visiting privileges. However, the prisoners should see that it is the guards who are establishing this arbitrary illogicality between his eating sausages and their getting visitors.

Having dismissed Sarge’s opposition, Hellmann turns back to his skinny nemesis, Prisoner 416. He orders him out of solitary to do fifteen push-ups, “Just for me, and real quick.”

416 gets down on the floor and begins to do push-ups. However, he is so weak and so disoriented that they are hardly push-ups. He is mostly just raising his butt.

Hellmann can’t believe what he is seeing. “What is he doing?” he shouts in an incredulous voice.

“Pushing his ass around,” says Burdan.

Landry awakening from his dormant state adds, “We told him to do push-ups.”

Hellmann is screaming: “Are those push-ups, 5486?”

The prisoner answers, “I guess so, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

“No way. They are not push-ups.”

Jerry-5486 agrees, “If you say so, they are not push-ups, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Burdan jumps in: “He’s swishing his ass, isn’t he, 2093?”

Sarge meekly acquiesces: “If you say so, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Burdan: “What’s he doing?”

5486 complies: “He’s swishin’ his ass.”

Hellmann makes Paul-5704 demonstrate the way to do good push-ups for 416’s edification.

“See that, 416? He’s not pushin’ his ass. He’s not fuckin’ a hole in the ground. Now do it right!”

416 tries to imitate 5704, but he is unable to do so because he just does not have enough strength. Burdan adds his mean observation: “Can’t you keep your body straight while you’re doing this, 416? You look like you’re on a roller coaster or something.”

Hellmann rarely uses physical aggression. He prefers instead to dominate verbally, sarcastically, and with inventively sadistic games. He is always aware of the exact freedom allowed him by the margin of his role as guard—he may improvise but must not lose control of himself. However, this night’s challenges have gotten to him. He stands beside 416, who is lying on the ground in a push-up position, and orders him to do slow push-ups. Hellmann then puts his foot on top of 416’s back as he goes up and pushes down hard on the backstroke. The others all seem to be surprised at this physical abuse. After a couple of push-ups, the tough-guy guard lifts his foot off of the prisoner’s back and orders him back into the Hole, slamming the door with a loud clang and locking it.

As I watch this, I recall prisoners’ drawings of Nazi guards at Auschwitz doing the same thing, stepping on a prisoner’s back as he does push-ups.

“A Self-Righteous, Pious Asshole”

Burdan yells to 416 through the door of his confinement, “You don’t eat, you’re not gonna have very much energy, 416.” (I suspect Burdan is beginning to feel sorry for the plight of this puny little kid.)

Now it is time for Guard Hellmann’s ascendancy. He delivers a minisermon: “I hope you boys are taking an example here. There is no reason for you to disobey orders. I haven’t given you anything you can’t obey. There’s no reason why I should offend anybody. You’re not in here for being upstanding citizens, you know. All this self-righteous drivel makes me puke. And you can knock it off right now.”

He asks Sarge for an evaluation of his little speech, and Sarge answers, “I think you made a nice speech, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Getting close to his face, Hellmann goes back to attacking Sarge: “You think you’re a self-righteous, pious asshole?”

Sarge replies: “If you wish to think so.”

“Well, think about that. You are a self-righteous, pious asshole.”

We are back on the not so merry-go-round, with Sarge replying “I will be one if you wish me to be, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

“I don’t wish you to be, you just are.”

“As you say, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

Hellmann again goes up and down the ranks desperate for approval, and each prisoner agrees with him.

“He’s a self-righteous, pious asshole.”

“A self-righteous, pious asshole, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

“Yes, a self-righteous, pious asshole.”

Delighted that at least this little world sees things his way, Hellmann tells Sarge, “I’m sorry, it’s four to one. You lose.”

Sarge responds that all that matters is what he thinks of himself.

“Well, if you think something else, then I think you’re in very serious trouble. Because you’re not really in touch with what is real, with reality. You live a life that’s nothing but mendacity, that’s what you doin’. I’m sick of you, 2093.”

“I’m sorry, Mr. Correctional Officer.”

“You such a self-righteous, pious bastard that I wanna puke.”

“I’m sorry if I make you feel that way, Mr. Correctional Officer.” Burdan makes Sarge bend over in a fixed position touching his toes, so that he doesn’t have to look at his face again.

“Say, ‘Thank You, 416!’”

The last thing that Hellmann must achieve in his battle against belligerents is to crush any sympathy that may be developing among the prisoners for the sad case of 416.

“It is unfortunate that we all have to suffer because some people just don’t have their minds right. You’ve got a nice friend in here [as he bangs against the door of the Hole]. He’s gonna see to it that you don’t get blankets tonight.”

Hellmann aligns his plight with that of the prisoners, against their common enemy, numero 416, who is about to harm them all by his foolish hunger strike.

Burdan and Hellmann line up the four prisoners and encourage them to say “Thanks” to their fellow Prisoner 416 sitting in the dark, cramped Hole. Each does so in turn.

“Why don’t you all thank 416 for this?”

They all recite, “Thank you, 416.”

Still even that is not sufficient for this devilish duo. Hellmann commands them, “Now go over there, next to the door. I want you to thank him with your fists, on the door.”

They do so, one by one, banging on the door, as they recite, “Thank you, 416!” As they do, a loud, resonating noise booms through the Hole, to further terrify pitiable 416, alone in there.

Burdan: “That’s the way, with real spirit.”

(It’s difficult to determine the extent to which the other prisoners are angry with 416 for causing them all this unnecessary grief, or are just following orders, or are indirectly working off some of their frustrations and rage against the guards’ abuses.)

Hellmann shows them how to bang really hard against the door, several times for good measure. Sarge is last and surprisingly complies meekly and obediently. When he is finished, Burdan grabs Sarge by the shoulders and pushes him hard against the back wall. He then orders the prisoners back into their cells and says to his chief operating officer, Hellmann, “They’re all ready for lights-out, Officer.”





THE DIRTY BLANKET BARGAIN


Recall the classic southern prison movie Cool Hand Luke, from which I borrowed the idea that the guards and staff should wear silver reflecting sunglasses to create a sense of anonymity. Tonight Guard Hellmann would improvise a script that might rival the best that the scriptwriter could have created in shaping the nature of prison authority. He enacts a creatively evil scene that demonstrates that his power can create an arbitrary reality by providing the inmates with an illusion of choice to punish one of their fellows.

Lights dimmed, prisoners in their cells, 416 in solitary. An eerie quiet looms over the Yard. Hellmann slithers up on the table that is between the Hole and our observation post, behind which we are recording these events, allowing us to get a close look at the unfolding drama. As the chief night shift guard leans back against the wall, legs crossed in a Buddha-like lotus position, one arm hanging between his legs, the other resting on the table, Hellmann is the portrait of power in repose. He moves his head slowly from side to side. We notice his long sideburns, muttonchops, down to his chin. He licks his thick lips as he chooses his words carefully and articulates them with an accentuated southern drawl.

The Man has come up with a new Machiavellian plan. He lays out his terms for the release of 416 from solitary. It is not up to him to decide to keep the troublemaker in the Hole all night; rather, he is inviting all of them, the fellow prisoners, to make that decision: Should 416 be released now, or should he rot in the Hole all night?

Just then, Kindly Guard Geoff Landry saunters into the Yard. At six feet three and 185 pounds, he is the biggest of all the guards or prisoners. As usual, he holds a cigarette in one hand, the other hand in his pocket, sunglasses conspicuously absent. He walks to the center of the action, stops, looks distressed, frowns, seems about to intervene, and does nothing but passively observe John Wayne continue with showtime.

“Now, there are several ways to do this, depending on what you want to do. Now, if 416 does not want to eat his sausages, then you can give me your blankets and sleep on the bare mattress. Or you can keep your blankets and 416 will stay in there another day. Now what will it be?”

“I’ll keep my blanket, Mr. Correctional Officer,” 7258 calls out immediately. (Hubbie has no use for 416.)

“What will it be over here?”

“Keep my blanket,” says Paul-5704, our former rebel leader.

“How about 5486?”

Refusing to yield to the social pressure, 5486 shows sympathy for the sad 416 by offering to give up his blanket so that 416 does not have to stay in solitary for another day.

Burdan yells at him, “We don’t want your blanket!”

“Now, you boys are gonna have to come to some kind of decision here.”

Burdan, who has been assuming the posture of a swaggering little authority figure with hands on hips, swinging his club as often as possible, walks up and down past each of the cells. He turns to Sarge in his cell and asks him, “What do you feel about it?”

Surprisingly, Sarge comes down from his high moral ground, which now seems limited only to not speaking obscenities, declares, “If the other two wish to keep their blankets, I’ll keep my blanket.” That proves to be the crucial swing vote.

Burdan exclaims, “We got three against one.”

Hellmann repeats that message loud and clear, so that all can hear.

“We got three against one.” As he slides off the table, the boss shouts into the Hole, “416, you’re gonna be in there for a while, so just get used to it!”11

Hellmann struts off the Yard, with Burdan dutifully following and Landry taking up the reluctant rear. An apparent victory has been won in the endless struggle of guard power against organized prisoner resistance. Indeed, it has been a hard day’s night for these guards, but they can now enjoy the sweet taste of victory in this battle of wills and wits.





