CHAPTER EIGHT

Thursday’s Reality Confrontations

Thursday’s prison is full of woe, yet we have miles to go before our exploration is complete.

In the middle of the night, I awake from a terrible nightmare in which I am hospitalized in a strange town after an auto accident. I am struggling to communicate to the nurse that I had to go back to my work, but she cannot understand me. It is as though I were speaking in a foreign tongue. I scream out to let me go; “I have to be released.” Instead, she puts me in restraints and tapes my mouth shut. In a kind of “lucid dream,” where one is aware of being an actor in a dream while still dreaming, I envision that word of this incident gets back to the guards.1 They are delighted that with the “bleeding-heart-liberal” superintendent out of the way, they are now totally free to deal with their “dangerous prisoners” in any way they feel necessary to maintain law and order.

That is indeed a scary thought. Imagine what might happen in that basement dungeon if the guards could now do whatever they wanted to the prisoners. Imagine what they could do knowing there was no oversight, no one observing their secret games of domination and submission, no one to interfere with their own little “mind experiments,” which they could play out as wit and whimsy dictated. I jump off the convertible couch-bed in my upstairs office, wash, dress, and head back to the basement, glad to have survived that nightmare and to have my own freedom restored.

The 2:30 A.M. count is in full swing once again. The seven weary prisoners, awakened once more by loud, shrilling whistles and billy clubs rattling the bars on their stinking, barren cells, are lined up against the wall. Guard Vandy is reciting selected rules and then testing the prisoners’ memories of them by delivering assorted punishments for memory lapses.

Guard Ceros would like the whole experience to be more like a tightly run military prison, so he has the prisoners march in place repeatedly, as though they were in the Army. After a brief discussion, the two comrades decide that these young men need to be more fully disciplined and to understand the importance of making their beds in the best military fashion. The prisoners are ordered to strip their beds completely and then remake them with precision and stand by them for inspection. Naturally, as in good boot camp style, they all fail the inspection, must restrip their beds, remake their beds, refail inspection, and then repeat the inane process until the guards grow bored with that game. Guard Varish adds his cute two cents: “Okay, men, now that you have made your beds, you can sleep in them—until the next count.” Remember, this is only day five of our experiment.





VIOLENCE ERUPTS ON THE YARD


Amid the 7 A.M. count and seemingly more carefree singing required of the prisoners, violence suddenly erupts. Prisoner Paul-5704, exhausted from lack of sleep and irritated at having been singled out for abuse on almost all shifts, strikes back. He refuses to do sit-ups as commanded. Ceros insists that the others all continue to do sit-ups without stopping until 5704 agrees to join in; only by his submission can he stop their painful exercise. Prisoner 5704 does not take the bait.

In an extended interview with Curt Banks, Paul-5704 described his side of this incident and the hostility festering within him:

“I’ve got lousy thigh muscles, and I’m not supposed to stretch them. I told them that, but they said, ‘shut up and do them anyway.’ ‘Fuck you, you little punk,’ I said, while still laying on the ground. As I was getting up to be put in the Hole once again, He [Ceros] pushed me against the wall. We scuffled, pushing each other hard and yelling. I wanted to swing at him and hit him in the face, but to me that would represent fighting . . . . I’m a pacifist, you know, I just don’t think it was in me. But I hurt my foot when we hassled, and insisted on seeing a doctor, but was put in the Hole instead. I did threaten to ‘flatten’ him when I got out of the Hole, so they kept me in there until all others had breakfast. When they finally let me out of solitary, I was furious and did try to strike that guard [Ceros].

“It took two guards to restrain me. As they took me to a separate room for my solo breakfast, I complained about the pain in my foot and asked for a doctor. I did not let the guards examine my foot since what did they know about it?

“I ate alone but did apologize to [Varnish], who was least hostile toward me. But the guy I really want to crack is ‘John Wayne,’ that guy from Atlanta. I’m a Buddhist, and he keeps calling me a Communist just to provoke me, and it does. I now think that the good treatment on the part of some guards, like big Landry [Geoff], is only because they were ordered to act that way.”2

Guard John Landry notes in the daily log that 5704 has been the one most in trouble or “at least he was the most punished prisoner”:



After each episode he [5704] has shown considerable depression, but his spirit, which he calls ‘the freak mentality,’ continues to rise. He is one of the strongest willed prisoners. He also refused to wash lunch dishes, so I recommend giving him lousy dinners and curtailed smoking privileges—he has a heavy habit.



Consider the following alternate and insightful perspective Guard Ceros had of this critical incident and of the psychology of imprisonment in general:



One of the prisoners, 5704, was not cooperating at all, so I decided to put him in the Hole. By that time, it was regular routine. He reacted violently and I found that I had to defend myself, not as me, but as the guard. He hated me as the guard. He was reacting to the uniform; I felt that was the image he placed on me. I had no choice but to defend myself as a guard. I wondered why the other guards weren’t rushing to help me. Everybody was stunned.

I realized then that I was as much a prisoner as they were. I was just a reaction to their feelings. They had more of a choice in their actions. I don’t think we did. We were both crushed by the situation of oppressiveness, but we guards had the illusion of freedom. I did not see that at the time, or else I would have quit. We all went in as slaves to the money. The prisoners soon became slaves to us; we were still slaves to the money. I realized later that we were all slaves to something in this environment. Thinking of it as “just an experiment” meant no harm could be done with reality. That was the illusion of freedom. I knew I could quit, but I didn’t, because I couldn’t as a slave to something there.3



Prisoner Jim-4325 agreed about the slavish nature of his condition: “The worst thing about this experience is the super structured life and the absolute obedience one must pay to the guards. The humiliation of being almost slaves to the guards is the worst.”4

However, Guard Ceros did not let his sense of being trapped in his role interfere with exerting the power of his position. He noted, “I enjoyed bothering them. It bothered me that ‘Sarge,’ 2093, was so very sheepish. I did make him polish and wax my boots seven times, and he never complained.”5

In his reflections, Guard Vandy revealed the dehumanizing perception of the prisoners that had crept into his thinking about them: “Prisoners were very sheepish by Thursday, except for a brief scuffle between Ceros and 5704, which was a small incident of violence that I did not like whatsoever. I thought of them as sheep and I did not give a damn as to their condition.”6

In Guard Ceros’s final evaluation report, he offered a different take on the emerging sense of dehumanization by the guards of the prisoners:



There were a few times when I had forgotten the prisoners were people, but I always caught myself, realized that they were people. I simply thought of them as ‘prisoners’ losing touch with their humanity. This happened for short periods of time, usually when I was giving orders to them. I am tired and disgusted at times, this is usually the state of my mind. Also I make an actual try of my will to dehumanize them in order to make it easy for me.7



Our staff agree that of all the guards, the one who “goes by the book” most consistently is Varnish. He is one of the oldest guards, at twenty-four, like Arnett. Both of them are graduate students, so they should have a bit more maturity than the other guards, whose ages range from just eighteen for Ceros, Vandy, and J. Landry.

Varnish’s daily shift reports are the most detailed and lengthy, including accounts of individual incidents of prisoner subordination. Yet he rarely comments on what the guards were doing and there is no sense of the psychological forces at work in any of these reports. He punishes prisoners only for rule violations and never arbitrarily. Varnish’s role-playing has become so fully internalized that he is the prison guard whenever he is in this prison setting. He is not dramatic and abusive as some others are, like Arnett and Hellmann. On the other hand, he is not trying to get the prisoners to like him, as others, such as Geoff Landry, do. He merely does his job as routinely and efficiently as possible. I see from his background information that Varnish considers himself egotistical at times, with a streak of dogmatism on the side.

“There was at times a distinct tendency to minimize effort by not harassing prisoners as much as we could have,” Varnish reported.

The way in which roles can come to rule not only one’s emotions but also one’s reason is interestingly revealed in Varnish’s self-reflective analysis after the study:



I started out in the experiment thinking that I would probably be able to act in a manner appropriate to the experiment, but as the experiment progressed, I was rather surprised to find out that the feelings I had sought to impose on myself were beginning to take over. I was actually beginning to feel like a guard and had really thought I was incapable of this kind of behavior. I was surprised—no, I was dismayed—to find out that I could really be a—uh—that I could act in a manner so absolutely unaccustomed to anything I would really dream of doing. And while I was doing it I didn’t feel any regret, I didn’t feel any guilt. It was only afterwards, when I began to reflect on what I had done, that this behavior began to dawn on me and I realized that this was a part of me I had not noticed before.”8



Prisoner 5704 Earns More Tormenting

Prisoner Paul-5704’s assault on Ceros was the primary subject of talk in the guard station during the 10 A.M. transfer from the morning to the day shift, when they were taking off or putting on their uniforms to end a shift or start one. They agreed that he would need special attention and discipline since no such attack against guards could be tolerated.

Prisoner 5704 was not included in the 11:30 A.M. count because he was chained to his bed in Cell 1. Guard Arnett ordered everyone else down for seventy push-ups as group punishment for 5704’s insubordination. Although the prisoners were getting weaker from their minimal diet and exhausted from lack of sleep, they were nevertheless able to perform this sizable number of push-ups—which I could not do when well fed and rested. They were getting into athletic condition reluctantly and miserably.

Continuing the ironic theme music from the previous day, the prisoners were made to sing, loud and clear, “Oh, What a Beautiful Morning” and “Amazing Grace,” mixed in with a choral round of “Row, Row, Row Your Boat.” Shortly after he joined his fellows for this chorus, Prisoner Paul-5704 continued his verbal insubordination, and once again he was thrown into the Hole. Screaming and cursing at the top of his lungs, he again kicked down the wooden partition that separated the two compartments of the Hole. The guards dragged him out, handcuffed him, chained both ankles together, and put him back into Cell 2 while they repaired the damage to the Hole. Solitary now had to have two separate cell units for whenever two prisoners had to be disciplined simultaneously.

As inventively determined as real prisoners can be, 5704 somehow was able to take the hinge bolts off the door to his cell, thereby locking himself in and taunting the guards. Once again, the guards broke into his cell, and carted him back to the now-repaired Hole until he was taken to the Parole Board later that day for a disciplinary hearing.

5704’s riotous actions finally break through the appearance of equanimity that Guard Arnett has carefully cultivated. As one of the older guards, a graduate student in sociology, who has tutored in three juvenile jails and who has been charged (and acquitted) for “illegal assembly” in a civil rights protest, Arnett has the most relevant experience for being a conscientious guard. He is, but without compassion for the prisoners, as he behaves with a completely professional demeanor every moment he is on the Yard. He is as precise in delivering his verbal commands as he is in his controlled physical gestures. He has become a high-status authority figure, like a TV anchorman, with his unified movements of head, neck, and shoulders and his synchronized arm-wrist-hand gestures. Deliberate in word and deed, Arnett conveys a sense of economy of involvement with the scene around him. It is as hard to imagine him being ruffled by anything, as it is to imagine anyone challenging him.



I am a little surprised myself at the equanimity that I felt throughout. I felt angry only once for a slash when 5704 took the lock off his door and poked me in the stomach with my own stick (which I had just poked him with). At all other times, I felt quite relaxed. I never experienced any sense of power or elation when pushing people or ordering them about.9



In this prison setting, Arnett used his understanding of some social science research to his advantage:



I was aware from my reading that boredom and other aspects of prison life can be exploited to make people feel disoriented by being impersonal, giving boring work, punishing all prisoners for bad behavior by individuals, demeaning perfect execution of trivial demands in exercise sessions. I was sensitive to the power of those in control of social settings and I tried to heighten alienation [of the prisoners] by using some of these techniques. I could use it only in a very limited way because I didn’t want to be brutal.10



In challenging the early parole release for 5704, Arnett wrote to the Board, “I can hardly list all 5704’s infractions at this time. He is constantly and grossly insubordinate, with flare ups of violence and extreme mood swings, and constantly tries to incite the other prisoners to insubordination and general uncooperativeness. He acts badly even when he knows punishment for the other prisoners will result. He should be dealt with harshly by the discipline committee.”

Prisoner 416 Confronts the System with a Hunger Strike

Prisoner 5704 wasn’t the only disciplinary concern. The madness of this place, to which we have become accustomed over the few days since we began last Sunday, had also struck Prisoner 416 when he arrived yesterday as a replacement prisoner for first-to-be-released prisoner Doug-8612. He could not believe what he was witnessing and wanted to quit the experiment immediately. However, he was told by his cellmates that he could not quit. His cellmates passed along the false statement that Prisoner 8612 had asserted, that it was not possible to leave, that “They” would not allow anyone to leave before the time was up. I am reminded of the famous line from the song “Hotel California”: “You can check out anytime you like, but you can never leave.”

Instead of challenging that false assertion, Prisoner 416 would use a passive means of escape. “I developed a plan,” he later said. “I would insist on the loophole in my hastily prepared contract. But what force beyond pleading could I exert on this system? I could rebel as Paul-5704 has. But by using legal tactics to get out, my feelings were of secondary importance, though I followed them in terms of achieving my goal. Instead, I chose to exhaust the resources of this simulation by being impossible, by refusing all rewards and accepting their punishments.” (It is unlikely that 416 realized that he was adopting a strategy that organized labor has used in struggles against management, to “play by the rules,” formally known as “work to rule,” on every matter in order to expose inherent weaknesses in the system.11)

416 decided to go on a fast because, by refusing the food the guards offered, he would take away one source of their power over the prisoners. Looking at his skinny body, his muscle-free body, 135 pounds on a five-foot-eight frame, made me think that he already looked like a starvation victim.

In some ways, Clay-416 was more powerfully impacted by his first day as a prisoner in the Stanford County Jail than anyone else was, as he told us in this personal, yet depersonalized analysis:

“I began to feel that I was losing my identity. The person I call ‘Clay,’ the person who put me in this place, the person who volunteered to go into this prison—’cause it was a prison to me, it still is a prison to me—I don’t look on it as an experiment or a simulation—it is a prison run by psychologists instead of run by the State. I began to feel that identity, the person I was, that decided to go to prison—was distant from me—was remote, until finally, I wasn’t that. I was ‘416.’ I was really my number, and 416 was going to have to decide what to do, and that was when I decided to fast. I decided to fast because that was the one reward the guards gave you. They always threatened they wouldn’t let you eat, but they had to give you eats. And so I stopped eating. Then I had a sort of power over something because I found the one thing they couldn’t crack me on. They were going to catch shit eventually if they didn’t get me to eat. And so I was sort of humiliating them by being able to fast.”12

He began by refusing to touch his lunch. Arnett reported that he overheard 416 telling his cellmates that he intended not to eat until he got the legal consultation that he had been demanding. He said that “After about twelve hours I’ll probably collapse, and then what can they do? They’ll have to give in.” Arnett found him nothing more than a “sassy and back talkin’” prisoner. He sees nothing noble in this hunger strike.

Here was a new prisoner embarking on a daring plan of disobedience, directly challenging the guards’ power. His act could potentially make him a nonviolent hero around whom the prisoners could rally, someone to rouse them from their mindlessly obedient stupor—like Mahatma Gandhi. By contrast, it is clear that the violence used by 5407 did not work in a place where the resources of power are so imbalanced in favor of the system. I was hoping that 416 would come up with another plan that would involve his cellmates and the others in communal disobedience, using a mass hunger strike as a tactic for remediation of their harsh treatment. Nevertheless, I worried that he was so internally focused that he had little awareness of the need to engage his fellows in fuller group opposition.

Two More Prisoners Break Down

It appeared that the problem caused by 5407 and 416 were the beginnings of a domino effect of confrontations. Prisoner 1037’s mother had been right. Her son, Rich, had not looked good to her; now he did not look good to me. He had become increasingly depressed after his folks had left following visiting hours; he probably wished that they had insisted on taking him home with them. Instead of accepting his mother’s accurate appraisal of his condition, Rich probably came to believe that his masculinity was at stake. He wanted to prove that he could take it, “like a man.” He couldn’t. Just like his cellmates 8612 and 819 from the original rebellious Cell 2, 1037 displayed symptoms of extreme stress to such an extent that I had him taken to the quiet room outside the prison yard and told him that it would be best if he were paroled at this time. He was pleased and surprised at this good news. As I helped him change into his civilian clothes, he was still shaky. I told him he would get full pay for the entire experiment and that we would be in contact with him and all the other students soon to go over the results of the study, complete the final surveys, and give them their payment.

Prisoner 1037 later said that the worst part of the experiment was the “time when the guards gave me the feeling that they were expressing their true inner feelings and not just the guard role they were playing. For example, there were some times during the exercise periods when we prisoners would be pushed to the point of real suffering. Some guards seemed to really enjoy our agony.”13

When his parents came to get him during visiting hours, the news of 1037’s imminent parole did not go down well with Prisoner 4325, who was more stressed than any of us had realized. “Big Jim,” as our research team referred to 4325, seemed like a self-assured young man whose preselection assessment had indicated he was in the normal range on all measures. Nevertheless, on that afternoon he abruptly broke down.

“When the appearance before the Parole Board came up, I immediately became hopeful of getting released. But I fell a long way down when Rich [1037] was paroled and I was not. That one act worked its way into me and brought about an even heavier feeling of desperation. I ‘broke’ as a result. I learned that my emotions are much more present than I thought and realized what a great life I actually have. If prison is anything like what I went through here, I don’t know how it could help anyone.”14

I said the same things to him as I had said to 1037, namely, that we were going to parole him soon anyway for his good behavior, and that it was fine if he left sooner. I thanked him for his participation, told him I was sorry that it had been so tough on him, and invited him back soon to discuss what we found. I wanted to have all the students come back together to share their reactions after having had a bit of distance from this unusual experience. He gathered his belongings and left quietly after indicating that he did not need to see a psychological counselor in Student Health Services.

The Warden’s Log noted, “4325 reacts badly and has to be released by 5:30 P.M. because of severe reactions like those displayed by 819 [Stew] and 8612 [Doug] before him.” The log also adds the curious fact that there is no mention of 4325’s release by any of the prisoners or by any of the guards. Gone and forgotten. Rest in Peace. Apparently, by this time in the grueling test of endurance all that matters is who is present and accounted for—not who used to be. Out of sight is definitely out of mind.

Letters Home from the Stanford Jail

“Today when the prisoners were writing letters home explaining what a fine time they were having, as they have done before, prisoner 5486 [Jerry] could not get his letter right until the third attempt,” reported Guard Markus. “This prisoner’s behavior and respect for authority have been steadily deteriorating from the early days when he was in the model cell #3. Since cell realignment, 5486 has been adversely affected by his new cellmates, and his behavior is now characterized by his new wise cracks, especially during counts. All of his behaviors have the sole purpose to undermine prison authority.”

Arnett’s report also singled out this formerly model prisoner as a new problem: “5486 has been in gradual downhill slide since being separated from 4325 and 2093 in cell #3. He has become something of a jokester and minor cutup. This unacceptable behavior should be rectified before leading to committing something serious.”

The third guard on the day shift, John Landry, was similarly upset when “5486 made a joke out of letter writing as a sign of his general non-cooperation. I recommend, as punishment, that he be made to write 15 letters of this type.”

Christina Joins the Mad Hatter’s Party

After Thursday’s Parole Board and Disciplinary Board finished their deliberations, Carlo had to return to the city for urgent business. I was glad that I did not have to take him to dinner because I wanted to be present for the early visiting hours scheduled for right after the prisoners had their dinner. I had to apologize to Mrs. Y., Prisoner 1037’s mother, for my insensitive behavior the other night. However, I also wanted to have a more relaxed dinner that night with the newcomer to those deliberations, Christina Maslach.

Christina had recently gotten her Ph.D. in social psychology at Stanford and was about to begin her career as an assistant professor at Berkeley, one of the first women to be hired by its Psychology faculty in decades. She was a diamond in the smooth—smart, serene, and self-contained. Hardworking and committed to a career as a research psychologist and educator, Christina had worked with me earlier as a teaching assistant and a valuable research collaborator as well as an informal editor of several of my books.

I imagine that I would have been in love with her even if she had not been stunningly beautiful. For a poor kid from the Bronx, this elegant “California Girl” was a dream come true. However, I had to maintain a respectful distance so that my recommendations for her employment would not be tainted by my personal involvement. Now that she had gotten one of the best jobs in the country on her own merits, we could pursue our relationship openly.

I had not told her much about this prison study because she and some other colleagues and graduate students were scheduled to do a thorough evaluation of the staff, prisoners, and guards the next day, Friday, about halfway through our scheduled two weeks. I had the sense that she had not been pleased by what she had seen and heard on the afternoon of the disciplinary deliberations. It was not anything she had said that disturbed me, but her saying nothing at all. We would discuss her reactions to Carlo and that scenario at our late dinner, as well as the kind of information I hoped she could obtain from her interviews on Friday.

The Priest Follows Through on His Promise of Pastoral Aid

The priest, who knows that this is just a simulated prison, has already done his part to add verisimilitude to this mock prison by his seriously intense role-playing the other day. Now he is forced to follow through on his priestly promise to give aid should anyone request his assistance. Sure enough, Father McDermott calls the mother of Hubbie-7258 and tells Mrs. Whittlow that her son needs legal representation if he wants to get out of the Stanford County Jail. Instead of just saying that if her son really wants out so badly, she will just take him back home with her when she sees him at the next Visitors’ Night, Mrs. W. does what she is told. She calls her nephew Tim, a lawyer in the public defender’s office. He in turn calls me, and we follow through on this script by agreeing to schedule his official lawyer’s visit for Friday morning as one more realistic element in this experience that is growing ever more unreal. Our little drama, it would appear, is now being rewritten by Franz Kafka as a surreal supplement to The Trial, or perhaps by Luigi Pirandello as an update of his Il fu Mattia Pascal, or his better-known play Six Characters in Search of an Author.

A Hero in the Rearview Mirror

Sometimes it takes time and distance to realize the value of life’s important lessons. Clay-416 might provide a counterpart of Marlon Brando’s classic statement in On the Waterfront, “I coulda been a contender.” Clay-416 might have said, “I coulda been a hero.” However, in the heat of the moment he was thought to be just a “troublemaker” who caused hardships to his fellows—a rebel without an obvious cause.

Heroism often requires social support. We typically celebrate heroic deeds of courageous individuals, but we do not do so if their actions have tangible immediate cost to the rest of us and we can’t understand their motives. Such heroic seeds of resistance are best sown if all members of a community share a willingness to suffer for common values and goals. We have seen such an instance, for example, in Nelson Mandela’s resistance to apartheid when he was imprisoned in South Africa. Networks of people in many European nations organized escapes and hideouts for Jews to survive the Nazi Holocaust. Hunger strikes were employed for political purposes in the fasting to death of IRA leaders during their imprisonment in Belfast’s Long Kesh prison. They and others from the Irish National Liberation Army used the hunger strike to gain attention to their status as political prisoners instead of being designated as ordinary criminals.15 More recently, hundreds of detainees being held in the U.S. military prison in Guantánamo, Cuba, have gone on extended hunger strikes to protest the illegal and inhumane nature of their captivity and gain media attention to their cause.

As for Clay-416, although he had a personal plan for effective resistance, he did not take time to share it with his cellmates or the other prisoners so that they could decide to join forces with him. Had he done so, his plan might have represented a unifying principle rather than being dismissed as a personal pathology. It would have become a collective challenge to the evil system rather than a dispositional quirk. Perhaps because he came on the scene late, the other prisoners did not know him well enough or felt that he had not paid his dues as they had during those first hard days and nights. In any case, he was an “outsider,” as Dave, our informer (replacement for 8612), had been. Though Dave had been quickly won over to the prisoners’ side and aligned with their cause against the system that had hired him as its spy, not so with 416. However, I think it was also 416’s introverted style that was alienating his fellows. He was used to going it alone, living his life in his own complex mind and not in the realm of interpersonal connections. Nevertheless, his defiance had a powerful impact on the thinking of at least one other prisoner, albeit after the prison experience was over.

Jerry-5486, the prisoner recently designated a “smart aleck” by the Parole Board, was clearly influenced by 416’s heroism in the face of harsh abuse: “I was impressed with Clay’s stoic determination and wish he would have been there from the beginning. He would have had a definite effect on the events that followed.”

In his later reflections, 5486 added:



It was interesting that when Clay-416, who was the first real example of an obstinate person who had made up his mind when he absolutely refused to eat his sausages, people went against him. Earlier in the study, he would have been their ideal. Because a lot of people said they were going to be hard and fast and strike and all this, but when it finally came around to somebody having the guts to do that, they went against him. They wanted their own petty little comforts rather than see him hold on to his integrity.



Jerry-5486 went on to note how unpleasant it was to witness the clash between 416 and 7258, “between Hubbie and Clay over the sausages and the girlfriend.” Later on, he had a better perspective on the true meaning of that confrontation, but he could not see the true nature of the event while it was unfolding and he could have taken action to intervene and defuse it:



I realized that everybody was so far into the whole thing that they were suffering and making others suffer as well. It was too sad to see them go through it, especially since [Hubbie] didn’t realize that, if he had not gotten to see his girl, it would be ‘John Wayne’s’ fault, not Clay’s. [Hubbie] took the bait and let it tear him apart.16



Meanwhile, back in solitary confinement, Clay-416 was coping in a kind of Buddhist style that would have made Paul-5704 proud of him, had he known that Clay was using such a Zen-like tactic for mental survival.

“I meditated constantly. For example, when I was refusing dinner, the guard [Burdan] has all the prisoners out of their cells trying to convince me that visitors’ day was going to be canceled and all this shit, which I calculated wouldn’t happen. But I wasn’t sure; I just had calculated that probability. I then continually stared at the droplet of water from the frankfurter that was glistening on my tin plate. I just stared at that droplet and focused myself first horizontally, then vertically. Nobody was then able to bother me. I had a religious experience in the Hole.”17

This scrawny kid had found inner peace through his passive resistance, taking control over his body and directing himself away from the guards. Clay-416 offered this moving account of how he believed that he had won the contest of personal will against institutional power:

“Once I refused food before the dominant evening guard, I became content for the first time here. It pleased me to infuriate [Guard Hellmann]. Upon being thrown in the Hole for the night, I was jubilant. Jubilant because I felt all but sure that I had exhausted his resources (to be used against him). I was astonished to realize too that I had privacy in solitary confinement—it was luxurious. His punishment of the others did not concern me. I was gambling on the limits of the situation. I knew, I calculated, that visitors’ privileges could not be removed. I prepared myself to stay in the Hole until probably ten the next morning. In the Hole I was furthest from experiencing myself as ‘Clay.’ I was ‘416,’ willing and proud even to be ‘416.’ The number had an identity to me because 416 had found his own response to the situation. I felt no need to cling to the former manhood I had under my old name. In the Hole, there is a four-inch bar of light extending top to bottom, thrown by the crack between the closet doors. About the third hour there, I was filled with calm in regarding this bar of light. It is the most beautiful thing in the prison. I don’t mean that only subjectively. It is, go look at it. When I was released around 11 P.M. and returned to a bed, I felt that I had won, that my will, so far, was stronger than the will of the situation as a whole. I slept well that night.”

The Sidekick Shows a Little Soul

Curt Banks tells me that of all the guards the one he likes or respects least is Burdan because he is such a little toady, sucking up after Hellmann, living in the big guy’s wake. I am feeling the same, although from a prisoner’s point of view there were others who were much worse threats to their sanity and survival. One of the staff had overheard Burdan bragging that he had seduced his friend’s wife last night. The three of them had been regular weekly bridge players, and although he had always been attracted to this twenty-eight-year-old mother of two children, he had never had the guts to move on her—until now. Perhaps it was his newfound sense of authority that gave him the courage to deceive and cuckold his old friend. If it were true, it was another reason not to like him. Then we found in his background information that his mother escaped from Nazi Germany, so we add some positive weight back into our evaluation of this complex young man.

Burdan’s shift report is an amazingly accurate depiction of official corrections staff behavior:



We have a crisis in authority, this rebellious conduct [416’s fasting] potentially undermines the complete control we have over the others. I have gotten to know the idiosyncrasies of various numbers [interesting that he calls them “numbers”; a blatant deindividualization of the prisoners]; I attempt to utilize this information only for harassment while inside the cellblock.



He also points the finger at the lack of support he and the other guards were getting from our staff: “Real trouble started at dinner—we look to prison authority to find out how to handle this late revolt for the reason that we are worried about him not eating . . . . They are strangely absent.” (We plead guilty to not providing oversight and training.)

My negative view of Guard Burdan is tempered by what he did next. “I can’t stand the idea of him [416] being in the Hole any longer,” he says. “It seems dangerous [since the rules limit solitary to one hour]. I argue with Dave, and then quietly put the new prisoner, 416, back in his cell.” He adds, “but with a touch of malice, I order him to take the sausages to bed with him.”18

A validation of this positive take on Burdan comes from a comment by Jerry-5486, who was the only prisoner to volunteer to give up his blanket for Clay-416: “I was upset at John Wayne’s ranting and raving. [Burdan] came over to my cell knowing I sympathized with Clay and said that he won’t be kept in there all night. ‘We’ll bring him out as soon as everyone is asleep,’ he whispered to me, and then went back to pretending he was a hard guy. It was as if he needed to make some honest, sincere communication in the eye of the storm.”19

Not only was Jerry-5486 in 416’s corner, but he also came to feel that the best thing about this whole experience was meeting Clay: “Seeing one guy who knew what he wanted and was willing to endure whatever necessary to get it. He was the only guy with anything at stake who didn’t sell out, or plead, or crack up.”20

In that night’s Shift Report, Burdan notes, “There is no solidarity between the remaining prisoners, with the exception of 5486 who has always demanded equal privileges for all.” (I concur; that is one reason for respecting Jerry-5486 more than any of the other prisoners.)

This intense, extended experience is enriching my appreciation of the complexity of human nature because just when you think you understand someone, you realize you know only the smallest slice of their inner nature derived from a limited set of personal or mediated contacts. As I too come to respect Clay-416 for his willpower in the face of such strong opposition, I discover that he is not all Buddha. He tells us in his final interview what he thinks about the suffering his hunger strike caused the other prisoners: “If I am trying to get out and the guards create a situation where it is difficult on other people because I’m trying to get out, I don’t give a shit.”

His friend Jerry-5486 provides a fascinating perspective on the complex mind games that he was playing—and losing—in this prison.



More and more as the experiment went on, I could justify my actions by saying “It’s only a game, and I know it and I can endure it easy enough, and they can’t bother my mind, so I’ll go through the actions.” Which was fine for me. I was enjoying things, counting my money, and planning my escape. I felt my head was pretty together and they couldn’t upset me, because I was detached from it all, watching it happen. But I realize now that no matter how together I thought I was inside my head, my prison behavior was often less under my control than I realized. No matter how open, friendly and helpful I was with other prisoners I was still operating as an isolated, self-centered person, being rational rather than compassionate. I got along fine in my own detached way, but now I’m aware that frequently my actions hurt others. Instead of responding to their needs, I would assume that they were as detached as I and thereby rationalize my own selfish behavior.

The best example of this was when Clay [416] was in the closet with his sausages . . . . Clay and I were friends, he knew I was on his side during the fasting incident, and I felt I had helped him some at the supper table when the other prisoners were trying to make him eat. But when he went in the closet and we were told to yell things and pound on the door, I did it just like everyone else. I easily justified it by saying “It’s just a game. Clay knows I’m on his side. My actions don't make any difference so I’ll just keep humoring the guard.” Later, I realized that the yelling and pounding was really hard on Clay. There I was tormenting the guy I liked most. And justifying it by saying “I’ll go through the motions but they haven’t got control of my mind.” When what was really important was the other guy’s mind. What was he thinking? How were my actions affecting him? I was blind to the consequences of my actions, and unconsciously assigning the responsibility for them to the guards. I had separated my mind from my actions. I probably would have done anything short of causing physical harm to a prisoner as long as I could shift the responsibility to the guards.

And so now I think, maybe you can’t separate mind and actions as clearly as I did during the experiment. I prided myself on how unassailable my mind was—I didn’t get upset, I didn’t let them control my mind. But as I look back on the things I did it seems they had quite a strong, but subtle, control over my mind.21




“WHAT YOU ARE DOING TO THOSE

BOYS IS A TERRIBLE THING!”

The last toilet run of Thursday night started at 10 P.M. Christina had been working at the library following her quiet stint earlier on the Parole and Disciplinary Board. She had come down to the prison for the first time to pick me up to drive over to the Town and Country Mall near campus for a late dinner at Stickney’s Restaurant. I was in my Superintendent’s Office going over some logistics for the next day’s mass interviews. I saw her chatting with one of the guards, and when she finished, I motioned her in to have a seat near my desk. She later described her unusual encounter with that particular guard:



In August of 1971, I had just completed my doctorate at Stanford University, where I was the office mate of Craig Haney, and was preparing to start my new job as an assistant professor of psychology at the University of California, Berkeley. Relevant background also should include mention that I had recently gotten involved romantically with Phil Zimbardo, and we were even considering the possibility of marriage. Although I had heard from Phil and other colleagues about the plans for their prison simulation study, I had not participated in either the preparatory work or the initial days of the actual simulation. Ordinarily I would have been more interested and maybe become involved in some way, but I was in the process of moving, and my focus was on preparing for my first teaching job. However, I agreed when Phil asked me, as a favor, to help conduct some interviews with the study participants . . . .

When I went downstairs to the basement location of the prison . . . I then went to the other end of the hall, where the guards entered the yard; there was a room outside the yard entrance, which the guards used to rest and relax when not on duty or to change into or out of their uniforms at the start or end of their shifts. I talked to one of the guards there who was waiting to begin his shift. He was very pleasant, polite and friendly, surely a person anyone would consider a really nice guy.

Later on, one of the research staff mentioned to me that I should take a look at the yard again, because the new late-night guard shift had come on, and this was the notorious “John Wayne” shift. John Wayne was the nickname for the guard who was the meanest and toughest of them all; his reputation had preceded him in various accounts I had heard. Of course, I was eager to see who he was and what he was doing that attracted so much attention. When I looked through the observation point, I was absolutely stunned to see that their John Wayne was the “really nice guy” with whom I had chatted earlier. Only now, he was transformed into someone else. He not only moved differently, but he talked differently—with a Southern accent . . . . He was yelling and cursing at the prisoners as he made them go through “the count,” going out of his way to be rude and belligerent. It was an amazing transformation from the person I had just spoken to—a transformation that had taken place in minutes just by stepping over the line from the outside world into that prison yard. With his military-style uniform, billy club in hand, and dark, silver-reflecting sunglasses to hide his eyes . . . this guy was an all-business, no-nonsense, really mean prison guard.22



Just then, I watched the last toilet run chain gang parading past the open door of my Superintendent’s Office. As usual, their ankle chains were linked from inmate to inmate; big paper bags covered their heads, each prisoner’s arm holding on to the shoulder of the one before him. A guard, big Geoff Landry, led the procession.

“Chris, look at this!” I exclaimed. She looked up, then right down.

“Did you see that? What do you think?”

“I already saw it.” And she looked away again.

I was shocked by her seeming indifference.

“What do you mean? Don’t you understand that this is a crucible of human behavior, we are seeing things no one has witnessed before in such a situation. What is the matter with you?” Curt and Jaffe also joined me against her.

She couldn’t reply because she was so emotionally distressed. Tears ran down her cheeks. “I’m leaving. Forget dinner. I’m going home.”

I ran out after her, and we argued on the front steps of Jordan Hall, home of the Psychology Department. I challenged whether she could ever be a good researcher if she was going to get so emotional from a research procedure. I told her that dozens of people had come down to this prison and no one had reacted as she had. She was furious. She didn’t care if everyone in the world thought that what I was doing was okay. It was simply wrong. Boys were suffering. As principal investigator, I was personally responsible for their suffering. They were not prisoners, not experimental subjects, but boys, young men, who were being dehumanized and humiliated by other boys who had lost their moral compass in this situation.

Her recollection of this intense confrontation is filled with gems of wisdom and compassion, but at that time, it was a slap in my face, the wake-up call from the nightmare that I had been living day and night for the past week.

Christina recollects:



At around 11 P.M., the prisoners were being taken to the toilet prior to going to bed. The toilet was outside the confines of the prison yard, and this had posed a problem for the researchers, who wanted the prisoners to be ‘in prison’ 24 hours a day (just as in a real prison). They did not want the prisoners to see people and places in the outside world, which would have broken the total environment they were trying to create. So the routine for the bathroom runs was to put paper bags over the prisoners’ heads so they couldn’t see anything, chain them together in a line, and lead them down the hall into, around, and out of a boiler room and then to the bathroom and back. It also gave the prisoners an illusion of a great distance between the yard and the toilet, which was in fact only in a hallway around the corner.



Christina continues her recollection of that fateful night’s reality confrontation:



When the bathroom run took place that Thursday evening, Phil excitedly told me to look up from some report I had been reading: “Quick, quick—look at what’s happening now!” I looked at the line of hooded, shuffling, chained prisoners, with guards shouting orders at them—and then quickly averted my gaze. I was overwhelmed by a chilling, sickening feeling. ‘Do you see that? Come on, look—it’s amazing stuff!’ I couldn’t bear to look again, so I snapped back with, “I already saw it!” That led to a bit of a tirade by Phil (and other staff there) about what was the matter with me. Here was fascinating human behavior unfolding, and I, a psychologist, couldn’t even look at it? They couldn’t believe my reaction, which they may have taken to be a lack of interest. Their comments and teasing made me feel weak and stupid—the out-of-place woman in this male world—in addition to already feeling sick to my stomach by the sight of these sad boys so totally dehumanized.



She recalls our clash and its resolution:



A short while later, after we had left the prison setting, Phil asked me what I thought about the entire study. I’m sure he expected some sort of great intellectual discussion about the research and the events we had just witnessed. Instead, what he got was an incredibly emotional outburst from me (I am usually a rather contained person). I was angry and frightened and in tears. I said something like,

“What you are doing to those boys is a terrible thing!”

What followed was a heated argument between us. That was especially scary for me, because Phil seemed to be so different from the man I thought I knew, someone who loves students and cares for them in ways that were already legendary at the university. He was not the same man that I had come to love, someone who is gentle and sensitive to the needs of others and surely to mine. We had never had an argument before of this intensity. Instead of being close and in tune with each other, we seemed to be on opposite sides of some great chasm. Somehow, the transformation in Phil (and in me as well) and the threat to our relationship was unexpected and shocking. I don’t remember how long the fight went on, but I felt it was too long and too traumatic.

What I do know is that eventually Phil acknowledged what I was saying, apologized for his treatment of me, and realized what had been gradually happening to him and everyone else in the study: that they had all internalized a set of destructive prison values that distanced them from their own humanitarian values. And at that point, he owned up to his responsibility as creator of this prison and made the decision to call the experiment to a halt. By then it was well past midnight, so he decided to end it the next morning, after contacting all the previously released prisoners, and calling in all the guard shifts for a full round of debriefings of guards, prisoners, and then everyone together. A great weight was lifted from him, from me, and from our personal relationship.23


YOU’RE MALE CAMELS, NOW HUMP THEM

I returned to the dungeon relieved and even exhilarated by the decision to abort the mission. I couldn’t wait to share the news with Curt Banks, who had done yeoman’s duty servicing the video patrol at various times of the day and night, despite having a family to tend to as well. He too was delighted and told me that he was going to recommend ending the study as soon as possible after what he had witnessed while I was gone. We were sorry Craig was not here tonight to share our end-game joy.

The calm demeanor displayed by Clay-416, after what should have been a stressful ordeal, has angered Hellmann. He cascades into a 1 A.M. count to end all counts. The sad, dwindling cadre of only five remaining prisoners (416, 2093, 5486, 5704, and 7258) wearily lines up against the wall to recite their numbers, rules, and songs. No matter how well they do their chores, someone is punished in various ways. They are yelled at, cursed, and made to say abusive things to each other. “Tell him he’s a prick!” yells Hellman, and one prisoner turns to say that to the next. Then the sexual harassment that started to bubble up last night resumes as testosterone flows freely in every direction.

Hellman shouts out to all of them, “See that hole in the ground? Now do twenty-five push-ups, fucking that hole! You hear me!” One after another, the prisoners obey as Burdan shoves them down to do their duty.

After a brief consultation between John Wayne and his little sidekick, Burdan, a new sexual game is devised. “Okay, now pay attention. You three are going to be female camels. Get over here and bend over touching your hands to the floor.” (When they do, their naked butts are exposed since they are wearing no underwear beneath their smock-dresses.) Hellmann continues with obvious glee, “Now you two, you’re male camels. Stand behind the female camels and hump them.”

Burdan giggles at this double entendre. Although their bodies never touch, the helpless prisoners are simulating sodomy by making thrusting motions of humping. They are dismissed back to their cells as the guards retreat to their quarters, clearly feeling that they have earned their night’s salary. My nightmare from last night is coming true. I am glad that now I can control it by ending it all tomorrow.

It is hard to imagine that such sexual humiliation could happen in only five days, when the young men all know that this is a simulated prison experiment. Moreover, initially they all recognized that the “others” were also college students like themselves. Given that they were all randomly assigned to play these contrasting roles, there were no inherent differences between the two categories. They all began the experience as seemingly good people. Those who were guards knew that but for the random flip of a coin they could have been wearing the prisoner smocks and been controlled by those they were now abusing. They also knew that the prisoners had done nothing criminally wrong to deserve their lowly status. Yet, some guards have transformed into perpetrators of evil, and other guards have become passive contributors to the evil through their inaction. Still other normal, healthy young men as prisoners have broken down under the situational pressures, while the remaining surviving prisoners have become zombie-like followers.24

The power of this situation ran swiftly and deeply through most of those on this exploratory ship of human nature. Only a few were able to resist the situational temptations to yield to power and dominance while maintaining some semblance of morality and decency. Obviously, I was not among that noble class.





