CHAPTER NINE

Friday’s Fade to Black

We have so much to do to take down our prison in a matter of hours. Curt, Jaffe, and I are already exhausted from the hectic day and night we have just endured. In addition, in the middle of the night we have to decide on all the arrangements for debriefing sessions, final evaluations, and disbursement of payments and personal belongings, as well as cancellation of afternoon visits from colleagues who had planned to help us interview everyone connected with this study. We also have to cancel various arrangements with the cafeteria food service, return the rented cots and handcuffs to the campus police, and more.

We know that we each have to do double duty, monitoring the Yard action, taking short catnaps, and laying out the final day’s logistics. We will announce the end of the study immediately after the public defender’s visit. It was already scheduled for the morning, and it would be an appropriate event around which to wrap up the whole experience. We decide not to tell the guards before informing the prisoners of the good news from me directly. I anticipate that the guards will be angry to learn that the study is being terminated prematurely, especially now, when they believe that they are in total control and are anticipating an easy week ahead, with some new replacements. They have learned how to be “guards.” Obviously, their learning curve has peaked.

Jaffe will contact the five prisoners who had been released earlier and invite them back around noontime to share in the debriefing and get their full week’s pay. I have to ask all the guard shifts either to come by at noon or to hang around until then for a “special event.” Having anticipated that there were supposed to be full staff interviews by outsiders on Friday, the guards expect some new element to be added, but not this abrupt end to their jobs.

If all goes as planned, there will be an hour of prisoner debriefing around one o’clock, then the same for the guards for an hour, and finally all the guards and prisoners will come together for a full encounter. While each group is engaged, the other group will complete our final evaluation forms, be paid, and have the opportunity either to keep their uniforms as souvenirs or to turn them in. If they wish, they can also take the various signs we posted in the Yard and on the Hole. We also have to arrange a big farewell lunch for everyone and make arrangements for them all to return soon to view selected videos and discuss their reactions from a more detached perspective.

Before taking my nap on the convertible couch in my upstairs professor’s office, where I have been sleeping fitfully for most of the week, I tell the morning shift guards to let the prisoners sleep through the night and to minimize any further hostility against the prisoners. They shrug their shoulders and nod, as though Dad were telling them not to have fun on the playground.


FRIDAY’S FINAL COUNT

For the first time in a week, the prisoners have been allowed to sleep for nearly six unbroken hours. The accrued interest on their sleep debt must have been enormous. It is hard to determine the effects on their moods and their thinking that was caused by having their sleeping and dreaming disrupted so often every night. It was probably considerable. The emotional breakdown of some of the early-released prisoners may have been amplified by their sleep disturbances.

The 7:05 A.M. count lasts only ten minutes. Numbers are called out and other innocuous rituals observed. A good hot breakfast is served to the final five survivors. As might have been expected, Clay-416 refuses to eat any breakfast food, even when the other prisoners gently encourage him to do so.

Despite my instructions to go easy on the prisoners, the guards go ballistic at Clay’s continued insubordination. “Everyone down for fifty push-ups if 416 don’t eat his breakfast.” Clay-416 does not budge but just stares down at his food plate. Vandy and Ceros try to force-feed him, stuffing food into his mouth as he spits it out. They enlist 5704 and 2093 to help them, but to no avail. Clay-416 is put back into his cell and forced to “make love” to his dinner sausages. Ceros orders him to caress them, to hug them, and then to kiss them. Clay-416 does all that. Yet he is true to his word and never eats a single bite of them.

Guard Vandy is upset at 416’s defiance and also at his buddy’s meanspiritedness. In his retrospective diary, Vandy said, “When 416 refused to eat I was once again angered specifically, since there was no way to force the food down his throat, even though we let some other prisoners try. Andre [Ceros] made the prisoner hug and kiss and caress a day-old sausage after being made to sleep with it. I thought this was uncalled for. I would never ever make the prisoner do this.”1

What does Guard Ceros have to say about his own behavior? His retrospective diary noted, “I decided to force feed him, but he wouldn’t eat. I let the food slide down his face. I didn’t believe it was me doing it. I hated myself for making him eat. I hated him for not eating. I hated the reality of human behavior.”2

The day shift came on at ten as usual. I told the lead guard, Arnett, to keep it cool and mellow in light of the coming legal representation. His day shift critical incident report indicated that Clay-416 was undergoing some strange changes in spite of his Zen meditation and earlier surface calm. Arnett’s incident report noted:



416 is very jumpy. He jerked as I took the bag off his head for the toilet run. Had to pull him along when leading him to and from the bathroom, even though I told him I was not going to run him into anything [which the guards often did to prisoners for spite]. He was very nervous about being punished. I held his sausages when he went to the toilet. He tried to get me to give him back his sausages since another guard had ordered him to always have them.”3




THE PUBLIC DEFENDER OF PRISONER RIGHTS AND WRONGS

I meet briefly with Tim B., a local lawyer working in the public defender’s office. He is curious and skeptical about this whole affair. He has reluctantly given up his valuable time only because his aunt had asked him as a personal favor to check on his cousin. I describe the main features of the study and how serious it had become. I invite him to treat the matter exactly as he would if he had been called in to represent a group of real inmates. He agrees, and meets first with cousin Hubbie-7258 alone and then with all the prisoners. He allows us secretly to videotape the session in the same laboratory room on the first floor where the Parole Board had met.

The level of formality between these two kin surprises me. There is no hint of any previous relationship, if any existed. Maybe it was an Anglo thing, but I had expected at least a hug, not a formal handshake and “It’s good to see you again.” Attorney Tim goes through a standard list of items in a businesslike manner. He reads from a prepared list the categories of concern, stopping after each one to elicit the prisoner’s responses, notes them, usually without comment, and moves on to the next in order:



Informed of rights upon arrest?

Harassment by guards?

Nature of any guard abuse?

Under pressure, mentally distraught?

Size and condition of cell?

Requests that have been denied?

Warden’s behavior that was unacceptable?

Issues about bail?



Hubbie-7258 answers the questions in a good-humored way. I think he is assuming that his cousin was going through this standard routine prior to escorting him out of the jail. The prisoner tells his public defender that they have been told that there is no way for them to leave the prison, no way to break the contract. The PD reminds him that if the original contract were based on monetary return for services, by his being willing to forfeit that fee the contract would be null and void. “Yes, I told them that at the Parole Board hearing, but it did no good, I’m still here.”4 In listing his complaints, Hubbie-7258 makes it a point to note that Prisoner 416’s troublemaking behavior had made them all mad.

The guards escort the remaining prisoners into the interview room, with bags over their heads as usual. The guards are joking as they remove the hoods. They leave, but I remain seated in the rear. The PD runs through the same set of questions as with Hubbie, inviting any of the prisoners to reply with their complaints as appropriate.

Clay-416 leads off, complaining first about the Parole Board pressuring him to plead guilty to the charges of his arrest, which he had refused to do because he was never officially charged. His fasting was, in part, a way to call attention to his illegal imprisonment given that he was being held without charges.

(Again this young man continued to confound me; clearly, he was functioning at multiple, incompatible levels. He was dealing with the whole experience in purely legalistic terms, mixing an experimental services contract with prisoner’s rights and corrections formalities, not to mention a certain “new age” mystical meditation.)

Clay seems desperate to talk to someone who would actually listen to him. “Certain guards, who will go unnamed,” he says, “misbehaved toward me up to the level of injurious behavior.” He is willing to file an official complaint against them, if necessary. “Those guards also arranged for the other prisoners to be set against me by allegedly making my fasting a condition for their not getting visitors,” he nods toward Hubbie-7258, who sheepishly looks the other way. “And I was frightened when they put me in the Hole and had the other prisoners bang against the door. Their own rule against violence was set, but I was afraid it would soon be overstepped.”

Sarge-2093 speaks up next, describing some of the attempts various guards made to harass him, but he is proud to report that they had been unsuccessful. He then gives a precise clinical description and demonstration of when a particular guard had ordered him to do many push-ups—with two other prisoners sitting on his back.

The public defender is startled by that account, duly noting it down with a frown. Next, tall Paul-5704 complains about the guards manipulating him by using his smoking habit against him. Good guy Jerry-5486 complains at a less personal, more general level of the inadequate diet and missed meals, the exhaustion from endless middle-of-the-night counts, the out-of-control behavior of some guards, and the lack of supervision by the senior staff. I wince as he turns to look directly at me, but he was right on target: I was guilty.

When the public defender completes his note taking, he thanks them for this information, and says he would file a formal report on Monday and try to arrange for their bail. As he rises to leave, Hubbie-7258 loses it: “You can’t go away and leave us here! We want to leave now with you. We can’t stand another week or even weekend. I thought you were going to arrange for me, for us, to be bailed out now. Please!” Tim B. is taken aback by this sudden emotional outburst. He explains in a most formal way what his job entails, what its limits are, and how he could help them but is powerless to take action there and then. The five survivors appear to hit bottom at that point; their high hopes dashed by legal nonsense.

Tim B.’s reactions to this unique experience, conveyed to me in a letter shortly afterward, are informative:



On the Failure of the Prisoners to Demand Legal Rights



. . . [A]nother possible explanation of why the prisoners failed to request legal advice is that, as white middle-class Americans, they may not have ever envisioned the possibility that they would ever be thrust into the criminal arena, where their rights would be of paramount importance. Finding themselves in that position, they were disarmed of the ability to objectively appraise the situation and act as they otherwise knew they should.



On the Power of This Situation to Distort Reality



. . . The classical devaluation of money compared to such things as freedom and locomotion was clearly evident (in the activities which I witnessed). You will remember the great anticipation of release caused by my explanation of the bail offer. The reality of their imprisonment appeared to be quite penetrating even though they were intellectually aware that they were only involved in an experiment. Clearly confinement in itself seems to be painful regardless whether for legal reasons or otherwise.5


LISTEN CAREFULLY: THE EXPERIMENT IS OVER. YOU ARE FREE

The public defender’s words darken the prisoners’ hopes. A palpable cloak of gloom prevails over the sullen inmates. The public defender shakes their limp hands in turn as he leaves the room. I ask him to wait outside for me. Then I move to the head of the table and ask the prisoners to pay attention to what I am going to say next. They hardly have sufficient motivation left to pay attention to anything, now that their hopes for a quick dismissal have been dashed by the lawyer’s officious reaction to their plight.

“I have something important to tell you, so please listen carefully: The experiment is over. You are free to leave today.”

There is no immediate reaction, no change in their facial expressions or body language. I have the sense that they are confused, skeptical, maybe even suspicious, and feel that this is another test of their reactions. I continue slowly and as clearly as possible, “I and the rest of the research staff have decided to terminate the experiment as of this moment. The study is officially over and the Stanford County Jail is closed. We all thank you for your important role in this study, and—”

Cheers replace the gloom. Hugs, slaps on backs, and wide smiles break through on those all-too-long-grim faces. Euphoria reverberates in Jordan Hall. It is a joyful moment for me as well to be able to liberate these survivors from their imprisonment and to give up my role as prison superintendent once and for all.


OLD POWER FAILURE, NEW POWER FOUND

There are few moments in my life that have given me more personal pleasure than being able to say those few words of liberation and to share in that total elation. I was overcome by the aphrodisiac of positive power, of being able to do something, to say something, that had such an unconditionally joyful impact on other people. Then and there I vowed to use whatever power that I had for good and against evil, to promote what is best in people, to work to free people from their self-imposed prisons, and to work against systems that pervert the promise of human happiness and justice.

The negative power on which I had been running for the past week, as superintendent of this mock prison, had blinded me to the reality of the destructive impact of the System that I was sustaining. Moreover, the myopic focus of a principal research investigator similarly distorted my judgment about the need to terminate the experiment much earlier, perhaps as soon as the second normal, healthy participant suffered an emotional breakdown. While I was focused on the abstract conceptual issue, the power of the behavioral situation versus the power of individual dispositions, I had missed seeing the all-encompassing power of the System that I had helped create and sustain.

Yes, indeed, Christina Maslach, it was terrible what I was allowing to be done to those innocent boys, not through any direct abuse but through my failure to stop abuse and my support of a system of arbitrary rules, regulations, and procedures that facilitated abuse. I was the “Iceman” in that hot house of inhumanity.

The System includes the Situation, but it is more enduring, more widespread, involving extensive networks of people, their expectations, norms, policies, and, perhaps, laws. Over time, Systems come to have a historical foundation and sometimes also a political and economic power structure that governs and directs the behavior of many people within its sphere of influence. Systems are the engines that run situations that create behavioral contexts that influence the human action of those under their control. At some point, the System may become an autonomous entity, independent of those who initially started it or even of those in apparent authority within its power structure. Each System comes to develop a culture of its own, as many Systems collectively come to contribute to the culture of a society.

While the Situation surely brought out the worst in many of these student volunteers, transforming some into perpetrators of evil and others into pathological victims, I was even more fully transformed by the System of domination. The others were kids, young men, without much real experience. I was a seasoned researcher, a mature adult, and a “street-smart” grown-up, still filled with my Bronx-boy acumen in sizing up situations and figuring out action-scenario to survive in the ghetto.

However, in the past week I had gradually morphed into a Prison Authority Figure. I walked and talked like one. Everyone around me responded to me as though I were one. Therefore, I became one of them. The very nexus of that authority figure is one that I have opposed, even detested, all my life—the high-status, authoritarian, overbearing boss man. Yet I had become that abstraction in the flesh. I could ease my conscience by noting that one of my principal activities as the good, kindly superintendent was restraining the overeager guards from committing physical violence. That restraint merely allowed them to divert their energies into more ingenious psychological abuses of the suffering prisoners.

It was surely my mistake to embrace the dual roles of researcher and superintendent because their different, sometimes conflicting, agendas created identity confusion in me. At the same time, those dual roles also compounded my power, which in turn influenced the many “outsiders” who came into our setting but did not challenge the System—parents, friends, colleagues, police, the priest, the media, and the lawyer. It is evident that one does not appreciate the power of Situations to transform one’s thinking, feeling, and action when caught in its grip. A person in the claws of the System just goes along, doing what emerges as the natural way to respond at that time in that place.

If you were placed in a strange and novel cruel Situation within a powerful System, you would probably not emerge as the same person who entered that crucible of human nature. You would not recognize your familiar image if it were held next to the mirror image of what you had become. We all want to believe in our inner power, our sense of personal agency, to resist external situational forces of the kinds operating in this Stanford Prison Experiment. For some, that belief is valid. They are usually the minority, the rare birds, those who I will designate as heroic later in our journey. For many, that belief of personal power to resist powerful situational and systemic forces is little more than a reassuring illusion of invulnerability. Paradoxically, maintaining that illusion only serves to make one more vulnerable to manipulation by failing to be sufficiently vigilant against attempts of undesired influence subtly practiced on them.


ALL HANDS ON DECK FOR DEBRIEFING

It was evident that we had to use the short but vital debriefing time for several purposes. First, we needed to allow all the participants to express openly their emotions and reactions to this unique experience within a nonthreatening situation.6 Next, it was important for me to make clear to both the prisoners and the guards that any extreme behavior they had displayed was diagnostic of the power of the situation and not diagnostic of any personal pathology in them. They had to be reminded that they had all been chosen precisely because they were normal and healthy to begin with. They had not brought any kind of personal defects into this prison setting; the setting had brought out the extremes in them that we all had witnessed. They were not the proverbial “bad apples”—rather, it was the “bad barrel” of the Stanford prison that was implicated in the transformations that had been demonstrated so vividly. Finally, it was crucial to use this opportunity as a time for moral reeducation. The debriefing was a means of exploring the moral choices that had been available to each of the participants and how they had dealt with them. We discussed what the guards could have done differently to be less abusive to the prisoners and what the prisoners could have done to deflect their abuse. I made it clear that I felt personally responsible for not having intervened a number of times during the study when the abuse was extreme. I had tried to contain physical aggression, but I had not acted to modify or stop the other forms of humiliation when I should have. I was guilty of the sin of omission—the evil of inaction—of not providing adequate oversight and surveillance when it was required.

The Ex-Cons Vent

The former prisoners displayed a curious mixture of relief and resentment. They were all pleased that the nightmare was finally over. Those who had survived the week did not show any overt pride in their accomplishment in the face of their peers who had been released early. They knew that at times they had been zombie-like in their mindless compliance, obeying absurd orders and totally conforming in chants against Prisoner Stewart-819, as well as engaging in hostile actions against Clay-416 and ridiculing Tom-2093, our most moral prisoner, “Sarge.”

The five prisoners released early showed no negative signs of the emotional overload they had suffered. This was in part because they had a base level of stability and normality to which to return and in part because the source of their distress was centered on such an atypical setting, the basement jail, and its strange happenings. Being divested of their strange uniform and other prison attire had also helped detach them from that sordid situation. For the prisoners, the main issue was coping with the shame inherent in the submissive role they had played. They needed to establish a sense of personal dignity, to rise above the constraints of their submissive position that had been externally imposed on them.

However, Doug-8612, the first to be arrested and first to be released because of his deteriorating mental condition, was still angry with me in particular for having created a situation in which he lost control over his behavior and mind. Indeed, he had thought about leading a break-in with his friends to free the prisoners and had, in fact, come back to Jordan Hall the day after he was released to prepare for it. Fortunately, he had decided against that action for several reasons. He was amused to learn how seriously we had taken the rumor of his liberation plans and doubly pleased to learn of the lengths to which we, and especially I, had gone to safeguard our institution from his assault.

As expected, the newly freed former inmates railed against the guards, who they felt had gone far beyond the demands of their role to be creatively abusive to them or to single them out for particular abuse. Tops on their negative hit parade were Hellmann, Arnett, and Burdan, followed by Varnish and Ceros as less consistently “evil.”

However, they were as quick to point out those guards whom they saw as “good guards,” who had done little favors for them or who had never been so fully immersed in their role that they forgot that the prisoners were human beings. In this category, the two standouts were Geoff Landry and Markus. Geoff had done small favors for them, constantly distanced himself from the abusive actions of his night shift crewmates, and even stopped wearing his guard’s sunglasses and military shirt. He even told us later that he had thought about asking to become a prisoner because he hated to be part of a system that was grinding other people down so badly.

Markus was not as obviously “wired” into the prisoners’ suffering, but we learned that on a few early occasions he had brought in a gift of fresh fruit to supplement the prisoners’ meager meals. After the warden had admonished him for not being sufficiently engaged during his shift, Markus, who had stayed on the sidelines during the prisoner revolt, began to yell at the prisoners and to issue scathing parole reports against them. As an aside, Markus’s handwriting is quite beautiful, almost like calligraphy, so he showed it off a bit, using it to denounce the prisoners’ parole requests. He is someone who loves the outdoors, hiking, camping, and yoga; therefore, he especially hated to be cooped up in our dungeon.

Between the “bad” and the “good” guards were those who had gone “by the book,” done their job, played the role, and punished infractions but were rarely personally abusive toward individual prisoners. Here we find Varnish, the standby guards Morison and Peters, and, at times, the younger Landry brother. The initial aloofness and distancing himself from the Yard action that Varnish showed may in part have been due to his shyness, as revealed in his background information statement of “having few close friends.”

John Landry played a vacillating role, at times as tough sidekick to Arnett and always as the one attacking rebellious prisoners with the skin-chilling, fire extinguisher carbon dioxide spray. At other times, he went by the book, and most prisoners reported that they liked him. John, a mature eighteen-year-old, was rather ruggedly handsome, and aspired to write fiction, live on a California beach, and continue dating a lot.

One mode of inaction that characterized the “good guards” was their reluctance to challenge the abusive actions of the “bad guards” on their shift. Not only did they never face up to them while on the Yard, but neither Geoff Landry nor Markus ever did so in private when they were in the guard quarters, as far as we were able to determine. Later on we will consider whether their failure to intervene as bystanders to abuse constituted an “evil of inaction.”

One of the consistently rebellious prisoners, Paul-5704, reported this reaction upon discovering that the experiment was over:



When we were notified the experiment was over, I felt a wave of relief and a wave of melancholy break inside of me at once. I was really glad the study was over, but also would have been much more happy that it lasted 2 weeks. The money is the only reason I was in the experiment. All the same, the feeling that I was glad to get out won, and I couldn’t stop smiling till I got to Berkeley. Once I was there for a few hours, I forgot the whole thing and wouldn’t talk to anybody about it.7



You will recall that this Paul was the prisoner who was proud to be the head of the Stanford County Jail Prisoners’ Grievance Committee and the one who had also planned to write an exposé of the study for several alternative newspapers in Berkeley revealing how government-supported research was focused on ways in which to deal with student dissidents. His plan was totally forgotten; it never happened.

The Ex-Guards Resent

In the second hour of debriefing, the former guards presented a quite different group portrait. While a few of them, the “good guards” in the prisoner evaluations, were also glad that the ordeal was over, most were distressed to see the study terminated prematurely. Some focused on the easy money they had been anticipating for another week’s work now that they had the situation clearly under their control. (They ignored the continuing problems posed by Clay-416’s fast and Sarge’s gaining the moral upper hand in his confrontations with Hellmann.) Some guards were ready to apologize openly for having gone too far, for fully enjoying their power. Others felt justified in what they had done, seeing their actions as necessary to fulfill the role they had been given. My main problem in dealing with the guards was to help them recognize that they should be experiencing some guilt since they had made others suffer, despite their understanding of the demands of the role they were playing. I made clear my strong guilt for failing to intervene more often, which had thereby given them implicit permission to go to the extremes they did. They might have avoided their abuses had they had better top-down surveillance.

It was easy for most guards to point to the prisoner rebellion on Day 2 as the turning point in their perception of the prisoners, who suddenly appeared to them as “dangerous” and needing to be suppressed. They also resented the negative personal references and cursing that some prisoners made to them during the rebellion, which they considered demeaning and which elicited their retaliation in kind.

A difficult element of the debriefing was allowing the guards to explain why they had done what they did, without sanctioning their justifications, for those were simply excuses for abusive, hostile, and even sadistic behavior. The end of the experiment also meant the end of enjoying having all that newfound guard power at their command. As Guard Burdan noted in his diary, “When Phil confides in me that the experiment was going to be over, I feel elated, but shocked to find some other guards disappointed somewhat because of the loss of money, but somewhat because they were enjoying themselves.”8

A Final Mixing of the Categories

In the third hour of debriefing a lot of nervous laughter filled the laboratory room when we brought in the former prisoners to meet their captors, indistinguishable in their civilian clothes. Without their uniforms, numbers, and distinctive accessories, they were interchangeable, hard even for me to identify, having gotten so used to seeing them in their prison garb. (Remember, in 1971 there was hair everywhere, shoulder-length hair and long sideburns on most of the students in both categories, some of whom had full mustaches as well.)

The joint session was, in the words of one former prisoner, “stiffly polite,” compared to the more relaxed and friendly prisoners’ session. As each was scoping out the others, one prisoner asked whether some recruits had been selected to be guards because they were taller. Jerry-5486 said, “I had the feeling somewhere along the study that the guards were bigger than the prisoners, and I wonder if the average height of the guards is higher than the average height of the prisoners. I don’t know if that’s true or not or if that was my perception because of the uniforms.” Before I answered “No,” I asked all the students to line up in order of their height, from tallest to shortest. There was an almost perfect height match between the guards on one side and the prisoners on the other. What became evident is that the prisoners had come to perceive the guards as taller than they actually were, as though their guard power provided them with a two-inch shoe lift.

There were not any direct confrontations between abused prisoners and abusing guards, as I had anticipated there might be. In part, this was because such personal challenges would have been awkward in a group of more than twenty people. It is likely, however, that what remained of the strong emotions felt by some of the former prisoners had to be consciously suppressed now that the power grid had been deactivated. It also helped that a few of the guards openly apologized for submerging themselves too deeply into their role and taking it too seriously. Their apologies eased the tension and stood as proxy for the tougher guards who did not apologize openly, like Hellmann.

At this debriefing session, former Tough Guard Arnett, our sociology graduate student, recounted two events that had impressed him:



One was Zimbardo’s observation of “prisoners’” immersion in their inmate roles . . . expressed by people staying inmates even when they said they’d give up their payment if they could be released [paroled]. The other impression is the seeming inability of former “prisoners” at the meeting to believe that “John Wayne” and I, and perhaps other guards (I felt that we were the two most disliked guards) had been completely acting in our roles. Some or many “prisoners” seemed to feel that we were actually sadistic or extremely authoritarian people and that our professions of acting were cover-ups, to hide the real nature of our behavior from them, or ourselves, or both. I am absolutely sure that for myself at least, this was not the case.9



One psychological observation that I offered was about the lack of humor in our prison and the failure to use humor to defuse tension or even to bring some reality to an unreal situation. For example, guards who were not pleased with the extreme behavior of their shift mates could have made a joke at their expense in guard quarters, saying that they should be getting double pay for overacting their role. Or the prisoners might have used humor to pull themselves out of the unreal basement jail by asking the guards what this place had been used for before it became a jail: a pigsty? Or a frat house, maybe? Humor breaks through the pretensions of person and place. However, in the past week there had been none to be found in this sad place.

Before we adjourned, I asked them all to be sure they had completed their final evaluations of the experience they had undergone and to complete some other forms that Curt Banks had available. I also invited them to write a short retrospective diary of the events that stood out in their memory during the following month. They would get a fee for doing so. Finally, they would all be invited back in a few weeks for a “Class of 1971” reunion to review some of the data we had gathered. A slide show and video clips would be available.

It should be added that I maintained contact with many of the participants over a number of years, all of them through correspondence whenever there was a publication or media show of the study. In addition, some of them participated in various television programs that featured our study for decades after this experience, a few even to this day. We will discuss the aftereffects of this experience on them later on.

What Does It Mean to Be a Prisoner or a Guard?

Before we turn in the next chapter to examining some of the objective data we collected over the six days of study and to reflect on the serious ethical issues raised by the experiment, I think it would be useful to review some of the insights we gathered from a selection of our participants.

On Being in the Role of Prisoner

Clay-416: “A good prisoner is one who knows how to strategically unify himself with other prisoners without getting put out of action himself. My cellmate, Jerry[5486], is a good prisoner. There are always bound to be some prisoners struggling to get out and others who are not at that point. Those who are not struggling at the time should learn to protect their interests without being a real obstacle to those who are struggling. A bad prisoner is one who cannot do this, who is only out for himself.”10

Jerry-5486: “The most apparent thing that I noticed was how most of the people in this study derive their sense of identity and well-being from their immediate surroundings rather than from within themselves, and that’s why they broke down—just couldn’t stand the pressure—they had nothing within them to hold up against all of this.”11

Paul-5704: “The way we had to degrade ourselves really brought me down and that’s why we all got docile towards the end of the experiment. I gave up being a reactionary because I could see nothing was being changed by my attitude and behavior. After Stew and Rich [819 and 1037] left, I found myself thinking that I couldn’t change everything that needed changing myself . . . that’s another reason I settled down after they left, to accomplish what I wanted I would have needed others to work with me. I tried to talk to the other prisoners about a strike or something, but they wanted no part of it because of the punishment they had received for the first one.”12

Guard Arnett: “I was profoundly surprised and impressed by the reactions of most of the prisoners to the experimental situation . . . particularly the individual breakdowns which did occur, and the impending ones which I feel surely would have happened had the experiment not been terminated when it was.”13

Doug-8612: “The material conditions, like the guards, the cells, and such stuff, that didn’t matter to me—like when I was nude and in chains, that never bothered me. It was the head part, the psychological part that was the worst. Knowing that I couldn’t get out if I wanted . . . I didn’t like not being able to go to the bathroom when I wanted to . . . . It’s not having the choice that’s the tearing apart thing.”14

Substitute Prisoner Dave-“8612”—our spy, who knew that he was sent into our jail for only one day to find out about the nature of the escape plans—reveals how quickly and totally one can move into the role of prisoner: “The roles were infesting everyone from the lowliest prisoner to the warden himself.” He very quickly identified himself with the prisoners, and in only a single day the simulated imprisonment had an enormous impact on Dave:



I at times felt some guilt at being sent in to fink on these great guys—I was somewhat relieved that there was really nothing to tell about the escape . . . . And when the opportunity to fink did come up—I knew where the handcuff key was after a while—I didn’t tell . . . . I fell asleep that night feeling dirty, guilty, scared. When we were taken to the boiler room (in anticipation of the break in) I had taken off my foot cuff and seriously considered trying to escape (alone I might add) but I did not for fear of getting caught . . . . The experience of one full day as a prisoner had aroused sufficient anxiety to keep me away from the prison for the rest of the week. Even when I returned for the “debriefing” session, I was still feeling extremely anxious—I was not eating very much, felt mildly nauseous all the time, and was more nervous than I can ever remember being. The entire experience was so upsetting to me that I was unable to bring myself to discuss my experiences in depth with anyone—even my wife.15



I should add that we later discovered that the handcuff keys had been stolen from one of the guards by a prisoner. After the incident with the Wednesday-night transfer of all the prisoners up to the fifth-floor storage room, when they were returned to the Yard at 12:30 A.M., two of the prisoners had been cuffed together to prevent their trying to escape. Without the keys to unlock them, I had to call the Stanford Police to remove the cuffs, an embarrassment, to say the least. One of the prisoners had thrown the key into a heating vent. David knew this and never shared that information with any of the staff.

On the Power of the Guard Role

Guard Geoff Landry: “It’s almost like a prison that you create yourself—you get into it, and it’s just that it becomes the definitions you make of yourself, almost become walls, and you want to break out, and you want to be able to tell everyone that, ‘this isn’t really Me at all, and I’m a person who wants to get out and show that I’m free and I do have my own will, and I’m not the sadistic type of person that enjoys this type of thing.”16

Guard Varnish: “This experience was worthwhile for me, absolutely. The idea that two roughly identical groups of college students each in only a week’s time evolved into two totally disparate social groups with one group having and utilizing total power over the other to their detriment is chilling.

“I was surprised at myself . . . . I made them call each other names and cleanout toilets with their bare hands. I practically considered the prisoners ‘cattle,’ and I kept thinking I have to watch out for them in case they try something.”17

Guard Vandy: “My enjoyment in harassing and punishing prisoners was quite unnatural for me because I tend to think of myself as being sympathetic to the injured, especially animals. I think that it was an outgrowth from my total freedom to rule the prisoners, I began to abuse my authority.”18

(An interesting carryover, or carryout, of this newfound guard power is revealed in Warden Jaffe’s log. Vandy had reported to the others on his shift “that he had caught himself bossing his mother around at home.”)

Guard Arnett: “Being superficially tough came easily to me. For one thing, I am an authoritarian person in some ways (even though I strongly dislike the trait in myself and others). Further, I felt that the experiment was important and my being ‘guard-like’ was part of finding out how people react to real oppression . . . . The main influence on my behavior was the feeling, even though vague, that real prison is brutal in that it is dehumanizing. I tried to be that within the constraints of my detachment and controlled commitment . . . . First, I tried to avoid ever being personal or friendly . . . . I tried to be neutral and business like. Also, I was aware from my readings that the boredom and other aspects of prison life can be exploited to make people feel disoriented by being impersonal; giving boring work; punishing all prisoners for ‘bad’ behavior by individuals; demanding perfect execution of trivial commands in exercise and at other times; speaking harshly and mechanically during exercise sessions . . . within a social setting and so very sensitive to those in control of that setting, and I tried to heighten prisoner alienation by using some of those techniques. I could do this in only a limited way, because I didn’t want to be brutal.”19

On Good and Bad Guards

Paul-5704: “I was pleased with John and Geoff [Landry]. They didn’t really get into the guard thing as much as the others. They always remained human beings even when giving punishment to someone. I was surprised that the guards in general accepted their roles as much as they did after being able to go home each day or night.”20

Guard John Landry: “After I talked to the other prisoners, they told me I was a good guard and thanks for being that way. I knew inside I was a shit. Curt [Banks] looked at me and I knew he knew. I knew also that while I was good and just to the prisoners, I failed myself. I let cruelty happen and did nothing except feel guilty and be a nice guy. I honestly didn’t think I could do anything. I didn’t even try. I did what most people do. I sat in the guard’s station and tried to forget about the prisoners.”21

An even more remarkable testimony to the power of this simulated prison experience and its impact on one of the guards whom prisoners saw as the most fair and just, Geoff Landry, the big brother of John Landry, occurred in an audio interview at the end of the study. He surprised us by indicating that he had been thinking of switching roles.

Guard Geoff Landry: “The experience became more than just participating in the experiment. What I mean to say is that if this was an experiment, the results and products were almost too real. When a prisoner gives you a glassy stare, and mumbles inaudibly, you just almost have to perceive the worst. It’s almost because you fear that the worst will happen. It’s almost as if I accepted it would happen, and the slightest indication of anxiety and breakdown is the beginning of the worst possible effects. Specifically, the experience became more than just an experiment when 1037 started acting as though he was breaking down. At this time I was afraid and apprehensive and thought of quitting. And I also was thinking of asking to become a prisoner. I felt as though I didn’t want to become part of the machine that beats down on other men and forces them to conform and continually harasses them. I almost wished that I was being harassed than having to be the harasser.”22

In this context, it is interesting to note that on Wednesday night, this guard had reported to the Warden that his shirt was too tight and was irritating his skin, so he took it off. Obviously, since he had selected it, had tried it on for fit the day before we began, and had worn it for four days with no complaints, his problem was more mental than material. We arranged for him to get a larger size, which he put on reluctantly. He also kept taking off his sunglasses and not remembering where he had put them when the staff asked why he was not following standard guard protocol.

Guard Ceros: “I hated the whole fucking experiment. I walked out the door when the experiment was over. It was too real for me.”23

On the Quiet Rage of Guard Sadism

Doug-8612, in an interview he did later for a student-directed film on our study, eloquently compared the Stanford Prison Experiment with real prisons he had come to know as a staff member working in a California prison:

“The Stanford Prison was a very benign prison situation, and it still caused the guards to become sadistic, prisoners to become hysterical, other prisoners to break out in hives. Here you have a benign situation, and it didn’t work. It promoted everything a regular prison promotes. The guard role promotes sadism. The prisoner role promotes confusion and shame. Anybody can be a guard. It’s harder to be on guard against the impulse to be sadistic. It’s a quiet rage, malevolence, you can keep down but there’s nowhere for it to go; it comes out sideways, sadistically. I think you do have more control as a prisoner. Everybody needs to [experience being] a prisoner. There are real prisoners I have met in jail who are people of exceptional dignity, who did not put down the guards, who were always respectful of the guards, who did not create in the guards a sadistic impulse, who could rise above the shame of the role. They knew how to preserve their dignity in that situation.”24

On the Nature of Prisons

Clay-416: “The guards are as locked in as you are as prisoners. They just have the run of the cellblock, but they have a locked door behind them which they can’t open, and so really you’re all together and what you create, you create together. Prisoners have no society of their own and the guards don’t have any society of their own. It’s one thing and it’s hideous.”25

Guard Ceros: “[When] a prisoner reacted violently toward me, I found that I had to defend myself, not as me but as me the guard . . . . He hated me as the guard. He was reacting to the uniform. I had no choice but to defend myself as a guard. It shocked me . . . . I realized that I was just as much a prisoner as they were. I was just a reaction to their feelings . . . . We were both crushed by the oppressiveness, but we, the guards, had an illusion of freedom. That’s just what it was, an illusion . . . . We all went in slaves to the money. The prisoners soon became slaves to us . . .”26 As Bob Dylan sings in his song “George Jackson,” sometimes the world seems like one big prison yard:



Some of us are prisoners,

The rest of us are guards.




ON CHARACTER TRANSFORMATION IN SIX DAYS

Reviewing some of the statements made before the start of the experiment and then again in our various daily records, we can see some fundamental transitions taking place in the mentality of the guards. A case in point is that of Guard Chuck Burdan, in his own words before, during, and after this experience.

Prior to the Experiment: “As I am a pacifist and non-aggressive individual, I cannot see a time when I might guard and/or maltreat other living things. I hope that I will be chosen as a prisoner rather than a guard. As an anti-establishment person continually involved in non-conforming political and social behavior, I can foresee a time when I may have to fill the role of a prisoner—and I am curious to see my capabilities in that direction.”

After Guard Orientation Meeting: “Buying uniforms at the end of the meeting confirms the game-like atmosphere of this thing. I doubt whether many of us share the expectations of ‘seriousness’ that the experimenters seem to have. I am feeling a certain amount of relief at being only an alternate.”

First Day: “My main fear at the outset of the experiment was that prisoners would see me as a real bastard, as a guard type, as all the things I am not and not the way I envision myself . . . . One of the reasons I have long hair is I don’t want people to envision me in a manner that I am not . . . . Feel sure that the prisoners will make fun of my appearance and evolve my first basic strategy—mainly not to smile at anything they say or do which would be admitting it’s all only a game. I stay outside the cage (while Hellmann and the tall blonde guard finish serving dinner, they seem much more self-assured in their roles than I feel). As I’m bracing myself to enter, I check my sunglasses, pick up my club—which provides a certain power and security—and walk in. I set my mouth rigidly into a semi scowl, determined to hold it there no matter what is said. At cell 3 I stop and setting my voice hard and low say to #5486, ‘What are you smiling at?’ ‘Nothing, Mr. Correctional Officer.’ ‘Well see that you don’t.’ As I walk off I feel stupid.”

Second Day: “Walking from my car I suddenly wanted people to notice my uniform, ‘hey look what I’m doing’ . . . . 5704 asked for a cigarette and I ignored him—because I am a non-smoker and could not empathize . . . . Meanwhile since I was feeling empathetic towards 1037, I determined NOT to talk with him. Later on, I am getting into the habit of hitting walls, chairs and bars [with Billy club] to show my power . . . . After we had Count and Lights Out [Guard Hellmann] and I held a loud conversation about going home to our girlfriends and what we were going to do to them (to irritate the prisoners).”

Third Day (Preparing for the first Visiting Night): “After warning the prisoners not to make any complaints unless they wanted the visit terminated fast, we finally brought in the first parents. I made sure I was one of the guards on the yard, because this was my first chance for the type of manipulative power that I really like—being a very noticed figure with almost complete control over what is said or not. While the parents and prisoners sat in chairs, I sat on the end of the table dangling my feet and contradicting anything I felt like. This was the first part of the experiment I was really enjoying. Prisoner 819 is being obnoxious and bears watching . . . . [Hellmann] and I both admire and dislike. As a guard (actor) he is fantastic, really getting into the sadism of the thing and this bugs me.”

Fourth Day: “The psychologist [Craig Haney] rebukes me for handcuffing and blindfolding a prisoner before leaving the [counseling] office, and I resentfully reply that it is both necessary security and my business anyway . . . . At home I was having more and more trouble describing the reality of the situation.”

Fifth Day: “I harass ‘Sarge’ who continues to stubbornly over-respond to all commands. I have singled him out for special abuse both because he begs for it and because I simply don’t like him. The real trouble starts at dinner. The new prisoner [416] refuses to eat his sausages. We throw him into the Hole ordering him to hold sausages in each hand. We have a crisis of authority; this rebellious conduct potentially undermines the complete control we have over the others. We decide to play upon prisoner solidarity and tell the new one that all the others will be deprived of visitors if he does not eat his dinner. I walk by and slam my stick into the Hole door . . . . I am very angry at this prisoner for causing discomfort and trouble for the others. I decided to force feed him, but he wouldn’t eat. I let the food slide down his face. I didn’t believe it was me doing it. I hated myself for making him eat but I hated him more for not eating.”

Sixth Day: “The experiment is over. I feel elated but am shocked to find some other guards disappointed somewhat because of the loss of money and some because they are enjoying themselves . . . . Talking during the detoxification session was very difficult; everything seems strained and uncomfortable . . . . I get on my bike and ride home through the sunshine. It feels damn good to be out of there.”

Weeks later: “The absolute cruelty of this event (Hellmann’s decision to leave 416 in the Hole all night) does not hit me until weeks later, but it must have hit Phil [Zimbardo] hard along with many other things at this point [that he decided to end the study].27

Another curious character transformation of someone only tangentially associated with our study is found among “additional anecdotes” in the Warden’s Log. Recall my serious psychologist colleague who challenged me in the midst of my frantic efforts to deceive the anticipated intruders by alleging the study had been terminated. He demanded to know, “What is the independent variable?”

Jaffe’s notes indicate that “Dr. B. visited on Tuesday night when the prisoners had been moved to the fifth floor closet. He and his wife went upstairs to see the prisoners. Mrs. B. passed out cupcakes, while Dr. B. made at least two comments ridiculing the prisoners, one concerning their manner of dress, and the other concerning the stench of the place. This pattern of ‘getting into the act’ occurred with almost every outside visitor.”

While his wife gave the participants some “tea and sympathy,” my usually reserved colleague unexpectedly treated these students in a dehumanized way that likely made them feel shamed.

On Hellmann’s “Little Experiments”28

Let’s look back at the Volunteer Background Form that Hellmann completed a week before the start of the experiment in order to get a sense of what he was like in his preguard status. I was amazed to learn that he was only an eighteen-year-old sophomore student, among our youngest participants. His counterpart, Arnett, was one of the oldest. Hellmann came from a middle-class academic family, the youngest sibling of four older sisters and a brother. At six feet two and 175 pounds, with green eyes and blond hair, he was an imposing figure. This young man identified himself as a musician and “a scientist at heart.” His self-description indicated, “I live a natural life and love music and food and other people.” He added, “I have a great love for my fellow human beings.”

In response to the question “What do people like most about you?” Hellmann radiated confidence: “People at first admire me because of my talent and outgoing personality. Few know my real capabilities at human relationships.”

In response to the negative version, “What do people like least about you?” Hellmann gave us an insight into this young man’s complex character and a hint of what is to come when he is given absolute power. He wrote, “My impatience with stupidity, a total disregard for people whose life style I do not agree with. My exploitation of some people, my bluntness, my confidence.” Finally, let’s add to the mix that this volunteer said that he preferred to be assigned to the prisoner role rather than to be a guard “because people resent guards.”

With that character reference in mind, it is now instructive to review his postexperiment reflections on what he perceived his role was in this study.

Guard Hellmann: “Yes it has been more than an experiment. I had a chance at testing people’s capabilities, pushing them to the breaking point under the guise of a correctional officer. It was not pleasant but I felt compelled out of my own fascination to test their reactions. I was conducting experiments on my own on many occasions.”29

“The best thing about the experiment was that I seemed to be the catalyst that brought out some startling results that gained interest from TV and the press . . . . I’m sorry if I caused more trouble than you wanted—It was an experiment of my own.”30

“The worst thing about the experiment was that so many people took me so seriously and that I made them enemies. My words affected them, [the prisoners] seemed to lose touch with the reality of the experiment.”31

A month after our study was terminated, this former guard was interviewed along with former prisoner Clay-416, his nemesis. They interacted as part of a TV documentary about our study on NBC’s Chronolog, a forerunner of 60 Minutes. It was titled, “819 Did a Bad Thing.”

After Hellmann described his transformation into the guard role, Clay went on the offensive, finally being able to add to the adage of that era, “What comes around, goes around.”

Hellmann: “Once you put a uniform on and are given a role, I mean, a job, saying ‘Your job is to keep these people in line,’ then you’re certainly not the same person if you’re in street clothes and in a different role. You really become that person once you put on the khaki uniform, you put on the glasses, you take the nightstick, and you act the part. That’s your costume, and you have to act accordingly when you put it on.”

Clay: “It harms me, I mean harms, I mean in the present tense, it harms me.”

Hellmann: “How did it harm you? How does it harm you? Just to think that people can be like that?”

Clay: “Yeah. It let me in on some knowledge that I’ve never experienced firsthand. I’ve read about it, I’ve read a lot about it. But I’ve never experienced it first hand. I’ve never seen anyone turn that way. And I know that you’re a nice guy. You know? You understand?”

Hellmann: [Smiling and shaking his head] “You don’t know that.”

Clay: “I do, I do know that you’re a nice guy. I don’t get bad—”

Hellmann: “Then why do you hate me?”

Clay: “Because I know what you can turn into. I know what you’re willing to do if you say, ‘Oh well, I’m not going to hurt anybody.’ ‘Oh well, it’s a limited situation, or it’s over in two weeks.’”

Hellmann: “Well, you in that position, what would you have done?”

Clay (slowly and carefully enunciating each word): I don’t know. I can’t tell you that I know what I’d do.”

Hellmann: “Would you—”

Clay (now talking over Hellmann): “I don’t think, I don’t believe, I would have been as inventive as you. I don’t think I would have applied as much imagination to what I was doing. Do you understand?”

Hellmann: “Yes, I—”

Clay [interrupting and seeming to enjoy his new sense of power]: “I think I would have been a guard, I don’t think it would have been such a masterpiece!”

Hellmann: “I didn’t see where it was really harmful. It was degrading, and that was part of my particular little experiment to see how I could, uh—”

Clay (in disbelief): “Your particular little experiment? Why don’t you tell me about that?”

Hellmann: “I was running little experiments of my own.”

Clay: “Tell me about your little experiments. I’m curious.”

Hellmann: “Okay, I wanted to see just what kind of verbal abuse that people can take before they start objecting, before they start lashing back, under the circumstances. And it surprised me that no one said anything to stop me. No one said, ‘Jeez, you can’t say those things to me, those things are sick.’ Nobody said that, they just accepted what I said. I said, ‘Go tell that man to his face that he’s the scum of the earth,” and they’d do it without question. They’d do push-ups without question, they’d sit in the Hole, they’d abuse each other, and here they’re supposed to be together as a unit in jail, but here they’re abusing each other because I requested them to and no one questioned my authority at all. And it really shocked me. [His eyes get teary.] Why didn’t people say something when I started to abuse people? I started to get so profane, and still, people didn’t say anything. Why?”

Why indeed?





