THE ART OF
DECEPTION
Controlling the Human Element of Security

KEVIN D. MITNICK
& William L. Simon

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F





01237124 FM.F





THE ART OF
DECEPTION
Controlling the Human Element of Security

KEVIN D. MITNICK
& William L. Simon

237124 FM.F





Publisher: Robert Ipsen
Editor: Carol Long
Developmental Editor: Nancy Stevenson
Managing Editor: John Atkins
Interior Design: Marie Kristine Parial-Leonardo
Text Design & Composition: Wiley Composition Services
Chart Design: Stacey Kirkland
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks.
In all instances where Wiley Publishing, Inc., is aware of a claim, the product names appear in
initial capital or ALL CAPITAL LETTERS. Readers, however, should contact the appropriate
companies for more complete information regarding trademarks and registration.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Copyright © 2002 by Kevin D. Mitnick. All rights reserved.
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470. Requests to the
Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Legal Department, Wiley Publishing, Inc.,
10475 Crosspoint Blvd., Indianapolis, IN 46256, (317) 572-3447, fax (317) 572-4447,
Email: permcoordinator@wiley.com.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other
damages.
For general information on our other products and services please contact our Customer
Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books.
ISBN: 0-471-23712-4
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

01237124 FM.F





For Reba Vartanian, Shelly Jaffe, Chickie Leventhal, and Mitchell
Mitnick, and for the late Alan Mitnick, Adam Mitnick,
and Jack Biello
For Arynne, Victoria, and David, Sheldon,
Vincent, and Elena

01237124 FM.F





Social Engineering

s

ocial engineering uses influence and persuasion to deceive people
by convincing them that the social engineer is someone he is not,
or by manipulation. As a result, the social engineer is able to take
advantage of people to obtain information with or without the use of
technology.

contents

1

Foreword

vii

Preface

ix

Introduction

xv

Part 1

1

Behind the Scenes

Chapter 1

Part 2

Security’s Weakest Link

The Art of the Attacker

3

13

Chapter 2

When Innocuous Information Isn’t

15

Chapter 3

The Direct Attack: Just Asking for It

31

Chapter 4

Building Trust

41

Chapter 5

“Let Me Help You”

55

Chapter 6

“Can You Help Me?”

77

Chapter 7

Phony Sites and Dangerous Attachments

93

Chapter 8

Using Sympathy, Guilt, and Intimidation

105

Chapter 9

The Reverse Sting

133

Part 3

Intruder Alert

147

Chapter 10

Entering the Premises

149

Chapter 11

Combining Technology and Social Engineering

173

Chapter 12

Attacks on the Entry-Level Employee

195

Chapter 13

Clever Cons

209

Chapter 14

Industrial Espionage

225

Part 4

Contents

vi

Raising the Bar

243

Chapter 15

Information Security Awareness and Training

245

Chapter 16

Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

259

Security at a Glance

331

Sources

339

Acknowledgments

341

Index

347

foreword

w

e humans are born with an inner drive to explore the nature
of our surroundings. As young men, both Kevin Mitnick and
I were intensely curious about the world and eager to prove
ourselves. We were rewarded often in our attempts to learn new things,
solve puzzles, and win at games. But at the same time, the world around
us taught us rules of behavior that constrained our inner urge toward free
exploration. For our boldest scientists and technological entrepreneurs, as
well as for people like Kevin Mitnick, following this inner urge offers the
greatest thrills, letting us accomplish things that others believe cannot be
done.
Kevin Mitnick is one of the finest people I know. Ask him, and he will
say forthrightly that what he used to do—social engineering—involves
conning people. But Kevin is no longer a social engineer. And even when
he was, his motive never was to enrich himself or damage others. That’s
not to say that there aren’t dangerous and destructive criminals out there
who use social engineering to cause real harm. In fact, that’s exactly why
Kevin wrote this book—to warn you about them.
The Art of Deception shows how vulnerable we all are—government,
business, and each of us personally—to the intrusions of the social engineer. In this security-conscious era, we spend huge sums on technology to
protect our computer networks and data. This book points out how easy
it is to trick insiders and circumvent all this technological protection.
Whether you work in business or government, this book provides a
powerful road map to help you understand how social engineers work and
what you can do to foil them. Using fictionalized stories that are both
entertaining and eye-opening, Kevin and coauthor Bill Simon bring to life
the techniques of the social engineering underworld. After each story,
they offer practical guidelines to help you guard against the breaches and
threats they’ve described.

Technological security leaves major gaps that people like Kevin can help
us close. Read this book and you may finally realize that we all need to
turn to the Mitnick’s among us for guidance.
— Steve Wozniak

Foreword

viii

preface

s

ome hackers destroy people’s files or entire hard drives; they’re
called crackers or vandals. Some novice hackers don’t bother learning the technology, but simply download hacker tools to break
into computer systems; they’re called script kiddies. More experienced
hackers with programming skills develop hacker programs and post them
to the Web and to bulletin board systems. And then there are individuals
who have no interest in the technology, but use the computer merely as a
tool to aid them in stealing money, goods, or services.
Despite the media-created myth of Kevin Mitnick, I am not a malicious
hacker.
But I’m getting ahead of myself.

STARTING OUT
My path was probably set early in life. I was a happy-go-lucky kid, but
bored. After my father split when I was three, my mother worked as a
waitress to support us. To see me then—an only child being raised by a
mother who put in long, harried days on a sometimes-erratic schedule—
would have been to see a youngster on his own almost all his waking
hours. I was my own babysitter.
Growing up in a San Fernando Valley community gave me the whole of
Los Angeles to explore, and by the age of twelve I had discovered a way to
travel free throughout the whole greater L.A. area. I realized one day while
riding the bus that the security of the bus transfer I had purchased relied on
the unusual pattern of the paper-punch that the drivers used to mark day,
time, and route on the transfer slips. A friendly driver, answering my carefully planted question, told me where to buy that special type of punch.
The transfers are meant to let you change buses and continue a journey
to your destination, but I worked out how to use them to travel anywhere
I wanted to go for free. Obtaining blank transfers was a walk in the park.

The trash bins at the bus terminals were always filled with only-partlyused books of transfers that the drivers tossed away at the end of their
shifts. With a pad of blanks and the punch, I could mark my own transfers and travel anywhere that L.A. buses went. Before long, I had all but
memorized the bus schedules of the entire system. (This was an early
example of my surprising memory for certain types of information; I can
still, today, remember phone numbers, passwords, and other seemingly
trivial details as far back as my childhood.)
Another personal interest that surfaced at an early age was my fascination with performing magic. Once I learned how a new trick worked, I
would practice, practice, and practice some more until I mastered it. To
an extent, it was through magic that I discovered the enjoyment in gaining secret knowledge.

Preface

x

From Phone Phreak to Hacker
My first encounter with what I would eventually learn to call social engineering came about during my high school years when I met another
student who was caught up in a hobby called phone phreaking. Phone
phreaking is a type of hacking that allows you to explore the telephone
network by exploiting the phone systems and phone company employees.
He showed me neat tricks he could do with a telephone, like obtaining
any information the phone company had on any customer, and using a
secret test number to make long-distance calls for free. (Actually it was
free only to us. I found out much later that it wasn’t a secret test number
at all. The calls were, in fact, being billed to some poor company’s MCI
account.)
That was my introduction to social engineering—my kindergarten, so
to speak. My friend and another phone phreaker I met shortly thereafter
let me listen in as they each made pretext calls to the phone company. I
heard the things they said that made them sound believable; I learned
about different phone company offices, lingo, and procedures. But that
“training” didn’t last long; it didn’t have to. Soon I was doing it all on my
own, learning as I went, doing it even better than my first teachers.
The course my life would follow for the next fifteen years had been set.
In high school, one of my all-time favorite pranks was gaining unauthorized access to the telephone switch and changing the class of service
of a fellow phone phreak. When he’d attempt to make a call from home,
he’d get a message telling him to deposit a dime because the telephone
company switch had received input that indicated he was calling from a
pay phone.

Becoming a Social Engineer
Some people get out of bed each morning dreading their daily work routine at the proverbial salt mines. I’ve been lucky enough to enjoy my work.
In particular, you can’t imagine the challenge, reward, and pleasure I had
in the time I spent as a private investigator. I was honing my talents in the
performance art called social engineering (getting people to do things they
wouldn’t ordinarily do for a stranger) and being paid for it.
For me it wasn’t difficult becoming proficient in social engineering. My
father’s side of the family had been in the sales field for generations, so the
art of influence and persuasion might have been an inherited trait. When
you combine that trait with an inclination for deceiving people, you have
the profile of a typical social engineer.

xi
Preface

I became absorbed in everything about telephones, not only the electronics, switches, and computers, but also the corporate organization, the
procedures, and the terminology. After a while, I probably knew more
about the phone system than any single employee. And I had developed
my social engineering skills to the point that, at seventeen years old, I was
able to talk most telco employees into almost anything, whether I was
speaking with them in person or by telephone.
My much-publicized hacking career actually started when I was in high
school. While I cannot describe the detail here, suffice it to say that one
of the driving forces in my early hacks was to be accepted by the guys in
the hacker group.
Back then we used the term hacker to mean a person who spent a great
deal of time tinkering with hardware and software, either to develop more
efficient programs or to bypass unnecessary steps and get the job done
more quickly. The term has now become a pejorative, carrying the meaning of “malicious criminal.” In these pages I use the term the way I have
always used it—in its earlier, more benign sense.
After high school I studied computers at the Computer Learning Center
in Los Angeles. Within a few months, the school’s computer manager realized I had found vulnerability in the operating system and gained full
administrative privileges on their IBM minicomputer. The best computer
experts on their teaching staff couldn’t figure out how I had done this. In
what may have been one of the earliest examples of “hire the hacker,” I
was given an offer I couldn’t refuse: Do an honors project to enhance the
school’s computer security, or face suspension for hacking the system. Of
course, I chose to do the honors project, and ended up graduating cum
laude with honors.

You might say there are two specialties within the job classification of
con artist. Somebody who swindles and cheats people out of their money
belongs to one sub-specialty, the grifter. Somebody who uses deception,
influence, and persuasion against businesses, usually targeting their information, belongs to the other sub-specialty, the social engineer. From the
time of my bus-transfer trick, when I was too young to know there was
anything wrong with what I was doing, I had begun to recognize a talent
for finding out the secrets I wasn’t supposed to have. I built on that talent
by using deception, knowing the lingo, and developing a well-honed skill
of manipulation.
One way I worked on developing the skills of my craft, if I may call it a
craft, was to pick out some piece of information I didn’t really care about
and see if I could talk somebody on the other end of the phone into providing it, just to improve my skills. In the same way I used to practice my
magic tricks, I practiced pretexting. Through these rehearsals, I soon found
that I could acquire virtually any information I targeted.
As I described in Congressional testimony before Senators Lieberman
and Thompson years later:

Preface

xii

I have gained unauthorized access to computer systems at some of the
largest corporations on the planet, and have successfully penetrated some
of the most resilient computer systems ever developed. I have used both
technical and nontechnical means to obtain the source code to various
operating systems and telecommunications devices to study their vulnerabilities and their inner workings.
All of this activity was really to satisfy my own curiosity; to see what I
could do; and find out secret information about operating systems, cell
phones, and anything else that stirred my curiosity.

FINAL THOUGHTS
I’ve acknowledged since my arrest that the actions I took were illegal, and
that I committed invasions of privacy.
My misdeeds were motivated by curiosity. I wanted to know as much as
I could about how phone networks worked and the ins-and-outs of computer security. I went from being a kid who loved to perform magic tricks
to becoming the world’s most notorious hacker, feared by corporations and
the government. As I reflect back on my life for the last 30 years, I admit I
made some extremely poor decisions, driven by my curiosity, the desire to
learn about technology, and the need for a good intellectual challenge.

I’m a changed person now. I’m turning my talents and the extensive
knowledge I’ve gathered about information security and social engineering tactics to helping government, businesses, and individuals prevent,
detect, and respond to information-security threats.
This book is one more way that I can use my experience to help others
avoid the efforts of the malicious information thieves of the world. I think
you will find the stories enjoyable, eye-opening, and educational.

xiii
Preface

01237124 FM.F





01237124 FM.F





introduction

t

his book contains a wealth of information about information security and social engineering. To help you find your way, here’s a quick
look at how this book is organized:
In Part 1 I’ll reveal security’s weakest link and show you why you and
your company are at risk from social engineering attacks.
In Part 2 you’ll see how social engineers toy with your trust, your desire
to be helpful, your sympathy, and your human gullibility to get what they
want. Fictional stories of typical attacks will demonstrate that social engineers can wear many hats and many faces. If you think you’ve never
encountered one, you’re probably wrong. Will you recognize a scenario
you’ve experienced in these stories and wonder if you had a brush with
social engineering? You very well might. But once you’ve read Chapters 2
through 9, you’ll know how to get the upper hand when the next social
engineer comes calling.
Part 3 is the part of the book where you see how the social engineer ups
the ante, in made-up stories that show how he can step onto your corporate premises, steal the kind of secret that can make or break your company, and thwart your hi-tech security measures. The scenarios in this
section will make you aware of threats that range from simple employee
revenge to cyber terrorism. If you value the information that keeps your
business running and the privacy of your data, you’ll want to read
Chapters 10 through 14 from beginning to end.
It’s important to note that unless otherwise stated, the anecdotes in this
book are purely fictional.
In Part 4 I talk the corporate talk about how to prevent successful social
engineering attacks on your organization. Chapter 15 provides a blueprint
for a successful security-training program. And Chapter 16 might just save
your neck—it’s a complete security policy you can customize for your
organization and implement right away to keep your company and information safe.

01237124 FM.F





Finally, I’ve provided a Security at a Glance section, which includes
checklists, tables, and charts that summarize key information you can use
to help your employees foil a social engineering attack on the job. These
tools also provide valuable information you can use in devising your own
security-training program.
Throughout the book you’ll also find several useful elements: Lingo
boxes provide definitions of social engineering and computer hacker
terminology; Mitnick Messages offer brief words of wisdom to help
strengthen your security strategy; and notes and sidebars give interesting
background or additional information.

Introduction

xvi

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F





1

part

behind the
scenes

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F





02237124 Part01/Ch01.F





