chapter

1

Security’s Weakest Link

a

company may have purchased the best security technologies that
money can buy, trained their people so well that they lock up all
their secrets before going home at night, and hired building
guards from the best security firm in the business.
That company is still totally vulnerable.
Individuals may follow every best-security practice recommended by the
experts, slavishly install every recommended security product, and be
thoroughly vigilant about proper system configuration and applying security patches.
Those individuals are still completely vulnerable.

THE HUMAN FACTOR
Testifying before Congress not long ago, I explained that I could often get
passwords and other pieces of sensitive information from companies by
pretending to be someone else and just asking for it.
It’s natural to yearn for a feeling of absolute safety, leading many people
to settle for a false sense of security. Consider the responsible and loving
homeowner who has a Medico, a tumbler lock known as being pickproof,
installed in his front door to protect his wife, his children, and his home.
He’s now comfortable that he has made his family much safer against
intruders. But what about the intruder who breaks a window, or cracks the
code to the garage door opener? How about installing a robust security
system? Better, but still no guarantee. Expensive locks or no, the homeowner remains vulnerable.
Why? Because the human factor is truly security’s weakest link.

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F

Chapter 1

4





Security is too often merely an illusion, an illusion sometimes made
even worse when gullibility, naïveté, or ignorance come into play. The
world’s most respected scientist of the twentieth century, Albert Einstein,
is quoted as saying, “Only two things are infinite, the universe and human
stupidity, and I’m not sure about the former.” In the end, social engineering attacks can succeed when people are stupid or, more commonly,
simply ignorant about good security practices. With the same attitude as
our security-conscious homeowner, many information technology (IT)
professionals hold to the misconception that they’ve made their companies largely immune to attack because they’ve deployed standard security
products—firewalls, intrusion detection systems, or stronger authentication devices such as time-based tokens or biometric smart cards. Anyone
who thinks that security products alone offer true security is settling for
the illusion of security. It’s a case of living in a world of fantasy: They will
inevitably, later if not sooner, suffer a security incident.
As noted security consultant Bruce Schneier puts it, “Security is not a
product, it’s a process.” Moreover, security is not a technology problem—
it’s a people and management problem.
As developers invent continually better security technologies, making it
increasingly difficult to exploit technical vulnerabilities, attackers will turn
more and more to exploiting the human element. Cracking the human
firewall is often easy, requires no investment beyond the cost of a phone
call, and involves minimal risk.

A CLASSIC CASE OF DECEPTION
What’s the greatest threat to the security of your business assets? That’s
easy: the social engineer—an unscrupulous magician who has you watching his left hand while with his right he steals your secrets. This character
is often so friendly, glib, and obliging that you’re grateful for having
encountered him.
Take a look at an example of social engineering. Not many people today
still remember the young man named Stanley Mark Rifkin and his little
adventure with the now defunct Security Pacific National Bank in Los
Angeles. Accounts of his escapade vary, and Rifkin (like me) has never told
his own story, so the following is based on published reports.
Code Breaking
One day in 1978, Rifkin moseyed over to Security Pacific’s authorizedpersonnel-only wire-transfer room, where the staff sent and received transfers totaling several billion dollars every day.

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F





He was working for a company under contract to develop a backup system for the wire room’s data in case their main computer ever went down.
That role gave him access to the transfer procedures, including how bank
officials arranged for a transfer to be sent. He had learned that bank officers who were authorized to order wire transfers would be given a closely
guarded daily code each morning to use when calling the wire room.
In the wire room the clerks saved themselves the trouble of trying to
memorize each day’s code: They wrote down the code on a slip of paper
and posted it where they could see it easily. This particular November day
Rifkin had a specific reason for his visit. He wanted to get a glance at that
paper.
Arriving in the wire room, he took some notes on operating procedures,
supposedly to make sure the backup system would mesh properly with the
regular systems. Meanwhile, he surreptitiously read the security code from
the posted slip of paper, and memorized it. A few minutes later he walked
out. As he said afterward, he felt as if he had just won the lottery.

5
Security’s Weakest Link

There’s This Swiss Bank Account . . .
Leaving the room at about 3 o’clock in the afternoon, he headed straight
for the pay phone in the building’s marble lobby, where he deposited a
coin and dialed into the wire-transfer room. He then changed hats, transforming himself from Stanley Rifkin, bank consultant, into Mike Hansen,
a member of the bank’s International Department.
According to one source, the conversation went something like this:
“Hi, this is Mike Hansen in International,” he said to the young woman
who answered the phone.
She asked for the office number. That was standard procedure, and he
was prepared: “286,” he said.
The girl then asked, “Okay, what’s the code?”
Rifkin has said that his adrenaline-powered heartbeat “picked up its
pace” at this point. He responded smoothly, “4789.” Then he went on to
give instructions for wiring “Ten million, two-hundred thousand dollars
exactly” to the Irving Trust Company in New York, for credit of the
Wozchod Handels Bank of Zurich, Switzerland, where he had already
established an account.
The girl then said, “Okay, I got that. And now I need the interoffice settlement number.”
Rifkin broke out in a sweat; this was a question he hadn’t anticipated,
something that had slipped through the cracks in his research. But he

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F





managed to stay in character, acted as if everything was fine, and on the
spot answered without missing a beat, “Let me check; I’ll call you right
back.” He changed hats once again to call another department at the
bank, this time claiming to be an employee in the wire-transfer room. He
obtained the settlement number and called the girl back.
She took the number and said, “Thanks.” (Under the circumstances, her
thanking him has to be considered highly ironic.)

Chapter 1

6

Achieving Closure
A few days later Rifkin flew to Switzerland, picked up his cash, and
handed over $8 million to a Russian agency for a pile of diamonds. He
flew back, passing through U.S. Customs with the stones hidden in a
money belt. He had pulled off the biggest bank heist in history—and
done it without using a gun, even without a computer. Oddly, his caper
eventually made it into the pages of the Guinness Book of World Records in
the category of “biggest computer fraud.”
Stanley Rifkin had used the art of deception—the skills and techniques
that are today called social engineering. Thorough planning and a good
gift of gab is all it really took.
And that’s what this book is about—the techniques of social engineering (at which yours truly is proficient) and how to defend against their
being used at your company.

THE NATURE OF THE THREAT
The Rifkin story makes perfectly clear how misleading our sense of security can be. Incidents like this—okay, maybe not $10 million heists, but
harmful incidents nonetheless—are happening every day. You may be losing money right now, or somebody may be stealing new product plans,
and you don’t even know it. If it hasn’t already happened to your company,
it’s not a question of if it will happen, but when.
A Growing Concern
The Computer Security Institute, in its 2001 survey of computer crime,
reported that 85 percent of responding organizations had detected computer security breaches in the preceding twelve months. That’s an
astounding number: Only fifteen out of every hundred organizations
responding were able to say that they had not had a security breach during the year. Equally astounding was the number of organizations that
reported that they had experienced financial losses due to computer

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F





Deceptive Practices
There’s a popular saying that a secure computer is one that’s turned off.
Clever, but false: The pretexter simply talks someone into going into the
office and turning that computer on. An adversary who wants your information can obtain it, usually in any one of several different ways. It’s just
a matter of time, patience, personality, and persistence. That’s where the
art of deception comes in.
To defeat security measures, an attacker, intruder, or social engineer
must find a way to deceive a trusted user into revealing information, or
trick an unsuspecting mark into providing him with access. When trusted
employees are deceived, influenced, or manipulated into revealing sensitive information, or performing actions that create a security hole for the
attacker to slip through, no technology in the world can protect a business. Just as cryptanalysts are sometimes able to reveal the plain text of a
coded message by finding a weakness that lets them bypass the encryption

7
Security’s Weakest Link

breaches: 64 percent. Well over half the organizations had suffered financially. In a single year.
My own experiences lead me to believe that the numbers in reports like
this are somewhat inflated. I’m suspicious of the agenda of the people conducting the survey. But that’s not to say that the damage isn’t extensive; it
is. Those who fail to plan for a security incident are planning for failure.
Commercial security products deployed in most companies are mainly
aimed at providing protection against the amateur computer intruder, like
the youngsters known as script kiddies. In fact, these wannabe hackers
with downloaded software are mostly just a nuisance. The greater losses,
the real threats, come from sophisticated attackers with well-defined
targets who are motivated by financial gain. These people focus on one
target at a time rather than, like the amateurs, trying to infiltrate as many
systems as possible. While amateur computer intruders simply go for
quantity, the professionals target information of quality and value.
Technologies like authentication devices (for proving identity), access
control (for managing access to files and system resources), and intrusion
detection systems (the electronic equivalent of burglar alarms) are necessary to a corporate security program. Yet it’s typical today for a company
to spend more money on coffee than on deploying countermeasures to
protect the organization against security attacks.
Just as the criminal mind cannot resist temptation, the hacker mind is
driven to find ways around powerful security technology safeguards. And in
many cases, they do that by targeting the people who use the technology.

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F





technology, social engineers use deception practiced on your employees to
bypass security technology.

ABUSE OF TRUST
In most cases, successful social engineers have strong people skills. They’re
charming, polite, and easy to like—social traits needed for establishing
rapid rapport and trust. An experienced social engineer is able to gain
access to virtually any targeted information by using the strategies and
tactics of his craft.
Savvy technologists have painstakingly developed information-security
solutions to minimize the risks connected with the use of computers, yet
left unaddressed the most significant vulnerability, the human factor.
Despite our intellect, we humans—you, me, and everyone else—remain
the most severe threat to each other’s security.

Chapter 1

8

Our National Character
We’re not mindful of the threat, especially in the Western world. In the
United States most of all, we’re not trained to be suspicious of each other.
We are taught to “love thy neighbor” and have trust and faith in each
other. Consider how difficult it is for neighborhood watch organizations
to get people to lock their homes and cars. This sort of vulnerability is
obvious, and yet it seems to be ignored by many who prefer to live in a
dream world—until they get burned.
We know that all people are not kind and honest, but too often we live
as if they were. This lovely innocence has been the fabric of the lives of
Americans and it’s painful to give it up. As a nation we have built into our
concept of freedom that the best places to live are those where locks and
keys are the least necessary.
Most people go on the assumption that they will not be deceived by
others, based upon a belief that the probability of being deceived is very
low; the attacker, understanding this common belief, makes his request
sound so reasonable that it raises no suspicion, all the while exploiting the
victim’s trust.
Organizational Innocence
That innocence that is part of our national character was evident back
when computers were first being connected remotely. Recall that the
ARPANet (the Defense Department’s Advanced Research Projects Agency

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F





TERRORISTS AND DECEPTION
Of course, deception isn’t an exclusive tool of the social engineer. Physical
terrorism makes the biggest news, and we have come to realize as never

9
Security’s Weakest Link

Network), the predecessor of the Internet, was designed as a way of
sharing research information between government, research, and educational institutions. The goal was information freedom, as well as technological advancement. Many educational institutions therefore set up
early computer systems with little or no security. One noted software
libertarian, Richard Stallman, even refused to protect his account with a
password.
But with the Internet being used for electronic commerce, the dangers
of weak security in our wired world have changed dramatically. Deploying
more technology is not going to solve the human security problem.
Just look at our airports today. Security has become paramount, yet
we’re alarmed by media reports of travelers who have been able to circumvent security and carry potential weapons past checkpoints. How is
this possible during a time when our airports are on such a state of alert?
Are the metal detectors failing? No. The problem isn’t the machines. The
problem is the human factor: The people manning the machines. Airport
officials can marshal the National Guard and install metal detectors and
facial recognition systems, but educating the frontline security staff on
how to properly screen passengers is much more likely to help.
The same problem exists within government, business, and educational
institutions throughout the world. Despite the efforts of security professionals, information everywhere remains vulnerable and will continue to
be seen as a ripe target by attackers with social engineering skills, until the
weakest link in the security chain, the human link, has been strengthened.
Now more than ever we must learn to stop wishful thinking and become
more aware of the techniques that are being used by those who attempt to
attack the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of our computer systems and networks. We’ve come to accept the need for defensive driving;
it’s time to accept and learn the practice of defensive computing.
The threat of a break-in that violates your privacy, your mind, or your
company’s information systems may not seem real until it happens. To
avoid such a costly dose of reality, we all need to become aware, educated,
vigilant, and aggressively protective of our information assets, our own
personal information, and our nation’s critical infrastructures. And we
must implement those precautions today.

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F

Chapter 1

10





before that the world is a dangerous place. Civilization is, after all, just a
thin veneer.
The attacks on New York and Washington, D.C., in September 2001
infused sadness and fear into the hearts of every one of us—not just
Americans, but well-meaning people of all nations. We’re now alerted to
the fact that there are obsessive terrorists located around the globe, welltrained and waiting to launch further attacks against us.
The recently intensified effort by our government has increased the levels of our security consciousness. We need to stay alert, on guard against
all forms of terrorism. We need to understand how terrorists treacherously
create false identities, assume roles as students and neighbors, and melt
into the crowd. They mask their true beliefs while they plot against us—
practicing tricks of deception similar to those you will read about in these
pages.
And while, to the best of my knowledge, terrorists have not yet used
social engineering ruses to infiltrate corporations, water-treatment plants,
electrical generation facilities, or other vital components of our national
infrastructure, the potential is there. It’s just too easy. The security awareness and security policies that I hope will be put into place and enforced
by corporate senior management because of this book will come none too
soon.

ABOUT THIS BOOK
Corporate security is a question of balance. Too little security leaves your
company vulnerable, but an overemphasis on security gets in the way of
attending to business, inhibiting the company’s growth and prosperity.
The challenge is to achieve a balance between security and productivity.
Other books on corporate security focus on hardware and software technology, and do not adequately cover the most serious threat of all: human
deception. The purpose of this book, in contrast, is to help you understand how you, your coworkers, and others in your company are being
manipulated, and the barriers you can erect to stop being victims. The
book focuses mainly on the non-technical methods that hostile intruders
use to steal information, compromise the integrity of information that is
believed to be safe but isn’t, or destroy company work product.
My task is made more difficult by a simple truth: Every reader will have
been manipulated by the grand experts of all time in social engineering—
their parents. They found ways to get you—“for your own good”—to do

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F





what they thought best. Parents become great storytellers in the same way
that social engineers skillfully develop very plausible stories, reasons, and
justifications for achieving their goals. Yes, we were all molded by our parents: benevolent (and sometimes not so benevolent) social engineers.
Conditioned by that training, we have become vulnerable to manipulation. We would live a difficult life if we had to be always on our guard,
mistrustful of others, concerned that we might become the dupe of someone trying to take advantage of us. In a perfect world we would implicitly
trust others, confident that the people we encounter are going to be honest and trustworthy. But we do not live in a perfect world, and so we have
to exercise a standard of vigilance to repel the deceptive efforts of our
adversaries.
The main portions of this book, Parts 2 and 3, are made up of stories
that show you social engineers in action. In these sections you’ll read
about:
•

•

•

•

You might think as you read some of the stories in Parts 2 and 3 that
they’re not possible, that no one could really succeed in getting away with
the lies, dirty tricks, and schemes described in these pages. The reality is
that in every case, these stories depict events that can and do happen;
many of them are happening every day somewhere on the planet, maybe
even to your business as you read this book.

11
Security’s Weakest Link

•

What phone phreaks discovered years ago: A slick method
for getting an unlisted phone number from the telephone
company.
Several different methods used by attackers to convince even
alert, suspicious employees to reveal their computer usernames
and passwords.
How an Operations Center manager cooperated in allowing an attacker to steal his company’s most secret product
information.
The methods of an attacker who deceived a lady into downloading software that spies on every keystroke she makes and
emails the details to him.
How private investigators get information about your company, and about you personally, that I can practically guarantee will send a chill up your spine.

02237124 Part01/Ch01.F





The material in this book will be a real eye-opener when it comes to protecting your business, but also personally deflecting the advances of a
social engineer to protect the integrity of information in your private life.
In Part 4 of this book I switch gears. My goal here is to help you create
the necessary business policies and awareness training to minimize the
chances of your employees ever being duped by a social engineer.
Understanding the strategies, methods, and tactics of the social engineer
will help prepare you to deploy reasonable controls to safeguard your IT
assets, without undermining your company’s productivity.
In short, I’ve written this book to raise your awareness about the serious
threat posed by social engineering, and to help you make sure that your
company and its employees are less likely to be exploited in this way.
Or perhaps I should say, far less likely to be exploited ever again.

Chapter 1

12

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





2

part

the art of the
attacker

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





