chapter

12

Attacks on the
Entry-Level Employee

a

s many of the stories here demonstrate, the skilled social engineer
often targets lower-level personnel in the organizational hierarchy.
It can be easy to manipulate these people into revealing seemingly
innocuous information that the attacker uses to advance one step closer to
obtaining more sensitive company information.
An attacker targets entry-level employees because they are typically
unaware of the value of specific company information or of the possible
results of certain actions. Also, they tend to be easily influenced by some
of the more common social engineering approaches—a caller who invokes
authority; a person who seems friendly and likeable; a person who appears
to know people in the company who are known to the victim; a request
that the attacker claims is urgent; or the inference that the victim will gain
some kind of favor or recognition.
Here are some illustrations of the attack on the lower-level employee in
action.

THE HELPFUL SECURITY GUARD
Swindlers hope to find a person who’s greedy because they are the ones
most likely to fall for a con game. Social engineers, when targeting someone such as a member of a sanitation crew or a security guard, hope to find
someone who is good-natured, friendly, and trusting of others. They are
the ones most likely to be willing to help. That’s just what the attacker had
in mind in the following story.

13237124 Ch12.F





Elliot’s View
Date/time: 3:26 A.M. on a Tuesday morning in February 1998.
Location: Marchand Microsystems facility, Nashua, New Hampshire

Elliot Staley knew he wasn’t supposed to leave his station when he wasn’t
on his scheduled rounds. But it was the middle of the night, for crying out
loud, and he hadn’t seen a single person since he had come on duty. And
it was nearly time to make his rounds anyway. The poor guy on the telephone sounded like he really needed help. And it makes a person feel fine
when they can do a little good for somebody.

Chapter 12

196

Bill’s Story
Bill Goodrock had a simple goal, one he had held on to, unaltered, since
age twelve: to retire by age twenty-four, not ever touching a penny of his
trust fund. To show his father, the almighty and unforgiving banker, that
he could be a success on his own.
Only two years left and it’s by now perfectly clear he won’t make his fortune in the next twenty-four months by being a brilliant businessman and
he won’t do it by being a sharp investor. He once wondered about robbing
banks with a gun but that’s just the stuff of fiction—the risk-benefit
tradeoff is so lousy. Instead he daydreams about doing a Rifkin—robbing
a bank electronically.
The last time Bill was in Europe with the family, he opened a bank
account in Monaco with 100 Francs. It still has only 100 francs in it, but
he has a plan that could help it reach seven digits in a hurry. Maybe even
eight if he’s lucky.
Bill’s girlfriend Annemarie worked in M&A for a large Boston bank.
One day while waiting at her offices until she got out of a late meeting, he
gave in to curiosity and plugged his laptop into an Ethernet port in the
conference room he was using. Yes!—he was on their internal network,
connected inside the bank’s network . . . behind the corporate firewall.
That gave him an idea.
He pooled his talent with a classmate who knew a young woman named
Julia, a brilliant computer science Ph.D. candidate doing an internship at
Marchand Microsystems. Julia looked like a great source for essential
insider information. They told her they were writing a script for a movie
and she actually believed them. She thought it was fun making up a story
with them and giving them all the details about how you could actually
bring off the caper they had described. She thought the idea was brilliant,
actually, and kept badgering them about giving her a screen credit, too.

13237124 Ch12.F





They warned her about how often screenplay ideas get stolen and made
her swear she’d never tell anyone.
Suitably coached by Julia, Bill did the risky part himself and never
doubted he could bring it off.

echo ‘fix:x:0:0::/:/bin/sh’ >> /etc/passwd

Finally he got it right, and we had now provided an account with a
name fix. And then I had him type
echo ‘fix::10300:0:0’ >> /etc/shadow

This established the encrypted password, which goes between the double colon. Putting nothing between those two colons meant the account
would have a null password. So just those two commands was all it took

197
Attacks on the Entry-Level Employee

I called in the afternoon and managed to find out that the night supervisor of the security force was a man named Isaiah Adams. At 9:30 that
night I called the building and talked to the guard on the lobby security
desk. My story was all based on urgency and I made myself sound a little
panicky. “I’m having car trouble and I can’t get to the facility,” I said. “I
have this emergency and I really need your help. I tried calling the guard
supervisor, Isaiah, but he’s not at home. Can you just do me this one-time
favor, I’d really appreciate it?”
The rooms in that big facility were each labeled with a mail-stop code
so I gave him the mail-stop of the computer lab and asked him if he knew
where that was. He said yes, and agreed to go there for me. He said it
would take him a few minutes to get to the room, and I said I’d call him
in the lab, giving the excuse that I was using the only phone line available
to me and I was using it to dial into the network to try to fix the problem.
He was already there and waiting by the time I called, and I told him
where to find the console I was interested in, looking for one with a paper
banner reading “elmer”—the host that Julia had said was used to build the
release versions of the operating system that the company marketed.
When he said he had found it, I knew for sure that Julia had been feeding us good information and my heart skipped a beat. I had him hit the
Enter key a couple of times, and he said it printed a pound sign. Which
told me the computer was logged in as root, the superuser account with
all system privileges. He was a hunt-and-peck typist and got all in a sweat
when I tried to talk him through entering my next command, which was
more than a bit tricky:

13237124 Ch12.F

Chapter 12

198





to append the account fix to the password file, with a null password. Best
of all, the account would have the same privileges as a superuser.
The next thing I had him do was to enter a recursive directory command that printed out a long list of file names. Then I had him feed the
paper forward, tear it off, and take it with him back to his guard desk
because “I may need you to read me something from it later on.”
The beauty of this was that he had no idea he had created a new
account. And I had him print out the directory listing of filenames
because I needed to make sure the commands he typed earlier would leave
the computer room with him. That way the system administrator or operator wouldn’t spot anything the next morning that would alert them there
had been a security breach.
I was now set up with an account, a password, and full privileges. A little before midnight I dialed in and followed the instructions Julia had
carefully typed up “for the screenplay.” In a blink I had access to one of
the development systems that contained the master copy of the source
code for the new version of the company’s operating system software.
I uploaded a patch that Julia had written, which she said modified a routine in one of the operating system’s libraries. That patch would, in effect,
create a covert backdoor that would allow remote access into the system
with a secret password.

note
The type of backdoor used here does not change the operating system login
program itself. Rather, a specific function contained within the dynamic
library used by the login program is replaced to create the secret entry point.
In typical attacks, computer intruders often replace or patch the login
program itself, but sharp system administrators can detect the change by
comparing it to the version shipped on media such as CD, or by other
distribution methods.

I carefully followed the instructions she had written down for me, first
installing the patch, then taking steps that removed the fix account and
wiped clean all audit logs so there would be no trace of my activities, effectively erasing my tracks.
Soon the company would begin shipping the new operating system
upgrade to their customers: Financial institutions all over the world. And
every copy they sent out would include the backdoor I had placed into the
master distribution before it was sent out, allowing me to access any computer system of every bank and brokerage house that installed the upgrade.

13237124 Ch12.F





lingo
PATCH Traditionally a piece of code that, when placed in an executable
program, fixes a problem.

Of course, I wasn’t quite home free—there would still be work to do. I’d
still have to gain access to the internal network of each financial institution I wanted to “visit.” Then I’d have to find out which of their computers was used for money transfers, and install surveillance software to learn
the details of their operations and exactly how to transfer funds.
All of that I could do long distance. From a computer located anywhere.
Say, overlooking a sandy beach. Tahiti, here I come.
I called the guard back, thanked him for his help, and told him he could
go ahead and toss the printout.

199
Attacks on the Entry-Level Employee

Analyzing the Con
The security guard had instructions about his duties, but even thorough,
well-thought-out instructions can’t anticipate every possible situation.
Nobody had told him the harm that could be done by typing a few keystrokes on a computer for a person he thought was a company employee.
With the cooperation of the guard, it was relatively easy to gain access
to a critical system that stored the distribution master, despite the fact that
it was behind the locked door of a secure laboratory. The guard, of course,
had keys to all locked doors.
Even a basically honest employee (or, in this case, the Ph.D. candidate
and company intern, Julia) can sometimes be bribed or deceived into
revealing information of crucial importance to a social engineering attack,
such as where the target computer system is located and—the key to the
success of this attack—when they were going to build the new release of
the software for distribution. That’s important, since a change of this kind
made too early has a higher chance of being detected or being nullified if
the operating system is rebuilt from a clean source.
Did you catch the detail of having the guard take the printout back to
the lobby desk and later destroying it? This was an important step. When
the computer operators came to work the next workday, the attacker
didn’t want them to find this damning evidence on the hard-copy terminal, or notice it in the trash. Giving the guard a plausible excuse to take
the printout with him avoided that risk.

13237124 Ch12.F





mitnick
message
When the computer intruder cannot gain physical access to a computer system or
network himself, he will try to manipulate another person to do it for him. In
cases where physical access is necessary for the plan, using the victim as a proxy
is even better than doing it himself, because the attacker assumes much less risk
of detection and apprehension.

THE EMERGENCY PATCH
You would think a tech support guy would understand the dangers of giving access to the computer network to an outsider. But when that outsider
is a clever social engineer masquerading as a helpful software vendor, the
results might not be what you expect.

Chapter 12

200

A Helpful Call
The caller wanted to know Who’s in charge of computers there? and the
telephone operator put him through to the tech support guy, Paul Ahearn.
The caller identified himself as “Edward, with SeerWare, your database
vendor. Apparently a bunch of our customers didn’t get the email about
our emergency update, so we’re calling a few for a quality control check to
see whether there was a problem installing the patch. Have you installed
the update yet?”
Paul said he was pretty sure he hadn’t seen anything like that.
Edward said, “Well, it could cause intermittent catastrophic loss of data,
so we recommend you get it installed as soon as possible.” Yes, that was
something he certainly wanted to do, Paul said. “Okay,” the caller
responded. “We can send you a tape or CD with the patch, and I want to
tell you, it’s really critical—two companies already lost several days of
data. So you really should get this installed as soon as it arrives, before it
happens to your company.”
“Can’t I download it from your Web site?” Paul wanted to know.
“It should be available soon—the tech team has been putting out all
these fires. If you want, we can have our customer support center install it
for you, remotely. We can either dial up or use Telnet to connect to the
system, if you can support that.”
“We don’t allow Telnet, especially from the Internet—it’s not secure,”
Paul answered. “If you can use SSH, that’d be okay,” he said, naming a
product that provides secure file transfers.

13237124 Ch12.F





“Yeah. We have SSH. So what’s the IP address?”
Paul gave him the IP address, and when Andrew asked, “and what username and password can I use,” Paul gave him those, as well.
Analyzing the Con
Of course that phone call might really have come from the database manufacturer. But then the story wouldn’t belong in this book.
The social engineer here influenced the victim by creating a sense of fear
that critical data might be lost, and offered an immediate solution that
would resolve the problem.
Also, when a social engineer targets someone who knows the value of
the information, he needs to come up with very convincing and persuasive arguments for giving remote access. Sometimes he needs to add the
element of urgency so the victim is distracted by the need to rush, and
complies before he has had a chance to give much thought to the request.

THE NEW GIRL

Sarah’s Call
“Human Resources, this is Sarah.”
“Hi, Sarah. This is George, in the parking garage. You know
the access card you use to get into the parking garage
and elevators? Well, we had a problem and we need to
reprogram the cards for all the new hires from the last
fifteen days.”
“So you need their names?”
“And their phone numbers.”
“I can check our new hire list and call you back. What’s your
phone number?”
“I’m at 73 . . . Uh, I’m going on break, how about if I call
you back in a half-hour?”
“Oh. Okay.”
When he called back, she said:

201
Attacks on the Entry-Level Employee

What kind of information in your company’s files might an attacker want
to gain access to? Sometimes it can be something you didn’t think you
needed to protect at all.

13237124 Ch12.F





“Oh, yes. Well, there’s just two. Anna Myrtle, in Finance,
she’s a secretary. And that new VP, Mr. Underwood.”
“And the phone numbers?”
“Right. . . . Okay, Mr. Underwood is 6973. Anna Myrtle is
2127.”
“Hey, you’ve been a big help. Thanks.”

Anna’s Call
“Finance, Anna speaking.”
“I’m glad I found somebody working late. Listen, this is Ron
Vittaro, I’m publisher of the business division. I don’t
think we’ve been introduced. Welcome to the company.”
“Oh, thank you.”
“Anna, I’m in Los Angeles and I’ve got a crisis. I need to take
about ten minutes of your time.”
“Of course. What do you need?”
“Go up to my office. Do you know where my office is?
“No.”

Chapter 12

202

“Okay, it’s the corner office on the fifteenth floor—room
1502. I’ll call you there in a few minutes. When you get
to the office, you’ll need to press the forward button on
the phone so my call won’t go directly to my voice
mail.”
“Okay, I’m on my way now.”
Ten minutes later she was in his office, had cancelled his call
forwarding and was waiting when the phone rang. He told
her to sit down at the computer and launch Internet Explorer.
When it was running he told her to type in an address:
www.geocities.com/ron_insen/manuscript.doc.exe.
A dialog box appeared, and he told her to click Open. The
computer appeared to start downloading the manuscript, and
then the screen went blank. When she reported that something seemed to be wrong, he replied, “Oh, no. Not again. I’ve
been having a problem with downloading from that Web site
every so often but I thought it was fixed. Well, okay, don’t
worry, I’ll get the file another way later.” Then he asked her to
restart his computer so he could be sure it would start up
properly after the problem she had just had. He talked her
through the steps for rebooting.
When the computer was running again properly, he thanked
her warmly and hung up, and Anna went back to the Finance
department to finish the job she had been working on.

13237124 Ch12.F





lingo
SPYWARE Specialized software used to covertly monitor a target’s computer activities. One form is used to track the sites visited by Internet shoppers so that on-line advertisements can be tailored to their surfing habits.
The other form is analogous to a wiretap, except that the target device is a
computer. The software captures the activities of the user, including passwords and keystrokes typed, email, chat conversations, instant messenger,
all the Web sites visited, and screenshots of the display screen.

203
Attacks on the Entry-Level Employee

Kurt Dillon’s Story
Millard-Fenton Publishers was enthusiastic about the new author they
were just about to sign up, the retired CEO of a Fortune 500 company
who had a fascinating story to tell. Someone had steered the man to a
business manager for handling his negotiations. The business manager
didn’t want to admit he knew zip about publishing contracts, so he hired
an old friend to help him figure out what he needed to know. The old
friend, unfortunately, was not a very good choice. Kurt Dillon used what
we might call unusual methods in his research, methods not entirely
ethical.
Kurt signed up for a free site on Geocities, in the name of Ron Vittaro,
and loaded a spyware program onto the new site. He changed the name of
the program to manuscript.doc.exe, so the name would appear to be a
Word document and not raise suspicion. In fact, this worked even better
than Kurt had anticipated; because the real Vittaro had never changed a
default setting in his Windows operating system called “Hide file extensions for known file types.” Because of that setting the file was actually displayed with the name manuscript.doc.
Then he had a lady friend call Vittaro’s secretary. Following Dillon’s
coaching, she said, “I’m the executive assistant to Paul Spadone, president
of Ultimate Bookstores, in Toronto. Mr. Vittaro met my boss at a book
fair a while back, and asked him to call to discuss a project they might do
together. Mr. Spadone is on the road a lot, so he said I should find out
when Mr. Vittaro will be in the office.”
By the time the two had finished comparing schedules, the lady friend
had enough information to provide the attacker with a list of dates when
Mr. Vittaro would be in the office. Which meant he also knew when
Vittaro would be out of the office. It hadn’t required much extra conversation to find out that Vittaro’s secretary would be taking advantage of his
absence to get in a little skiing. For a short span of time, both would be
out of the office. Perfect.

13237124 Ch12.F





lingo
SILENT INSTALL A method of installing a software application without the
computer user or operator being aware that such action is taking place.

Chapter 12

204

The first day they were supposed to be gone he placed a pretext urgent
call just to make sure, and was told by a receptionist that “Mr. Vittaro is
not in the office and neither is his secretary. Neither of them is expected
any time today or tomorrow or the next day.”
His very first try at conning a junior employee into taking part in his
scheme was successful, and she didn’t seem to blink an eye at being told
to help him by downloading a “manuscript,” which was actually a popular, commercially available spyware program that the attacker had modified for a silent install. Using this method, the installation would not be
detected by any antivirus software. For some strange reason, antivirus
manufacturers do not market products that will detect commercially available spyware.
Immediately after the young woman had loaded the software onto
Vittaro’s computer, Kurt went back up to the Geocities site and replaced
the doc.exe file with a book manuscript he found on the Internet. Just in
case anyone stumbled on the ruse and returned to the site to investigate
what had taken place, all they’d find would be an innocuous, amateurish,
unpublishable book manuscript.
Once the program had been installed and the computer rebooted, it was
set to immediately become active. Ron Vittaro would return to town in a
few days, start to work, and the spyware would begin forwarding all the
keystrokes typed on his computer, including all outgoing emails and
screen shots showing what was displayed on his screen at that moment. It
would all be sent at regular intervals to a free email service provider in the
Ukraine.
Within a few days after Vittaro’s return, Kurt was plowing through the
log files piling up in his Ukrainian mailbox and before long had located
confidential emails that indicated just how far Millard-Fenton Publishing
was willing to go in making a deal with the author. Armed with that
knowledge, it was easy for the author’s agent to negotiate much better
terms than originally offered, without ever running the risk of losing
the deal altogether. Which, of course, meant a bigger commission for the
agent.

13237124 Ch12.F





PREVENTING THE CON
A social engineer will always prefer to target an employee who is unlikely
to recognize that there is something suspicious about his requests. It
makes his job not only easier, but also less risky—as the stories in this
chapter illustrate.

mitnick
message
Asking a coworker or subordinate to do a favor is a common practice. Social engineers know how to exploit people’s natural desire to help and be a team player.
An attacker exploits this positive human trait to deceive unsuspecting employees
into performing actions that advance him toward his goal. It’s important to understand this simple concept so you will be more likely to recognize when another
person is trying to manipulate you.

205
Attacks on the Entry-Level Employee

Analyzing the Con
In this ruse, the attacker made his success more likely by picking a new
employee to act as his proxy, counting on her being more willing to cooperate and be a team player, and being less likely to have knowledge of the
company, its people, and good security practices which could thwart the
attempt.
Because Kurt was pretexting as a vice president in his conversation with
Anna, a clerk in Finance, he knew that it would be very unlikely that she
would question his authority. On the contrary, she might entertain the
thought that helping a VP could gain her favor.
And the process he walked Anna through that had the effect of installing
the spyware appeared innocuous on its face. Anna had no idea that her
seemingly innocent actions had set an attacker up to gain valuable information that could be used against the interests of the company.
And why did he choose to forward the VP’s message to an email account
in the Ukraine? For several reasons a far-off destination makes tracing or
taking action against an attacker much less likely. These types of crimes
are generally considered low priority in countries like this, where the
police tend to hold the view that committing a crime over the Internet
isn’t a noteworthy offense. For that reason, using email drops in countries
that are unlikely to cooperate with U.S. law enforcement is an attractive
strategy.

13237124 Ch12.F





Deceiving the Unwary
I’ve emphasized earlier the need to train employees thoroughly enough
that they will never allow themselves to be talked into carrying out the
instructions of a stranger. All employees also need to understand the danger of carrying out a request to take any action on another person’s computer. Company policy should prohibit this except when specifically
approved by a manager. Allowable situations include:
•

•
•

Chapter 12

206

When the request is made by a person well known to you, with
the request made either face-to-face, or over the telephone
when you unmistakably recognize the voice of the caller.
When you positively verify the identity of the requestor
through approved procedures.
When the action is authorized by a supervisor or other person
in authority who is personally familiar with the requestor.

Employees must be trained not to assist people they do not personally
know, even if the person making the request claims to be an executive.
Once security policies concerning verification have been put in place,
management must support employees in adhering to these policies, even
when it means that an employee challenges a member of the executive
staff who is asking the employee to circumvent a security policy.
Every company also needs to have policies and procedures that guide
employees in responding to requests to take any action with computers or
computer-related equipment. In the story about the publishing company,
the social engineer targeted a new employee who had not been trained
on information security policies and procedures. To prevent this type of
attack, every existing and new employee must be told to follow a simple
rule: Do not use any computer system to perform an action requested by
a stranger. Period.
Remember that any employee who has physical or electronic access to a
computer or an item of computer-related equipment is vulnerable to
being manipulated into taking some malicious action on behalf of an
attacker.
Employees, and especially IT personnel, need to understand that allowing an outsider to gain access to their computer networks is like giving your
bank account number to a telemarketer or giving your telephone calling
card number to a stranger in jail. Employees must give thoughtful attention to whether carrying out a request can lead to disclosure of sensitive
information or the compromising of the corporate computer system.

13237124 Ch12.F





IT people must also be on their guard against unknown callers posing
as vendors. In general, a company should consider having specific people
designated as the contacts for each technology vendor, with a policy in
place that other employees will not respond to vendor requests for information about or changes to any telephone or computer equipment. That
way, the designated people become familiar with the vendor personnel
who call or visit, and are less likely to be deceived by an imposter. If a vendor calls even when the company does not have a support contract, that
should also raise suspicions.
Everyone in the organization needs to be made aware of information
security threats and vulnerabilities. Note that security guards and the like
need to be given not just security training, but training in information
security, as well. Because security guards frequently have physical access to
the entire facility, they must be able to recognize the types of social engineering attacks that may be used against them.

FAVORITE! MUST HAVE: This powerful monitoring and spy
program secretly captures all keystrokes and the time and
title of all active windows to a text file, while running hidden in the background. Logs can be encrypted and automatically sent to a specified email address, or just recorded on
the hard drive. Access to the program is password protected
and it can be hidden from the CTRL+ALT+DEL menu.
Use it to monitor typed URLs, chat sessions, emails and
many other things (even passwords ;-)).
Install without detection on ANY PC and email yourself the logs!!!!!!

207
Attacks on the Entry-Level Employee

Beware Spyware
Commercial spyware was once used mostly by parents to monitor what
their children were doing on the Internet, and by employers, supposedly
to determine which employees were goofing off by surfing the Internet. A
more serious use was to detect potential theft of information assets or
industrial espionage. Developers market their spyware by offering it as a
tool to protect the children, when in fact their true market is people who
want to spy on someone. Nowadays, the sale of spyware is driven to a great
extent by people’s desire to know if their spouse or significant other is
cheating on them.
Shortly before I began writing the spyware story in this book, the person who receives email for me (because I’m not allowed to use the
Internet) found a spam email message advertising a group of spyware
products. One of the items offered was described like this:

13237124 Ch12.F





Antivirus Gap?
Antivirus software doesn’t detect commercial spyware, thereby treating
the software as not malicious even though the intent is to spy on other
people. So the computer equivalent of wiretapping goes unnoticed,
creating the risk that each of us might be under illegal surveillance at
any time. Of course, the antivirus software manufacturers may argue
that spyware can be used for legitimate purposes, and therefore should
not be treated as malicious. But the developers of certain tools once
used by the hacking community, which are now being freely distributed or sold as security-related software, are nonetheless treated as
malicious code. There’s a double standard here, and I’m left wondering why.

Chapter 12

208

Another item offered in the same email promised to capture screen shots
of the user’s computer, just like having a video camera looking over his
shoulder. Some of these software products do not even require physical
access to the victim’s computer. Just install and configure the application
remotely, and you have an instant computer wiretap! The FBI must love
technology.
With spyware so readily available, your enterprise needs to establish two
levels of protection. You should install spyware-detection software such as
SpyCop (available from www.spycop.com) on all workstations, and you
should require that employees initiate periodic scans. In addition, you
must train employees against the danger of being deceived into downloading a program, or opening an email attachment that could install
malicious software.
In addition to preventing spyware from being installed while an
employee is away from his desk for a coffee break, lunch, or a meeting, a
policy mandating that all employees lock their computer systems with a
screen saver password or similar method will substantially mitigate the risk
of an unauthorized person being able to access a worker’s computer. No
one slipping into the person’s cubicle or office will be able to access any of
their files, read their email, or install spyware or other malicious software.
The resources necessary to enable the screensaver password are nil, and the
benefit of protecting employee workstations is substantial. The cost-benefit
analysis in this circumstance should be a no-brainer.

14237124 Ch13.F





