chapter

13

Clever Cons

b

y now you’ve figured out that when a stranger calls with a request
for sensitive information or something that could be of value to
an attacker, the person receiving the call must be trained to get
the caller’s phone number, and call back to verify that the person is really
who he claims to be—a company employee, or an employee of a business
partner, or a technical support representative from one of your vendors,
for example.
Even when a company has an established procedure that the employees
follow carefully for verifying callers, sophisticated attackers are still able to
use a number of tricks to deceive their victims into believing they are who
they claim to be. Even security conscious employees can be duped by
methods such as the following.

THE MISLEADING CALLER ID
Anyone who has ever received a call on a cell phone has observed the feature known as caller ID—that familiar display showing the telephone
number of the caller. In a business setting, it offers the advantage of allowing a worker to tell at a glance whether the call coming in is from a fellow
employee or from outside the company.
Many years ago some ambitious phone phreakers introduced themselves
to the wonders of caller ID before the phone company was even allowed
to offer the service to the public. They had a great time freaking people
out by answering the phone and greeting the caller by name before they
said a word.

14237124 Ch13.F





Just when you thought it was safe, the practice of verifying identity by
trusting what you see—what appears on the caller ID display—is exactly
what the attacker may be counting on.
Linda’s Phone Call
Day/Time: Tuesday, July 23, 3:12 P.M.
Place: The offices of the Finance Department, Starbeat Aviation

Chapter 13

210

Linda Hill’s phone rang just as she was in the middle of writing a memo
to her boss. She glanced at her caller ID, which showed that the call was
from the corporate office in New York, but from someone named Victor
Martin—not a name she recognized.
She thought of letting the call roll over to voice mail so she wouldn’t
break the flow of thought on the memo. But curiosity got the better of
her. She picked up the phone and the caller introduced himself and said
he was from PR, and working on some material for the CEO. “He’s on his
way to Boston for meetings with some of our bankers. He needs the topline financials for the current quarter,” he said. “And one more thing. He
also needs the financial projections on the Apache project,” Victor added,
using the code name for a product that was to be one of the company’s
major releases in the spring.
She asked for his email address, but he said he was having a problem
receiving email that tech support was working on, so could she fax it
instead? She said that would be fine, and he gave her the internal phone
extension to his fax machine.
She sent the fax a few minutes later.
But Victor did not work for the PR department. In fact, he didn’t even
work for the company.
Jack’s Story
Jack Dawkins had started his professional career at an early age as a pickpocket working games at Yankee Stadium, on crowded subway platforms,
and among the nighttime throng of Times Square tourists. He proved so
nimble and artful that he could take a watch off a man’s wrist without his
knowing. But in his awkward teenage years he had grown clumsy and
been caught. In Juvenile Hall, Jack learned a new trade with a much lower
risk of getting nabbed.
His current assignment called for him to get a company’s quarterly
profit and loss statement and cash flow information, before the data was

14237124 Ch13.F





211
Clever Cons

filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and made public. His client was a dentist who didn’t want to explain why he wanted the
information. To Jack the man’s caution was laughable. He’d seen it all
before—the guy probably had a gambling problem, or else an expensive
girlfriend his wife hadn’t found out about yet. Or maybe he had just been
bragging to his wife about how smart he was in the stock market; now he
had lost a bundle and wanted to make a big investment on a sure thing by
knowing which way the company’s stock price was going to go when they
announced their quarterly results.
People are surprised to find out how little time it takes a thoughtful
social engineer to figure out a way of handling a situation he’s never faced
before. By the time Jack got home from his meeting with the dentist, he
had already formed a plan. His friend Charles Bates worked for a company, Panda Importing, that had its own telephone switch, or PBX.
In terms familiar to people knowledgeable about phone systems, the
PBX was connected to a digital telephone service known as a T1, configured as Primary Rate Interface ISDN (integrated services digital network)
or PRI ISDN. What this meant was that every time a call was placed from
Panda, setup and other call processing information went out over a data
channel to the phone company’s switch; the information included the
calling party number, which (unless blocked) is delivered to the caller ID
device at the receiving end.
Jack’s friend knew how to program the switch so the person receiving
the call would see on his caller ID, not the actual phone number at the
Panda office, but whatever phone number he had programmed into the
switch. This trick works because local phone companies do not bother to
validate the calling number received from the customer against the actual
phone numbers the customer is paying for.
All Jack Dawkins needed was access to any such telephone service.
Happily his friend and sometime partner in crime, Charles Bates, was
always glad to lend a helping hand for a nominal fee. On this occasion,
Jack and Charles temporarily reprogrammed the company’s telephone
switch so that calls from a particular telephone line located on the Panda
premises would spoof Victor Martin’s internal telephone number, making
the call appear to be coming from within Starbeat Aviation.
The idea that your caller ID can be made to show any number you wish
is so little known that it’s seldom questioned. In this case, Linda was happy
to fax the requested information to the guy she thought was from PR.
When Jack hung up, Charles reprogrammed his company’s telephone
switch, restoring the telephone number to the original settings.

14237124 Ch13.F





Analyzing the Con
Some companies don’t want customers or vendors to know the telephone
numbers of their employees. For example, Ford may decide that calls from
their Customer Support Center should show the 800-number for the
Center and a name like “Ford Support,” instead of the real direct-dial
phone number of each support representative placing a call. Microsoft
may want to give their employees the option of telling people their phone
number, instead of having everyone they call be able to glance at their
caller ID and know their extension. In this way the company is able to
maintain the confidentiality of internal numbers.
But this same capability of reprogramming provides a handy tactic
for the prankster, bill collector, telemarketer, and, of course, the social
engineer.

VARIATION: THE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES IS CALLING

Chapter 13

212

As co-host of a radio show in Los Angeles called “Darkside of the
Internet” on KFI Talk Radio, I worked under the station’s program director. David, one of the most committed and hardworking people I’ve ever
met, is very difficult to reach by telephone because he’s so busy. He’s one
of those people who doesn’t answer a call unless he sees from the caller ID
that it’s someone he needs to talk to.
When I’d phone him, because I have call blocking on my cell phone, he
could not tell who was calling and wouldn’t pick up the call. It would roll
over to voice mail, and it became very frustrating for me.
I talked over what to do about this with a long-time friend who is the
cofounder of a real estate firm that provides office space for high-tech
companies. Together we came up with a plan. He had access to his company’s Meridian telephone switch, which gives him the ability to program
the calling party number, as described in the previous story. Whenever I
needed to reach the program director and couldn’t get a call through, I
would ask my friend to program any number of my choosing to appear
on the caller ID. Sometimes I’d have him make the call look as if it was
coming from David’s office assistant, or sometimes from the holding company that owns the station.
But my favorite was programming the call to appear from David’s own
home telephone number, which he always picked up. I’ll give the guy
credit, though. He always had a good sense of humor about it when he’d
pick up the phone and discover I had fooled him once again. The best part

14237124 Ch13.F





213
Clever Cons

was that he’d then stay on the line long enough to find out what I wanted
and resolve whatever the issue was.
When I demonstrated this little trick on the Art Bell Show, I spoofed
my caller ID to display the name and number of the Los Angeles headquarters of the FBI. Art was quite shocked about the whole affair and
admonished me for doing something illegal. But I pointed out to him that
it’s perfectly legal, as long as it’s not an attempt to commit fraud. After the
program I received several hundred emails asking me to explain how I had
done it. Now you know.
This is the perfect tool to build credibility for the social engineer. If, for
example, during the research stage of the social engineering attack cycle,
it was discovered that the target had caller ID, the attacker could spoof his
or her own number as being from a trusted company or employee. A
bill collector can make his or her calls appear to come from your place of
business.
But stop and think about the implications. A computer intruder can call
you at home claiming to be from the IT department at your company.
The person on the line urgently needs your password to restore your files
from a server crash. Or the caller ID displays the name and number of
your bank or stock brokerage house, the pretty sounding girl just needs to
verify your account numbers and your mother’s maiden name. For good
measure, she also needs to verify your ATM PIN because of some system
problem. A stock market boiler-room operation can make their calls seem
to come from Merrill Lynch or Citibank. Someone out to steal your identity could call, apparently from Visa, and convince you to tell him your
Visa card number. A guy with a grudge could call and claim to be from
the IRS or the FBI.
If you have access to a telephone system connected to a PRI, plus a bit
of programming knowledge that you can probably acquire from the system vendor’s Web site, you can use this tactic for playing cool tricks on
your friends. Know anybody with overblown political aspirations? You
could program the referral number as 202 456-1414, and his caller ID
will display the name “WHITE HOUSE.”
He’ll think he’s getting a call from the president!
The moral of the story is simple: Caller ID cannot be trusted, except
when being used to identify internal calls. Both at work and at home,
everyone needs to become aware of the caller ID trick and recognize that
the name or phone number shown in a caller ID display cannot ever be
trusted for verification of identity.

14237124 Ch13.F





mitnick
message
The next time you receive a call and your caller ID shows it’s from your dear old
mom, you never know—it might be from a sweet little old social engineer.

THE INVISIBLE EMPLOYEE

Chapter 13

214

Shirley Cutlass has found a new and exciting way to make fast money. No
more putting in long hours at the salt mine. She has joined the hundreds
of other scam artists involved in the crime of the decade. She is an identity thief.
Today she has set her sights on getting confidential information from
the customer service department of a credit card company. After doing the
usual kind of homework, she calls the target company and tells the switchboard operator who answers that she’d like to be connected to the Telecom
Department. Reaching Telecom, she asks for the voice mail administrator.
Using information gathered from her research, she explains that her
name is Norma Todd from the Cleveland office. Using a ruse that should
by now be familiar to you, she says she’ll be traveling to corporate headquarters for a week, and she’ll need a voice mailbox there so she won’t have
to make long distance calls to check her voice mail messages. No need for
a physical telephone connection, she says, just a voice mailbox. He says
he’ll take care of it, he’ll call her back when it’s set up to give her the information she’ll need.
In a seductive voice, she says “I’m on my way into a meeting, can I call
you back in an hour?”
When she calls back, he says it’s all set up, and gives her the information—
her extension number and temporary password. He asks whether she
knows how to change the voice mail password, and she lets him talk her
through the steps, though she knows them at least as well as he does.
“And by the way,” she asks, “from my hotel, what number do I call to
check my messages?” He gives her the number.
Shirley phones in, changes the password, and records her new outgoing
greeting.
Shirley Attacks
So far it’s all been an easy setup. She’s now ready to use the art of deception.

14237124 Ch13.F





She calls the customer service department of the company. “I’m with
Collections, in the Cleveland office,” she says, and then launches into a
variation on the by-now familiar excuse. “My computer is being fixed by
technical support and I need your help looking up this information.” And
she goes on to provide the name and date of birth of the person whose
identity she is intent on stealing. Then she lists the information she wants:
address, mother’s maiden name, card number, credit limit, available
credit, and payment history. “Call me back at this number,” she says, giving the internal extension number that the voice mail administrator set up
for her. “And if I’m not available, just leave the information on my voice
mail.”
She keeps busy with errands for the rest of the morning, and then checks
her voice mail that afternoon. It’s all there, everything she asked for.
Before hanging up, Shirley clears the outgoing message; it would be careless to leave a recording of her voice behind.
And identify theft, the fastest growing crime in America, the “in” crime
of the new century, is about to have another victim. Shirley uses the
credit-card and identity information she just obtained, and begins running up charges on the victim’s card.
215

mitnick
message
Try calling your own voice mail once in a while; if you hear an outgoing message
that’s not yours, you may have just encountered your first social engineer.

Clever Cons

Analyzing the Con
In this ruse, the attacker first duped the company’s voice mail administrator into believing she was an employee, so that he would set up a temporary voice mailbox. If he bothered to check at all, he would have found
that the name and telephone number she gave matched the listings in the
corporate employee database.
The rest was simply a matter of giving a reasonable excuse about a computer problem, asking for the desired information, and requesting that the
response be left on voice mail. And why would any employee be reluctant
to share information with a coworker? Since the phone number that
Shirley provided was clearly an internal extension, there was no reason for
any suspicion.

14237124 Ch13.F





THE HELPFUL SECRETARY

Chapter 13

216

Cracker Robert Jorday had been regularly breaking into the computer networks of a global company, Rudolfo Shipping, Inc. The company eventually recognized that someone was hacking into their terminal server, and
that through that server the user could connect to any computer system at
the company. To safeguard the corporate network, the company decided
to require a dial-up password on every terminal server.
Robert called the Network Operations Center posing as an attorney
with the Legal Department and said he was having trouble connecting to
the network. The network administrator he reached explained that there
had been some recent security issues, so all dial-up access users would need
to obtain the monthly password from their manager. Robert wondered
what method was being used to communicate each month’s password to
the managers and how he could obtain it. The answer, it turned out, was
that the password for the upcoming month was sent in a memo via office
mail to each company manager.
That made things easy. Robert did a little research, called the company
just after the first of the month, and reached the secretary of one manager,
who gave her name as Janet. He said, “Janet, hi. This is Randy Goldstein,
in Research and Development. I know I probably got the memo with this
month’s password for logging into the terminal server from outside the
company but I can’t find it anywhere. Did you get your memo for this
month?”
Yes, she said, she did get it.
He asked her if she would fax it to him, and she agreed. He gave her the
fax number of the lobby receptionist in a different building on the company campus, where he had already made arrangements for faxes to
be held for him, and would then arrange for the password fax to be
forwarded. This time, though, Robert used a different fax-forwarding
method. He gave the receptionist a fax number that went to an on-line fax
service. When this service receives a fax, the automated system sends it to
the subscriber’s email address.
The new password arrived at the email dead drop that Robert set up on
a free email service in China. He was sure that if the fax was ever traced,
the investigator would be pulling out his hair trying to gain cooperation
from Chinese officials, who, he knew, were more than a little reluctant to
be helpful in matters like this. Best of all, he never had to show up physically at the location of the fax machine.

14237124 Ch13.F





mitnick
message
The skilled social engineer is very clever at influencing other people to do favors
for him. Receiving a fax and forwarding it to another location appears so harmless that it’s all too easy to persuade a receptionist or someone else to agree to
do it. When somebody asks for a favor involving information, if you don’t know
him or can’t verify his identity, just say no.

TRAFFIC COURT
Probably everyone who has ever been given a speeding ticket has daydreamed about some way of beating it. Not by going to traffic school, or
simply paying the fine, or taking a chance on trying to convince the judge
about some technicality like how long it has been since the police-car
speedometer or the radar gun was checked. No, the sweetest scenario
would be beating the ticket by outsmarting the system.

First Steps
“LAPD, Hollenbeck Division.”
“Hi, I’d like to talk to the Subpoena Control.”
“I’m the subpoena clerk.”
“Fine. This is Attorney John Leland, of Meecham, Meecham,
and Talbott. I need to subpoena an officer on a case.”
“Okay, which officer?”
“Do you have Officer Kendall in your division?”
“What’s his serial number?”
“21349.”
“Yes. When do you need him?”
“Some time next month, but I need to subpoena several
other witnesses on the case and then tell the court what
days will work for us. Are there any days next month
Officer Kendall won’t be available?”

217
Clever Cons

The Con
Although I would not recommend trying this method of beating a traffic
ticket (as the saying goes, don’t try this at home) still, this is a good example of how the art of deception can be used to help the social engineer.
Let’s call this traffic violater Paul Durea.

14237124 Ch13.F





“Let’s see . . . He has vacation days on the 20th through the
23rd, and he has training days on the 8th and 16th.”
“Thanks. That’s all I need right now. I’ll call you back when
the court date is set.”

Municipal Court, Clerk’s Counter
Paul: “I’d like to schedule a court date on this traffic ticket.”
Clerk: “Okay. I can give you the 26th of next month.”
“Well, I’d like to schedule an arraignment.”
“You want an arraignment on a traffic ticket?”
“Yes.”
“Okay. We can set the arraignment tomorrow in the morning
or afternoon. What would you like?”
“Afternoon.”
“Arraignment is tomorrow at 1:30 P.M. in Courtroom Six.”
“Thanks. I’ll be there.”

Chapter 13

218

Municipal Court, Courtroom Six
Date: Thursday, 1:45 P.M.
Clerk: “Mr. Durea, please approach the bench.”
Judge: “Mr. Durea, do you understand the rights that have
been explained to you this afternoon?”
Paul: “Yes, your honor.”
Judge: “Do you want to take the opportunity to attend traffic school? Your case will be dismissed after successful
completion of an eight-hour course. I’ve checked your
record and you are presently eligible.”
Paul: “No, your honor. I respectfully request that the case
be set for trial. One more thing, your honor, I’ll be traveling out of the country, but I’m available on the 8th or
9th. Would it be possible to set my case for trial on
either of those days? I’m leaving on a business trip for
Europe tomorrow, and I return in four weeks.”
Judge: “Very well. Trial is set for June 8th, 8:30 A.M.,
Courtroom Four.”
Paul: “Thank you, your honor.”

14237124 Ch13.F





Municipal Court, Courtroom Four
Paul arrived at court early on the 8th. When the judge came
in, the clerk gave him a list of the cases for which the officers
had not appeared. The judge called the defendants, including
Paul, and told them their cases were dismissed.

219
Clever Cons

Analyzing the Con
When an officer writes a ticket, he signs it with his name and his badge
number (or whatever his personal number is called in his agency). Finding
his station is a piece of cake. A call to directory assistance with the name
of the law enforcement agency shown on the citation (highway patrol,
county sheriff, or whatever) is enough to get a foot in the door. Once the
agency is contacted, they can refer the caller to the correct telephone number for the subpoena clerk serving the geographical area where the traffic
stop was made.
Law enforcement officers are subpoenaed for court appearances with
regularity; it comes with the territory. When a district attorney or a
defense lawyer needs an officer to testify, if he knows how the system
works, he first checks to make sure the officer will be available. That’s easy
to do; it just takes a call to the subpoena clerk for that agency.
Usually in those conversations, the attorney asks if the officer in question will be available on such-and-such a date. For this ruse, Paul needed
a bit of tact; he had to offer a plausible reason why the clerk should tell
him what dates the officer would not be available.
When he first went to the court building, why didn’t Paul simply tell the
court clerk what date he wanted? Easy—from what I understand, trafficcourt clerks in most places don’t allow members of the public to select court
dates. If a date the clerk suggests doesn’t work for the person, she’ll offer
an alternative or two, but that’s as far as she will bend. On the other hand,
anyone who is willing to take the extra time of showing up for an arraignment is likely to have better luck.
Paul knew he was entitled to ask for an arraignment. And he knew the
judges are often willing to accommodate a request for a specific date. He
carefully asked for dates that coincided with the officer’s training days,
knowing that in his state, officer training takes precedence over an appearance in traffic court.

14237124 Ch13.F





mitnick
message
The human mind is a marvelous creation. It’s interesting to note how imaginative
people can be at developing deceptive ways to get what they want or to get out
of a sticky situation. You have to use the same creativity and imagination to safeguard information and computer systems in the public and private sectors. So,
folks, when devising your company’s security policies—be creative and think outside the box.

Chapter 13

220

And in traffic court, when the officer does not show up—case dismissed. No fines. No traffic school. No points. And, best of all, no record
of a traffic offense!
My guess is that some police officials, court officers, district attorneys
and the like will read this story and shake their heads because they know
that this ruse does work. But shaking their heads is all they’ll do. Nothing
will change. I’d be willing to bet on it. As the character Cosmo says in the
1992 movie Sneakers, “It’s all about the ones and zeros”—meaning that in
the end, everything comes down to information.
As long as law enforcement agencies are willing to give information
about an officer’s schedule to virtually anyone who calls, the ability to get
out of traffic tickets will always exist. Do you have similar gaps in your
company or organization’s procedures that a clever social engineer can take
advantage of to get information you’d rather they didn’t have?

SAMANTHA’S REVENGE
Samantha Gregson was angry.
She had worked hard for her college degree in business, and stacked up
a pile of student loans to do it. It had always been drummed into her that
a college degree was how you got a career instead of a job, how you earned
the big bucks. And then she graduated and couldn’t find a decent job
anywhere.
How glad she had been to get the offer from Lambeck Manufacturing.
Sure, it was humiliating to accept a secretarial position, but Mr. Cartright
had said how eager they were to have her, and taking the secretarial job
would put her on the spot when the next nonadministrative position
opened up.
Two months later she heard that one of Cartright’s junior product managers was leaving. She could hardly sleep that night, imagining herself on
the fifth floor, in an office with a door, attending meetings and making
decisions.

14237124 Ch13.F





The next morning she went first thing to see Mr. Cartright. He said they
felt she needed to learn more about the industry before she was ready for
a professional position. And then they went and hired an amateur from
outside the company who knew less about the industry than she did.
It was about then that it began to dawn on her: The company had
plenty of women, but they were almost all secretaries. They weren’t going
to give her a management job. Ever.

TO: C. Pelton, IT dept.
FROM: L. Cartright, Development
Martin Johansson will be working with a special projects
team in my department.
I hereby authorize him to have access to the servers used
by the engineering group. Mr. Johansson’s security profile is
to be updated to grant him the same access rights as a
product developer.
Louis Cartright

lingo
SHOULDER SURFING The act of watching a person type at his computer
keyboard to detect and steal his password or other user information.

221
Clever Cons

Payback
It took her almost a week to figure out how she was going to pay them
back. About a month earlier a guy from an industry trade magazine had
tried to hit on her when he came in for the new product launch. A few
weeks later he called her up at work and said if she would send him some
advance information on the Cobra 273 product, he’d send her flowers,
and if it was really hot information that he used in the magazine, he’d
make a special trip in from Chicago just to take her out to dinner.
She had been in young Mr. Johannson’s office one day shortly after that
when he logged onto the corporate network. Without thinking, she had
watched his fingers (shoulder surfing, this is sometimes called). He had
entered “marty63” as his password.
Her plan was beginning to come together. There was a memo she
remembered typing not long after she came to the company. She found a
copy in the files and typed up a new version, using language from the original one. Her version read:

14237124 Ch13.F





When most everybody was gone at lunch, she cut Mr. Cartright’s signature from the original memo, pasted it onto her new version, and daubed
Wite-Out around the edges. She made a copy of the result, and then made
a copy of the copy. You could barely see the edges around the signature.
She sent the fax from the machine near Mr. Cartright’s office.
Three days later, she stayed after hours and waited till everyone left. She
walked into Johannson’s office, and tried logging onto the network with
his username and the password, marty63. It worked.
In minutes she had located the product specification files for the Cobra
273, and downloaded them to a Zip disk.
The disk was safely in her purse as she walked in the cool nighttime
breeze to the parking lot. It would be on its way to the reporter that night.

Chapter 13

222

Analyzing the Con
A disgruntled employee, a search through the files, a quick cut-paste-andWite-Out operation, a little creative copying, and a fax. And, voilà!—she
has access to confidential marketing and product specifications.
And a few days later, a trade magazine journalist has a big scoop with
the specs and marketing plans of a hot new product that will be in
the hands of magazine subscribers throughout the industry months in
advance of the product’s release. Competitor companies will have several
months head start on developing equivalent products and having their ad
campaigns ready to undermine the Cobra 273.
Naturally the magazine will never say where they got the scoop.

PREVENTING THE CON
When asked for any valuable, sensitive, or critical information that could
be of benefit to a competitor or anyone else, employees must be aware that
using caller ID as a means of verifying the identity of an outside caller is
not acceptable. Some other means of verification must be used, such as
checking with the person’s supervisor that the request was appropriate and
that the user has authorization to receive the information.
The verification process requires a balancing act that each company
must define for itself: Security versus productivity. What priority is going
to be assigned to enforcing security measures? Will employees be resistant
to following security procedures, and even circumvent them in order to
complete their job responsibilities? Do employees understand why security is important to the company and themselves? These questions need to

14237124 Ch13.F





223
Clever Cons

be answered to develop a security policy based on corporate culture and
business needs.
Most people inevitably see anything that interferes with getting their
work done as an annoyance, and may circumvent any security measures
that appear to be a waste of time. Motivating employees to make security
part of their everyday responsibilities through education and awareness
is key.
Although caller ID service should never be used as a means of authentication for voice calls from outside the company, another method called
automatic number identification (ANI) can. This service is provided when
a company subscribes to toll-free services where the company pays for the
incoming calls and is reliable for identification. Unlike caller ID, the telephone company switch does not use any information that is sent from a
customer when providing the calling number. The number transmitted by
ANI is the billing number assigned to the calling party.
Note that several modem manufacturers have added a caller ID feature
into their products, protecting the corporate network by allowing remoteaccess calls only from a list of preauthorized telephone numbers. Caller ID
modems are an acceptable means of authentication in a low-security environment but, as should be clear by now, spoofing caller ID is a relatively
easy technique for computer intruders, and so should not be relied on for
proving the caller’s identity or location in a high-security setting.
To address the case of identity theft, as in the story about deceiving an
administrator to create a voice mailbox on the corporate phone system,
make it a policy that all phone service, all voice mailboxes, and all entries
to the corporate directory, both in print and on line, must be requested in
writing, on a form provided for the purpose. The employee’s manager
should sign the request, and the voice mail administrator should verify the
signature.
Corporate security policy should require that new computer accounts or
increases in access rights be granted only after positive verification of the
person making the request, such as a callback to the system manager or
administrator, or his or her designee, at the phone number listed in the
print or on-line company directory. If the company uses secure email
where employees can digitally sign messages, this alternative verification
method may also be acceptable.
Remember that every employee, regardless of whether he has access to
company computer systems, may be duped by a social engineer. Everyone
must be included in security awareness training. Administrative assistants,

14237124 Ch13.F





receptionists, telephone operators, and security guards must be made
familiar with the types of social engineering attack most likely to be
directed against them so that they will be better prepared to defend against
those attacks.

Chapter 13

224

15237124 Ch14.F





