chapter

15

Information Security
Awareness and Training

a

social engineer has been given the assignment of obtaining the
plans to your hot new product due for release in two months.
What’s going to stop him?
Your firewall? No.
Strong authentication devices? No.
Intrusion detection systems? No.
Encryption? No.
Limited access to phone numbers for dial-up modems? No.
Code names for servers that make it difficult for an outsider to determine which server might contain the product plans? No.
The truth is that there is no technology in the world that can prevent a
social engineering attack.

SECURITY THROUGH TECHNOLOGY,
TRAINING, AND PROCEDURES
Companies that conduct security penetration tests report that their
attempts to break into client company computer systems by social engineering methods are nearly 100 percent successful. Security technologies
can make these types of attacks more difficult by removing people from
the decision-making process. However the only truly effective way to
mitigate the threat of social engineering is through the use of security
technologies combined with security policies that set ground rules for
employee behavior, and appropriate education and training for employees.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F

Chapter 15

246





There is only one way to keep your product plans safe and that is by
having a trained, aware, and a conscientious workforce. This involves
training on the policies and procedures, but also—and probably even
more important—an ongoing awareness program. Some authorities
recommend that 40 percent of a company’s overall security budget be
targeted to awareness training.
The first step is to make everyone in the enterprise aware that unscrupulous people exist who will use deception to psychologically manipulate
them. Employees must be educated about what information needs to be
protected, and how to protect it. Once people have a better understanding of how they can be manipulated, they are in a far better position to
recognize that an attack is underway.
Security awareness also means educating everyone in the enterprise
on the company’s security policies and procedures. As discussed in Chapter 17, policies are necessary rules to guide employee behavior to protect
corporate information systems and sensitive information.
This chapter and the next one provide a security blueprint that could
save you from costly attacks. If you don’t have trained and alert employees following well-thought-out procedures, it’s not a matter of if, but when
you will lose valuable information to a social engineer. Don’t wait for an
attack to happen to you before instituting these policies: It could be devastating to your business and to your employees’ welfare.

UNDERSTANDING HOW ATTACKERS TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF HUMAN NATURE
To develop a successful training program, you have to understand why
people are vulnerable to attacks in the first place. By identifying these tendencies in your training—for example, by drawing attention to them in
role-playing discussions—you can help your employees to understand
why we can all be manipulated by social engineers.
Manipulation has been studied by social scientists for at least fifty years.
Robert B. Cialdini, writing in Scientific American (February 2001), summarized this research, presenting six “basic tendencies of human nature”
that are involved in an attempt to obtain compliance to a request.
These six tendencies are those that social engineers rely on (consciously
or, most often, unconsciously) in their attempts to manipulate.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F





Authority
People have a tendency to comply when a request is made by a person in
authority. As discussed elsewhere in these pages, a person can be convinced to comply with a request if he or she believes the requestor is a person in authority or a person who is authorized to make such a request.
In his book Influence, Dr. Cialdini writes of a study at three Midwestern
hospitals in which twenty-two separate nurses’ stations were contacted by
a caller who claimed to be a hospital physician, and given instructions for
administering a prescription drug to a patient on the ward. The nurses
who received these instructions did not know the caller. They did not even
know whether he was really a doctor (he was not). They received the
instructions for the prescription by telephone, which was a violation of
hospital policy. The drug they were told to administer was not authorized
for use on the wards, and the dosage they were told to administer was
twice the maximum daily dosage, and thus could have endangered the life
of the patient. Yet in 95 percent of the cases, Cialdini reported, “the nurse
proceeded to obtain the necessary dosage from the ward medicine cabinet
and was on her way to administer it to the patient” before being intercepted by an observer and told of the experiment.

Liking
People have the tendency to comply when the person making a request
has been able to establish himself as likable, or as having similar interests,
beliefs, and attitudes as the victim.
Examples of attacks: Through conversation, the attacker manages to learn a
hobby or interest of the victim, and claims an interest and enthusiasm for
the same hobby or interest. Or he may claim to be from the same state or
school, or to have similar goals. The social engineer will also attempt to
mimic the behaviors of his target to create the appearance of similarity.

Reciprocation
We may automatically comply with a request when we have been given or
promised something of value. The gift may be a material item, or advice,

247
Information Security Awareness and Training

Examples of attacks: A social engineer attempts to cloak himself in the
mantle of authority by claiming that he is with the IT department, or
that he is an executive or works for an executive in the company.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F





or help. When someone has done something for you, you feel an inclination to reciprocate. This strong tendency to reciprocate exists even in situations where the person receiving the gift hasn’t asked for it. One of the
most effective ways to influence people to do us a “favor” (comply with a
request) is by giving some gift or assistance that forms an underlying
obligation.
Members of the Hare Krishna religious cult were very effective at
influencing people to donate to their cause by first giving them a book
or flower as a gift. If the recipient tried to return the gift, the giver
would refuse remarking, “It’s our gift to you.” This behavioral principle
of reciprocation was used by the Krishnas to substantially increase
donations.

Chapter 15

248

Examples of attacks: An employee receives a call from a person who identifies himself as being from the IT department. The caller explains that
some company computers have been infected with a new virus not recognized by the antivirus software that can destroy all files on a computer,
and offers to talk the person through some steps to prevent problems.
Following this, the caller asks the person to test a software utility that has
just been recently upgraded for allowing users to change passwords. The
employee is reluctant to refuse, because the caller has just provided help
that will supposedly protect the user from a virus. He reciprocates by
complying with the caller’s request.

Consistency
People have the tendency to comply after having made a public commitment or endorsement for a cause. Once we have promised we will do
something, we don’t want to appear untrustworthy or undesirable and will
tend to follow through in order to be consistent with our statement or
promise.
Example of attack: The attacker contacts a relatively new employee and
advises her of the agreement to abide by certain security policies and procedures as a condition of being allowed to use company information systems. After discussing a few security practices, the caller asks the user for
her password “to verify compliance” with policy on choosing a difficultto-guess password. Once the user reveals her password, the caller makes a
recommendation to construct future passwords in such a way that the
attacker will be able to guess it. The victim complies because of her prior
agreement to abide by company policies and her assumption that the
caller is merely verifying her compliance.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F





Social Validation
People have the tendency to comply when doing so appears to be in line
with what others are doing. The action of others is accepted as validation
that the behavior in question is the correct and appropriate action.
Examples of attacks: The caller says he is conducting a survey and names
other people in the department who he claims have already cooperated
with him. The victim, believing that cooperation by others validates the
authenticity of the request, agrees to take part. The caller then asks a series
of questions, among which are questions that draw the victim into revealing his computer username and password.

Scarcity
People have the tendency to comply when it is believed that the object
sought is in short supply and others are competing for it, or that it is available only for a short period of time.

CREATING TRAINING AND AWARENESS
PROGRAMS
Issuing an information security policy pamphlet or directing employees to
an intranet page that details security policies will not, by itself, mitigate
your risk. Every business must not only define the rules with written policies, but must make the extra effort to direct everyone who works with corporate information or computer systems to learn and follow the rules.
Furthermore, you must ensure that everyone understands the reason
behind each policy so that people don’t circumvent the rule as a matter of
convenience. Otherwise, ignorance will always be the worker’s excuse, and
the precise vulnerability that social engineers will exploit.
The central goal of any security awareness program is to influence people to change their behavior and attitudes by motivating every employee

249
Information Security Awareness and Training

Example of attack: The attacker sends emails claiming that the first 500
people to register at the company’s new Web site will win free tickets to a
hot new movie. When an unsuspecting employee registers at the site, he is
asked to provide his company email address and to choose a password.
Many people, motivated by convenience, have the propensity to use the
same or a similar password on every computer system they use. Taking
advantage of this, the attacker then attempts to compromise the target’s
work and home computer systems with the username and password that
have been entered during the Web site registration process.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F





to want to chip in and do his part to protect the organization’s information assets. A great motivator in this instance is to explain how their participation will benefit not just the company, but the individual employees
as well. Since the company retains certain private information about every
worker, when employees do their part to protect information or information systems, they are actually protecting their own information, too.
A security training program requires substantial support. The training
effort needs to reach every person who has access to sensitive information
or corporate computer systems, must be on-going, and must be continuously revised to update personnel on new threats and vulnerabilities.
Employees must see that senior management is fully committed to the
program. That commitment must be real, not just a rubber-stamped “We
give our blessings” memo. And the program must be backed up with sufficient resources to develop, communicate, test it, and to measure success.

Chapter 15

250

Goals
The basic guideline that should be kept in mind during development of
an information security training and awareness program is that the program needs to focus on creating in all employees an awareness that their
company might be under attack at any time. They must learn that each
employee plays a role in defending against any attempt to gain entry to
computer systems or to steal sensitive data.
Because many aspects of information security involve technology, it’s
too easy for employees to think that the problem is being handled by firewalls and other security technologies. A primary goal of training should
be to create awareness in each employee that they are the front line needed
to protect the overall security of the organization.
Security training must have a significantly greater aim than simply
imparting rules. The training program designer must recognize the strong
temptation on the part of employees, under pressure of getting their jobs
done, to overlook or ignore their security responsibilities. Knowledge
about the tactics of social engineering and how to defend against the
attacks is important, but it will only be of value if the training is designed
to focus heavily on motivating employees to use the knowledge.
The company can count the program as meeting its bottom-line goal if
everyone completing the training is thoroughly convinced and motivated
by one basic notion: that information security is part of his or her job.
Employees must come to appreciate and accept that the threat of social
engineering attacks is real, and that a serious loss of sensitive corporate

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F





information could endanger the company as well as their own personal
information and jobs. In a sense, being careless about information security at work is equivalent to being careless with one’s ATM PIN or credit
card number. This can be a compelling analogy for building enthusiasm
for security practices.

251
Information Security Awareness and Training

Establishing the Training and Awareness Program
The person responsible for designing the information security program
needs to recognize that this is not a one-size-fits-all project. Rather, the
training needs to be developed to suit the specific requirements of several
different groups within the enterprise. While many of the security policies
outlined in Chapter 16 apply to all employees across the board, many
others are unique. At a minimum, most companies will need training
programs tailored to these distinct groups: managers; IT personnel; computer users; nontechnical personnel; administrative assistants; receptionists; and security guards. (See the breakdown of policies by job assignment
in Chapter 16.)
Since the personnel of a company’s industrial security force are not ordinarily expected to be computer proficient, and, except perhaps in a very
limited way, do not come into contact with company computers, they are
not usually considered when designing training of this kind. However,
social engineers can deceive security guards or others into allowing them
into a building or office, or into performing an action that results in a computer intrusion. While members of the guard force certainly don’t need the
full training of personnel who operate or use computers, nonetheless they
must not be overlooked in the security awareness program.
Within the corporate world there are probably few subjects about which
all employees need to be educated that are simultaneously as important
and as inherently dull as security. The best designed information security
training programs must both inform and capture the attention and enthusiasm of the learners.
The aim should be to make security information awareness and training
an engaging and interactive experience. Techniques could include demonstrating social engineering methods through role-playing; reviewing media
reports of recent attacks on other less fortunate businesses and discussing
the ways the companies could have prevented the loss; or showing a
security video that’s entertaining and educational at the same time. There
are several security awareness companies that market videos and related
materials.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F





note
For those businesses that do not have the resources to develop a program
in-house, there are several training companies that offer security awareness
training services. Trade shows such as Secure World Expo (www.secure
worldexpo.com) are gathering places for these companies.

The stories in this book provide plenty of material to explain the methods and tactics of social engineering, to raise awareness of the threat, and
to demonstrate the vulnerabilities in human behavior. Consider using
their scenarios as a basis for role-playing activities. The stories also offer
colorful opportunities for lively discussion on how the victims could have
responded differently to prevent the attacks from being successful.
A skillful course developer and skillful trainers will find plenty of challenges, but also plenty of opportunities, for keeping the classroom time
lively, and, in the process, motivate people to become part of the solution.

Chapter 15

252

Structure of the Training
A basic security awareness training program should be developed that all
employees are required to attend. New employees should be required to
attend the training as part of their initial indoctrination. I recommend
that no employee be provided computer access until he has attended a
basic security awareness session.
For this initial awareness and training, I suggest a session focused
enough to hold attention, and short enough that the important messages
will be remembered. While the amount of material to be covered certainly
justifies longer training, the importance of providing awareness and motivation along with a reasonable number of essential messages in my view
outweighs any notion of half-day or full-day sessions that leave people
numb with too much information.
The emphasis of these sessions should be on conveying an appreciation
of the harm that can be done to the company, and to employees individually, unless all employees follow good security work habits. More important than learning about specific security practices is the motivation that
leads employees to accept personal responsibility for security.
In situations where some employees cannot readily attend classroom sessions, the company should consider developing awareness training using
other forms of instruction, such as videos, computer-based training,
online courses, or written materials.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F





Training Course Contents
When reduced to their fundamentals, all social engineering attacks have
the same common element: deception. The victim is led to believe that
the attacker is a fellow employee or some other person who is authorized
to access sensitive information, or authorized to give the victim instructions that involve taking actions with a computer or computer-related
equipment. Almost all of these attacks could be foiled if the targeted
employee simply follows two steps:
•
•

Verify the identity of the person making the request: Is the person making the request really who he claims to be?
Verify whether the person is authorized: Does the person have
the need to know, or is he otherwise authorized to make this
request?

253
Information Security Awareness and Training

After the initial short training session, longer sessions should be
designed to educate employees about specific vulnerabilities and attack
techniques relative to their position in the company. Refresher training
should be required at least once a year. The nature of the threat and the
methods used to exploit people are ever-changing, so the content of the
program should be kept up to date. Moreover, people’s awareness and
alertness diminish over time, so training must be repeated at reasonable
intervals to reinforce security principles. Here again the emphasis needs to
be as much on keeping employees convinced of the importance of security policies and motivated to adhere to them, as on exposing specific
threats and social engineering methods.
Managers must allow reasonable time for their subordinates to become
familiar with security policies and procedures, and to participate in the
security awareness program. Employees should not be expected to study
security policies or attend security classes on their own time. New
employees should be given ample time to review security policies and published security practices prior to beginning their job responsibilities.
Employees who change positions within the organization to a job that
involves access to sensitive information or computer systems should, of
course, be required to complete a security training program tailored to
their new responsibilities. For example, when a computer operator
becomes a systems administrator, or a receptionist becomes an administrative assistant, new training is required.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F





note
Because security awareness and training are never perfect, use security technologies whenever possible to create a system of defense in depth. This
means that the security measure is provided by the technology rather than
by individual employees, for example, when the operating system is configured to prevent employees from downloading software from the Internet, or
choosing a short, easily guessed password.

If awareness training sessions could change behavior so that each
employee would always be consistent about testing any request against
these criteria, the risk associated with social engineering attacks would be
dramatically reduced.
A practical information security awareness and training program that
addresses human behavior and social engineering aspects should include
the following:

254

•

Chapter 15

•

•
•
•
•

•

•

•

A description of how attackers use social engineering skills to
deceive people.
The methods used by social engineers to accomplish their
objectives.
How to recognize a possible social engineering attack.
The procedure for handling a suspicious request.
Where to report social engineering attempts or successful
attacks.
The importance of challenging anyone who makes a suspicious request, regardless of the person’s claimed position or
importance.
The fact that they should not implicitly trust others without
proper verification, even though their impulse is to give others
the benefit of the doubt.
The importance of verifying the identity and authority of any
person making a request for information or action. (See
“Verification and Authorization Procedures,” Chapter 16, for
ways to verify identity.)
Procedures for protecting sensitive information, including
familiarity with any data classification system.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F

•

•

•





The location of the company’s security policies and procedures, and their importance to the protection of information
and corporate information systems.
A summary of key security policies and an explanation of their
meaning. For example, every employee should be instructed in
how to devise a difficult-to-guess password.
The obligation of every employee to comply with the policies,
and the consequences for noncompliance.

Social engineering by definition involves some kind of human interaction. An attacker will very frequently use a variety of communication
methods and technologies in attempting to achieve his or her goal. For
this reason, a well-rounded awareness program should attempt to cover
some or all of the following:
•
•
•

•
•
•

Also, if the company plans to use penetration testing to determine the
effectiveness of defenses against social engineering attacks, a warning
should be given putting employees on notice of this practice. Let employees know that at some time they may receive a phone call or other communication using an attacker’s techniques as part of such a test. Use the
results of those tests not to punish, but to define the need for additional
training in some areas.
Details concerning all of the above items will be found in Chapter 16.

255
Information Security Awareness and Training

•
•

Security policies related to computer and voice mail passwords.
The procedure for disclosing sensitive information or materials.
Email usage policy, including the safeguards to prevent malicious code attacks including viruses, worms, and Trojan Horses.
Physical security requirements such as wearing a badge.
The responsibility to challenge people on the premises who
aren’t wearing a badge.
Best security practices of voice mail usage.
How to determine the classification of information, and the
proper safeguards for protecting sensitive information.
Proper disposal of sensitive documents and computer media
that contain, or have at any time in the past contained, confidential materials.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F





TESTING
Your company may want to test employees on their mastery of the information presented in the security awareness training, before allowing
computer system access. If you design tests to be given on line, many
assessment design software programs allow you to readily analyze test
results to determine areas of the training that need to be strengthened.
Your company may also consider providing a certificate testifying to the
completion of the security training as a reward and employee motivator.
As a routine part of completing the program, it is recommended that
each employee be asked to sign an agreement to abide by the security policies and principles taught in the program. Research suggests that a person
who makes the commitment of signing such an agreement is more likely
to make an effort to abide by the procedures.

ONGOING AWARENESS

Chapter 15

256

Most people are aware that learning, even about important matters, tends
to fade unless reinforced periodically. Because of the importance of
keeping employees up to speed on the subject of defending against social
engineering attacks, an ongoing awareness program is vital.
One method to keep security at the forefront of employee thinking is to
make information security a specific job responsibility for every person in
the enterprise. This encourages employees to recognize their crucial role in
the overall security of the company. Otherwise there is a strong tendency
to feel that security “is not my job.”
While overall responsibility for an information security program is
normally assigned to a person in the security department or the information technology department, development of an information security
awareness program is probably best structured as a joint project with the
training department.
The ongoing awareness program needs to be creative and use every
available channel for communicating security messages in ways that are
memorable so that employees are constantly reminded about good security habits. Methods should use all of the traditional channels, plus as
many nontraditional ones as the people assigned to develop and implement the program can imagine. As with traditional advertising, humor
and cleverness help. Varying the wording of messages keeps them from
becoming so familiar that they are ignored.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F





The list of possibilities for an ongoing awareness program might
include:
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

•
•
•

The threat is constant; the reminders must be constant as well.

WHAT’S IN IT FOR ME?
In addition to security awareness and training programs, I strongly
recommend an active and well-publicized reward program. You must

257
Information Security Awareness and Training

•

Providing copies of this book to all employees.
Including informational items in the company newsletter:
articles, boxed reminders (preferably short, attention-getting
items), or cartoons, for example.
Posting a picture of the Security Employee of the Month.
Hanging posters in employee areas.
Posting bulletin-board notices.
Providing printed enclosures in paycheck envelopes.
Sending email reminders.
Using security-related screen savers.
Broadcasting security reminder announcements through the
voice mail system.
Printing phone stickers with messages such as “Is your caller
who he says he is?”
Setting up reminder messages to appear on the computer when
logging in, such as “If you are sending confidential information in an email, encrypt it.”
Including security awareness as a standard item on employee
performance reports and annual reviews.
Providing security awareness reminders on the intranet, perhaps using cartoons or humor, or in some other way enticing
employees to read them.
Using an electronic message display board in the cafeteria, with
a frequently changing security reminder.
Distributing flyers or brochures.
And think gimmicks, such as free fortune cookies in the cafeteria, each containing a security reminder instead of a fortune.

16237124 Part04/Ch15.F





acknowledge employees who have detected and prevented an attempted
social engineering attack, or in some other way significantly contributed
to the success of the information security program. The existence of
the reward program should be made known to employees at all security
awareness sessions, and security violations should be widely publicized
throughout the organization.
On the other side of the coin, people must be made aware of the consequences of failing to abide by information security policies, whether
through carelessness or resistance. Though we all make mistakes, repeated
violations of security procedures must not be tolerated.

Chapter 15

258

17237124 Ch16.F





