chapter

16

Recommended Corporate
Information Security
Policies

n

ine out of every ten large corporations and government agencies
have been attacked by computer intruders, to judge from the
results of a survey conducted by the FBI and reported by the
Associated Press in April 2002. Interestingly, the study found that only
about one company in three reported or publicly acknowledged any
attacks. That reticence to reveal their victimization makes sense. To avoid
loss of customer confidence and to prevent further attacks by intruders
who learn that a company may be vulnerable, most businesses do not publicly report computer security incidents.
It appears that there are no statistics on social engineering attacks, and
if there were, the numbers would be highly unreliable; in most cases a
company never knows when a social engineer has “stolen” information, so
many attacks go unnoticed and unreported.
Effective countermeasures can be put into place against most types of
social engineering attacks. But let’s face reality here—unless everyone in
the enterprise understands that security is important and makes it his or
her business to know and adhere to a company’s security policies, social
engineering attacks will always present a grave risk to the enterprise.
In fact, as improvements are made in the technological weapons against
security breaches, the social engineering approach to using people to
access proprietary company information or penetrate the corporate network will almost certainly become significantly more frequent and attractive to information thieves. An industrial spy will naturally attempt to

17237124 Ch16.F





accomplish his or her objective using the easiest method and the one
involving the least risk of detection. As a matter of fact, a company that
has protected its computer systems and network by deploying state-ofthe-art security technologies may thereafter be at more risk from attackers
who use social engineering strategies, methods, and tactics to accomplish
their objectives.
This chapter presents specific policies designed to minimize a company’s
risk with respect to social engineering attacks. The policies address attacks
that are based not strictly on exploiting technical vulnerabilities. They
involve using some kind of pretext or ruse to deceive a trusted employee
into providing information or performing an action that gives the perpetrator access to sensitive business information or to enterprise computer
systems and networks.

WHAT IS A SECURITY POLICY?

Chapter 16

260

Security policies are clear instructions that provide the guidelines for
employee behavior for safeguarding information, and are a fundamental
building block in developing effective controls to counter potential security threats. These policies are even more significant when it comes to preventing and detecting social engineering attacks.
Effective security controls are implemented by training employees with
well-documented policies and procedures. However, it is important to
note that security policies, even if religiously followed by all employees,
are not guaranteed to prevent every social engineering attack. Rather, the
reasonable goal is always to mitigate the risk to an acceptable level.
The policies presented here include measures that, while not strictly
focused on social engineering issues, nonetheless belong here because they
deal with techniques commonly used in social engineering attacks. For
example, policies about opening email attachments—which could install
malicious Trojan Horse software allowing the attacker to take over the victim’s computer—address a method frequently used by computer intruders.
Steps to Developing a Program
A comprehensive information security program usually starts with a risk
assessment aimed at determining:
•
•

What enterprise information assets need to be protected?
What specific threats exist against these assets?

17237124 Ch16.F



•



What damage would be caused to the enterprise if these
potential threats were to materialize?

261
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

The primary goal of risk assessment is to prioritize which information
assets are in need of immediate safeguards, and whether instituting safeguards will be cost-effective based on a cost-benefit analysis. Simply put,
what assets are going to be protected first, and how much money should
be spent to protect these assets?
It’s essential that senior management buy into and strongly support
the necessity of developing security policies and an information security
program. As with any other corporate program, if a security program is
to succeed, management must do more than merely provide an endorsement, it must demonstrate a commitment by personal example.
Employees need to be aware that management strongly subscribes to the
belief that information security is vital to the company’s operation, that
protection of company business information is essential for the company
to remain in business, and that every employee’s job may depend on the
success of the program.
The person assigned to draft information security policies needs to
understand that the policies should be written in a style free of technical
jargon and readily understood by the nontechnical employee. It’s also
important that the document make clear why each policy is important;
otherwise employees may disregard some policies as a waste of time. The
policy writer should create a document that presents the policies, and a separate document for procedures, because policies will probably change
much less frequently than the specific procedures used to implement them.
In addition, the policy writer should be aware of ways in which security
technologies can be used to enforce good information security practices.
For example, most operating systems make it possible to require that user
passwords conform to certain specifications such as length. In some companies, a policy prohibiting users from downloading programs can be controlled via local or global policy settings within the operating system. The
policies should require use of security technology whenever cost-effective
to remove human-based decision-making.
Employees must be advised of the consequences for failing to comply
with security policies and procedures. A set of appropriate consequences
for violating the policies should be developed and widely publicized. Also,
a reward program should be created for employees who demonstrate
good security practices or who recognize and report a security incident.
Whenever an employee is rewarded for foiling a security breach, it should

17237124 Ch16.F

Chapter 16

262





be widely publicized throughout the company, for example in an article in
the company newsletter.
One goal of a security awareness program is to communicate the importance of security policies and the harm that can result from failure to follow such rules. Given human nature, employees will, at times, ignore or
circumvent policies that appear unjustified or too time-consuming. It is
a management responsibility to insure that employees understand the
importance of the policies and are motivated to comply, rather than treating them as obstacles to be circumvented.
It’s important to note that information security policies cannot be written in stone. As business needs change, as new security technologies come
to market, and as security vulnerabilities evolve, the policies need to be
modified or supplemented. A process for regular review and updating
should be put into place. Make the corporate security policies and procedures available via the corporate intranet or maintain such policies in a
publicly available folder. This increases the likelihood that such policies
and procedures will be reviewed more frequently, and provides a convenient method for employees to quickly find the answer to any informationsecurity related question.
Finally, periodic penetration tests and vulnerability assessments using
social engineering methods and tactics should be conducted to expose
any weakness in training or lack of adherence to company policies and
procedures. Prior to using any deceptive penetration-testing tactics,
employees should be put on notice that such testing may occur from time
to time.
How to Use These Policies
The detailed policies presented in this chapter represent only a subset of
the information security policies I believe are necessary to mitigate all
security risks. Accordingly, the policies included here should not be considered as a comprehensive list of information security policies. Rather,
they are the basis for building a comprehensive body of security policies
appropriate to the specific needs of your company.
Policy writers for an organization will have to choose the policies that
are appropriate based on their company’s unique environment and business goals. Each organization, having different security requirements
based on business needs, legal requirements, organizational culture, and
the information systems used by the company, will take what it needs
from the policies presented, and omit the rest.

17237124 Ch16.F





There are also choices to be made about how stringent policies will be
in each category. A smaller company located in a single facility where most
employees know one another does not need to be much concerned about
an attacker calling on the phone and pretending to be an employee
(although of course an imposter may masquerade as a vendor). Also,
despite the increased risks, a company framed around a casual, relaxed
corporate culture may wish to adopt only a limited subset of recommended policies to meet its security objectives.

DATA CLASSIFICATION

263
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

A data classification policy is fundamental to protecting an organization’s
information assets, and sets up categories for governing the release of
sensitive information. This policy provides a framework for protecting
corporate information by making all employees aware of the level of
sensitivity of each piece of information.
Operating without a data classification policy—the status quo in almost
all companies today—leaves most of these decisions in the hands of
individual workers. Naturally, employee decisions are largely based on
subjective factors, rather than on the sensitivity, criticality, and value of
information. Information is also released because employees are ignorant
of the possibility that in responding to a request for the information, they
may be putting it into the hands of an attacker.
The data classification policy sets forth guidelines for classifying
valuable information into one of several levels. With each item assigned a
classification, employees can follow a set of data-handling procedures that
protect the company from inadvertent or careless release of sensitive information. These procedures mitigate the possibility that employees will be
duped into revealing sensitive information to unauthorized persons.
Every employee must be trained on the corporate data classification
policy, including those who do not typically use computers or corporate
communications systems. Because every member of the corporate
workforce—including the cleaning crew, building guards, and copy-room
staff, as well as consultants, contractors, and even interns—may have
access to sensitive information, anyone could be the target of an attack.
Management must assign an Information Owner to be responsible for
any information that is currently in use at the company. Among other
things, the Information Owner is responsible for the protection of the
information assets. Ordinarily, the Owner decides what level of classification to assign based on the need to protect the information, periodically

17237124 Ch16.F





reassesses the classification level assigned, and decides if any changes are
needed. The Information Owner may also delegate the responsibility of
protecting the data to a Custodian or Designee.
Classification Categories and Definitions
Information should be separated into varying levels of classification based
on its sensitivity. Once a particular classification system is set up, it’s an
expensive and time-consuming process to reclassify information into new
categories. In our example policy I chose four classification levels, which is
appropriate for most medium-to-large businesses. Depending on the number and types of sensitive information, business may choose to add more
categories to further control specific types of information. In smaller businesses, a three-level classification scheme may be sufficient. Remember—
the more complex the classification scheme, the more expense to the
organization in training employees and enforcing the system.

Chapter 16

264

Confidential. This category of information is the most sensitive.
Confidential information is intended for use only within the organization.
In most cases, it should only be shared with a very limited number of
people with an absolute need to know. The nature of Confidential
information is such that any unauthorized disclosure could seriously
impact the company, its shareholders, its business partners, and/or its
customers. Items of Confidential information generally fall into one of
these categories:
•

•
•

Information concerning trade secrets, proprietary source code,
technical or functional specifications, or product
information that could be of advantage to a competitor.
Marketing and financial information not available to the
public.
Any other information that is vital to the operation of
the company such as future business strategies.

Private. This category covers information of a personal nature that is
intended for use only within the organization. Any unauthorized disclosure of Private information could seriously impact employees, or the company if obtained by any unauthorized persons (especially social engineers).
Items of Private information would include employee medical history,
health benefits, bank account information, salary history, or any other
personal identifying information that is not of public record.

17237124 Ch16.F





note
The Internal category of information is often termed Sensitive by security
personnel. I have chosen to use Internal because the term itself explains the
intended audience. I have used the term Sensitive not as a security classification but as a convenient method of referring to Confidential, Private, and
Internal information; put another way, Sensitive refers to any company information that is not specifically designated as Public.

Classified Data Terminology
Based on its classification, data should be distributed to certain categories
of people. A number of policies in this chapter refer to information being
given to an Unverified Person. For the purposes of these policies, an
Unverified Person is someone whom the employee does not personally
know to be an active employee or to be an employee with the proper rank
to have access to information, or who has not been vouched for by a
trusted third party.

265
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Internal. This category of information can be freely provided to any
persons employed by the organization. Ordinarily, unauthorized disclosure of Internal information is not expected to cause serious harm to
the company, its shareholders, its business partners, its customers, or its
employees. However, persons adept in social engineering skills can use
this information to masquerade as an authorized employee, contractor,
or vendor to deceive unsuspecting personnel into providing more sensitive
information that would result in unauthorized access to corporate computer systems.
A confidentiality agreement must be signed before Internal information
may be disclosed to third parties, such as employees of vendor firms, contractor labor, partner firms, and so on. Internal information generally
includes anything used in the course of daily business activity that should
not be released to outsiders, such as corporate organizational charts, network dial-up numbers, internal system names, remote access procedures,
cost center codes, and so on.
Public. Information that is specifically designated for release to the public.
This type of information can be freely distributed to anyone, such as press
releases, customer-support contact information, or product brochures.
Note that any information not specifically designated as Public should be
treated as Sensitive information.

17237124 Ch16.F

Chapter 16

266





For the purposes of these policies, a Trusted Person is a person you have
met face-to-face who is known to you as a company employee, customer,
or consultant to the company with the proper rank to have access to
information. A Trusted Person might also be an employee of a company
having an established relationship with your company (for example, a
customer, vendor, or strategic business partner that has signed a nondisclosure agreement).
In third party vouching, a Trusted Person provides verification of a person’s employment or status, and the person’s authority to request information or an action. Note that in some instances, these policies require
you to verify that the Trusted Person is still employed by the company
before responding to a request for information or action by someone for
whom they have vouched.
A privileged account is a computer or other account requiring access permission beyond the basic user account, such as a systems administrator
account. Employees with privileged accounts typically have the ability to
modify user privileges or perform system functions.
A general departmental mailbox is a voice mailbox answered with a generic
message for the department. Such a mailbox is used in order to protect names
and phone extensions of employees who work in a particular department.

VERIFICATION AND AUTHORIZATION
PROCEDURES
Information thieves commonly use deceptive tactics to access or obtain
confidential business information by masquerading as legitimate employees, contractors, vendors, or business partners. To maintain effective information security, an employee receiving a request to perform an action or
provide sensitive information must positively identify the caller and verify
his authority prior to granting a request.
The recommended procedures given in this chapter are designed to help
an employee who receives a request via any communication method such
as telephone, email, or fax to determine whether the request and the
person making it are legitimate.
Requests from a Trusted Person
A request for information or action from a Trusted Person may require:

17237124 Ch16.F



•

•



Verification that the company actively employs or has a
relationship with the person where such a relationship is a
condition of access to this category of information. This is
to prevent terminated employees, vendors, contractors, and
others who no longer are associated with the company from
masquerading as active personnel.
Verification that the person has a need to know, and is
authorized to have access to the information or to request
the action.

•
•
•

Verifying that the person is who he or she claims to be.
Determining that the requester is currently employed or
shares a need-to-know relationship with the company.
Determining that the person is authorized to receive the
specific information or to call for the requested action.

Step One: Verification of Identity

The recommended steps for verification are listed below in order of
effectiveness—the higher the number, the more effective the method. Also
included with each item is a statement about the weakness of that particular method, and the way in which a social engineer can defeat or
circumvent the method to deceive an employee.

267
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Requests from an Unverified Person
When a request is made by an Unverified Person, a reasonable verification
process must be deployed to positively identify the person making the
request as authorized to receive the requested information, especially
when the request in any way involves computers or computer-related
equipment. This process is the fundamental control to prevent successful
social engineering attacks: If these verification procedures are followed,
they will dramatically reduce successful social engineering attacks.
It is important that you not make the process so cumbersome that it is
cost-prohibitive, or that employees ignore it.
As detailed below, the verification process involves three steps:

17237124 Ch16.F



1.



Caller ID (assuming this feature is included in the company
telephone system). From the caller ID display, ascertain
whether the call is from inside or outside the company, and
that the name or telephone number displayed matches the
identity provided by the caller.
Weakness: External caller ID information can be falsified by
anyone with access to a PBX or telephone switch connected
to digital phone service.

2.

Callback. Look up the requester in the company directory,
and call back to the listed extension to verify that the
requester is an employee.
Weakness: An attacker with sufficient knowledge can callforward a company extension so that, when the employee
places the verification call to the listed phone number, the
call is transferred to the attacker’s outside phone number.

3.

Chapter 16

268

Vouching. A Trusted Person who vouches for the requester’s
identity verifies the requester.
Weakness: Attackers using a pretext are frequently able to
convince another employee of their identity, and get that
employee to vouch for them.

4.

Shared Secret. Use an enterprise-wide shared secret, such as a
password or daily code.
Weakness: If many people know the shared secret, it may be
easy for an attacker to learn it.

5.

Employee’s Supervisor/Manager. Telephone the employee’s
immediate supervisor and request verification.
Weakness: If the requester has provided the telephone number for reaching his or her manager, the person the employee
reaches when calling the number may not be the real manager but may, in fact, be an accomplice of the attacker.

17237124 Ch16.F

6.





Secure Email. Request a digitally signed message.
Weakness: If an attacker has already compromised an
employee’s computer and installed a keystroke logger to
obtain the employee’s pass phrase, he can send digitally
signed email that appears to be from the employee.

7.

Personal Voice Recognition. The person receiving the
request has dealt with the requester (preferably face-to-face),
knows for certain that the person actually is a Trusted Person,
and is familiar enough with the person to recognize his or her
voice on the telephone.
Weakness: This is a fairly secure method, not easily
circumvented by an attacker, but is of no use if the person
receiving the request has never met or spoken with the
requester.

8.

Weakness: To defeat this method, an attacker would have to
obtain one of the dynamic password devices, as well the
accompanying PIN of the employee to whom the device
rightfully belongs, or would have to deceive an employee into
reading the information on the display of the device and
providing the PIN.
9.

In Person with ID. The requester appears in person and
presents an employee badge or other suitable identification,
preferably a picture ID.
Weakness: Attackers are often able to steal an employee
badge, or create a phony badge that appears authentic;
however, attackers generally shun this approach because
appearing in person puts the attacker at significant risk of
being identified and apprehended.

269
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Dynamic Password Solution. The requester authenticates
himself or herself through the use of a dynamic password
solution such as a Secure ID.

17237124 Ch16.F





Step Two: Verification of Employment Status

The greatest information security threat is not from the professional social
engineer, nor from the skilled computer intruder, but from someone
much closer: the just-fired employee seeking revenge or hoping to set himself up in business using information stolen from the company. (Note that
a version of this procedure can also be used to verify that someone still
enjoys another kind of business relationship with your company, such as
a vendor, consultant, or contract worker.)
Before providing Sensitive information to another person or accepting
instructions for actions involving the computer or computer-related
equipment, verify that the requester is still a current employee by using
one of these methods:

Chapter 16

270

Employee Directory Check. If the company maintains an on-line
employee directory that accurately reflects active employees, verify that the
requester is still listed.
Requester’s Manager Verification. Call the requester’s manager using a
phone number listed in the company directory, not a number provided by
the requester.
Requester’s Department or Workgroup Verification. Call the requester’s
department or workgroup and determine from anyone in that department
or workgroup that the requester is still employed by the company.
Step Three: Verification of Need to Know

Beyond verifying that the requester is a current employee or has a relationship with your company, there still remains the issue of whether the
requester is authorized to have access to the information being requested,
or is authorized to request that specific actions affecting computers or
computer-related equipment be taken.
This determination may be made by using one of these methods:
Consult job title/workgroup/responsibilities lists. A company can
provide ready access to authorization information by publishing lists of
which employees are entitled to what information. These lists may be
organized in terms of employee job title, employee departments and
workgroups, employee responsibilities, or by some combination of these.
Such lists would need to be maintained on line to be kept current and
provide quick access to authorization information. Ordinarily, Information Owners would be responsible for overseeing the creation and maintenance of the lists for access to information under the Owner’s control.

17237124 Ch16.F





note
It is important to note that maintaining such lists is an invitation to the social
engineer. Consider: If an attacker targeting a company becomes aware that
the company maintains such lists, there is a strong motivation to obtain one.
Once in hand, such a list opens many doors to the attacker and puts the company at serious risk.

MANAGEMENT POLICIES
The following policies pertain to management-level employees. These are
divided into the areas of Data Classification, Information Disclosure,
Phone Administration, and Miscellaneous Policies. Note that each category of policies uses a unique numbering structure for easy identification
of individual policies.

271
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Obtain Authority from a Manager. An employee contacts his or her own
manager, or the manager of the requester, for authority to comply with
the request.
Obtain Authority from the Information Owner or a Designee. The
information Owner is the ultimate judge of whether a particular person
should be granted access. The process for computer-based access control is
for the employee to contact his or her immediate manager to approve a
request for access to information based on existing job profiles. If such a
profile does not exist, it is the manager’s responsibility to contact the relevant data Owner for permission. This chain of command should be followed so that Information Owners are not barraged with requests when
there is a frequent need to know.
Obtain Authority by Means of a Proprietary Software Package. For
a large company in a highly competitive industry, it may be practical
to develop a proprietary software package that provides need-to-know
authorization. Such a database stores employee names and access privileges
to classified information. Users would not be able to look up each individual’s access rights, but instead would enter the requester’s name, and the
identifier associated with the information being sought. The software then
provides a response indicating whether or not the employee is authorized
to access such information. This alternative avoids the danger of creating a
list of personnel with respective access rights to valuable, critical, or sensitive information that could be stolen.

17237124 Ch16.F





Data Classification Policies
Data Classification refers to how your company classifies the sensitivity of
information and who should have access to that information.
1-1 Assign data classification

Policy: All valuable, sensitive, or critical business information must be
assigned to a classification category by the designated Information Owner
or delegate.
Explanation/Notes: The designated Owner or delegate will assign
the appropriate data classification to any information routinely used to
accomplish business goals. The Owner also controls who can access such
information and what use can be made of it. The Owner of the information may reassign the classification and may designate a time period for
automatic declassification.
Any item not otherwise marked should be classified as Sensitive.
1-2 Publish classified handling procedures

Chapter 16

272

Policy: The company must establish procedures governing the release of
information in each category.
Explanation/Notes: Once classifications are established, procedures for
release of information to employees and to outsiders must be set up, as
detailed in the Verification and Authorization Procedures outlined earlier
in this chapter.
1-3 Label all items

Policy: Clearly mark both printed materials and media storage containing Confidential, Private, or Internal information to show the appropriate
data classification.
Explanation/Notes: Hard copy documents must have a cover sheet,
with a classification label prominently displayed, and a classification label
on every page that is visible when the document is open.
All electronic files that cannot easily be labeled with appropriate data
classifications (database or raw data files) must be protected via access controls to insure that such information is not improperly disclosed, and that
it cannot be changed, destroyed, or made inaccessible.
All computer media such as floppy disks, tapes, and CD-ROMs must be
labeled with the highest classification of any information contained therein.

17237124 Ch16.F





Information Disclosure
Information disclosure involves the release of information to various parties based on their identity and need to know.
2-1 Employee verification procedure

Policy: The company should establish comprehensive procedures to be
used by employees for verifying the identity, employment status, and
authorization of an individual before releasing Confidential or Sensitive
information or performing any task that involves use of any computer
hardware or software.
Explanation/Notes: Where justified by size of company and security
needs, advanced security technologies should be used to authenticate
identity. The best security practice would be to deploy authentication
tokens in combination with a shared secret to positively identify persons
making requests. While this practice would substantially minimize risk,
the cost may be prohibitive for some businesses. In those circumstances,
the company should use a company-wide shared secret, such as a daily
password or code.
2-2 Release of information to third parties

•
•

•
•

Information made available within the company.
Distribution of information to individuals and employees of
organizations having an established relationship with the
company, such as consultants, temporary workers, interns,
employees of organizations that have a vendor relationship
or strategic partnership arrangement with the company, and
so on.
Information made available outside the company.
Information at each classification level, when the information
is being delivered in person, by telephone, by email, by facsimile, by voice mail, by postal service, by signature delivery
service, and by electronic transfer.

Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: A set of recommended information disclosure procedures must
be made available and all employees should be trained to follow them.
Explanation/Notes: Generally, distribution procedures need to be
established for:

273

17237124 Ch16.F





2-3 Distribution of Confidential information

Policy: Confidential information, which is company information that
could cause substantial harm if obtained by unauthorized persons, may be
delivered only to a Trusted Person who is authorized to receive it.
Explanation/Notes: Confidential information in a physical form (that
is, printed copy or on a removable storage medium) may be delivered:
•
•
•

In person.
By internal mail, sealed and marked with the Confidential
classification.
Outside the company by a reputable delivery service (that is,
FedEx, UPS, and so on) with signature of recipient required,
or by a postal service using a certified or registered class of
mail.

Confidential information in electronic form (computer files, database
files, email) may be delivered:

Chapter 16

274

•
•
•
•

Within the body of encrypted email.
By email attachment, as an encrypted file.
By electronic transfer to a server within the company internal
network.
By a fax program from a computer, provided that only
the intended recipient uses the destination machine, or that
the intended recipient is waiting at the destination machine
while the fax is being sent. As an alternative, facsimiles can be
sent without the recipient present if sent over an encrypted
telephone link to a password-protected fax server.

Confidential information may be discussed in person; by telephone
within the company; by telephone outside the company if encrypted; by
encrypted satellite transmission; by encrypted videoconferencing link; and
by encrypted Voice Over Internet Protocol (VoIP).
For transmission by fax machine, the recommended method calls for the
sender to transmit a cover page; the recipient, on receiving the page, transmits a page in response, demonstrating that he/she is at the fax machine.
The sender then transmits the fax.

17237124 Ch16.F





The following means of communication are not acceptable for discussing or distributing Confidential information: unencrypted email,
voice mail message, regular mail, or any wireless communication method
(cellular, Short Message Service, or cordless).
2-4 Distribution of Private information

Policy: Private information, which is personal information about an
employee or employees that, if disclosed, could be used to harm employees or the company, may be delivered only to a Trusted Person who is
authorized to receive it.
Explanation/Notes: Private information in a physical form (that is,
hard-copy or data on a removable storage medium) may be delivered:
•
•
•

In person
By internal mail, sealed and marked with the Private classification
By regular mail

Private information in electronic form (computer files, database files,
email) may be delivered:

•

By internal email.
By electronic transfer to a server within the company internal
network.
By facsimile, provided that only the intended recipient uses
the destination machine, or that the intended recipient is
waiting at the destination machine while the fax is being
sent. Facsimiles can also be sent to password-protected fax
servers. As an alternative, facsimiles can be sent without the
recipient present if sent over an encrypted telephone link to a
password-protected fax server.

Private information may be discussed in person; by telephone; by satellite transmission; by videoconferencing link; and by encrypted VoIP.
The following means of communication are not acceptable for discussing or distributing Private information: unencrypted email, voice
mail message, regular mail, and by any wireless communication method
(cellular, SMS, or cordless).

Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

•
•

275

17237124 Ch16.F





2-5 Distribution of Internal information

Policy: Internal information is information to be shared only within the
company or with other Trusted persons who have signed a nondisclosure
agreement. You must establish guidelines for the distribution of Internal
information.
Explanation/Notes: Internal information may be distributed in any
form, including internal email, but may not be distributed outside the
company in email form unless encrypted.
2-6 Discussing Sensitive information over the
telephone

Chapter 16

276

Policy: Prior to releasing any information that is not designated as
Public over the telephone, the person releasing such information must
personally recognize the requester’s voice through prior business contact,
or the company phone system must identify the call as being from an
internal telephone number that has been assigned to the requester.
Explanation/Notes: If the requester’s voice is not known, call the
requester’s internal phone number to verify the requester voice through a
recorded voice mail message, or have the requester’s manager verify the
requester’s identity and need to know.
2-7 Lobby or reception personnel procedures

Policy: Lobby personnel must obtain photo identification prior to
releasing any package to any person who is not known to be an active
employee. A log should be kept for recording the person’s name, driver’s
license number, birth date, the item picked up, and the date and time of
such pickup.
Explanation/Notes: This policy also applies to handing over outgoing
packages to any messenger or courier service such as FedEx, UPS, or
Airborne Express. These companies issue identification cards that can be
used to verify employee identity.
2-8 Transfer of software to third parties

Policy: Prior to the transfer or disclosure of any software, program, or
computer instructions, the requester’s identity must be positively verified,
and it must be established whether such release is consistent with the data
classification assigned to such information. Ordinarily, software developed
in-house in source-code format is considered highly proprietary, and classified Confidential.

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: Determination of authorization is usually based on
whether the requester needs access to the software to do his or her job.
2-9 Sales and marketing qualification of customer leads

Policy: Sales and marketing personnel must qualify leads before releasing internal callback numbers, product plans, product group contacts, or
other Sensitive information to any potential customer.
Explanation/Notes: It is a common tactic for industrial spies to contact
a sales and marketing representative and make him believe that a big
purchase may be in the offing. In an effort to take advantage of the sales
opportunity, sales and marketing reps often release information that
can be used by the attacker as a poker chip to obtain access to Sensitive
information.
2-10 Transfer of files or data

Phone Administration
Phone administration policies ensure that employees can verify caller
identity, and protect their own contact information from those calling
into the company.
3-1 Call forwarding on dial-up or fax numbers

Policy: Call forwarding services that permit forwarding calls to external
telephone numbers will not be placed on any dial-up modem or fax telephone numbers within the company.
Explanation/Notes: Sophisticated attackers may attempt to dupe telephone company personnel or internal telecom workers into forwarding
internal numbers to an external phone line under control of an attacker.
This attack allows the intruder to intercept faxes, request Confidential
information to be faxed within the company (personnel assume that
faxing within the organization must be safe) or dupe dial-in users into

277
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Files or other electronic data should not be transferred to any
removable media unless the requester is a Trusted Person whose identity
has been verified and who has a need to have such data in that format.
Explanation/Notes: A social engineer can easily dupe an employee by
providing a plausible request for having Sensitive information copied to a
tape, Zip disc, or other removable media, and sent to him or held in the
lobby for pickup.

17237124 Ch16.F





providing their account passwords by forwarding the dial-up lines to a
decoy computer that simulates the login process.
Depending on the telephone service used within the company, the call
forwarding feature may be under control of the communications provider,
rather than the telecommunications department. In such circumstances, a
request will be made to the communications provider to insure the call
forwarding feature is not present on the telephone numbers assigned to
dial-up and fax lines.
3-2 Caller ID

Policy: The corporate telephone system must provide caller line identification (caller ID) on all internal telephone sets, and, if possible,
enable distinctive ringing to indicate when a call is from outside the
company.
Explanation/Notes: If employees can verify the identity of telephone
calls from outside the company it may help them prevent an attack, or
identify the attacker to appropriate security personnel.

Chapter 16

278

3-3 Courtesy phones

Policy: To prevent visitors from masquerading as company workers,
every courtesy telephone will clearly indicate the location of the caller (for
example, “Lobby”) on the recipient’s caller ID.
Explanation/Notes: If the caller ID for internal calls shows extension
number only, appropriate provision must be made for calls placed from
company phones in the reception area and any other public areas. It must
not be possible for an attacker to place a call from one of these phones and
deceive an employee into believing that the call has been placed internally
from an employee telephone.
3-4 Manufacturer default passwords shipped
with phone systems

Policy: The voice mail administrator should change all default passwords that were shipped with the phone system prior to use by company
personnel.
Explanation/Notes: Social engineers can obtain lists of default
passwords from manufacturers and use these to access administrator
accounts.

17237124 Ch16.F





3-5 Department voice mailboxes

Policy: Set up a generic voice mailbox for every department that ordinarily has contact with the public.
Explanation/Notes: The first step of social engineering involves gathering information about the target company and its personnel. By limiting
the accessibility of the names and telephone numbers of employees, a
company makes it more difficult for the social engineer to identify targets
in the company, or names of legitimate employees for use in deceiving
other personnel.
3-6 Verification of telephone system vendor

Policy: No vendor-support technicians will be permitted to remotely
access the company telephone system without positive identification of
vendor and authorization to perform such work.
Explanation/Notes: Computer intruders who gain access to corporate
telephone systems gain the ability to create voice mailboxes, intercept
messages intended for other users, or make free phone calls at the corporation’s expense.
3-7 Configuration of phone system

3-8 Call trace feature

Policy: Depending on limitations of the communications provider, the
call trace feature will be enabled globally to allow employees to activate the
trap-and-trace feature when the caller is suspected of being an attacker.
Explanation/Notes: Employees must be trained on call trace usage and
the appropriate circumstances when it should be used. A call trace should
be initiated when the caller is clearly attempting to gain unauthorized
access to corporate computer systems or requesting Sensitive information.
Whenever an employee activates the call trace feature, immediate notification must be sent to the Incident Reporting Group.

Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: The voice mail administrator will enforce security requirements
by configuring the appropriate security parameters in the telephone
system.
Explanation/Notes: Phone systems can be set up with greater or lesser
degrees of security for voice mail messages. The administrator should be
aware of company security concerns, and work with security personnel to
configure the phone system to protect Sensitive data.

279

17237124 Ch16.F





3-9 Automated phone systems

Policy: If the company uses an automated phone answering system, the
system must be programmed so that telephone extensions are not
announced when transferring a call to an employee or department.
Explanation/Notes: Attackers can use a company’s automated telephone system to map employee names to telephone extensions. Attackers
can then use knowledge of those extensions to convince call recipients that
they are employees with a right to insider information.
3-10 Voice mailboxes to become disabled after
successive invalid access attempts

Policy: Program the corporate telephone system to lock out any voice
mail account whenever a specified number of successive invalid access
attempts have been made.
Explanation/Notes: The Telecommunications administrator must lock
out a voice mailbox after five successive invalid attempts to log in. The
administrator must then reset any voice mail lockouts manually.

Chapter 16

280

3-11 Restricted telephone extensions

Policy: All internal telephone extensions to departments or workgroups
that ordinarily do not receive calls from external callers (help desk,
computer room, employee technical support, and so on) should be programmed so that these telephones can be reached only from internal
extensions. Alternately, they can be password-protected so that employees
and other authorized persons calling from the outside must enter the
correct password.
Explanation/Notes: While use of this policy will block most attempts
by amateur social engineers to reach their likely targets, it should be noted
that a determined attacker will sometimes be able to talk an employee
into calling the restricted extension and asking the person who answers
the phone to call the attacker, or simply conference in the restricted extension. During security training, this method of tricking employees into
assisting the intruder should be discussed to raise employee awareness
about these tactics.
Miscellaneous
4-1 Employee badge design

Policy: Employee badges must be designed to include a large photo that
can be recognized from a distance.

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: The photograph on corporate ID badges of standard design is, for security purposes, only slightly better than worthless.
The distance between a person entering the building and the guard or
receptionist who has the responsibility to check identification is usually
great enough that the picture is too small to recognize when the person
walks by. For the photo to be of value in this situation, a redesign of the
badge is necessary.
4-2 Access rights review when changing position or
responsibilities

4-3 Special identification for nonemployees

Policy: Your company should issue a special photo company badge to
trusted delivery people and nonemployees who have a business need to
enter company premises on a regular basis.
Explanation/Notes: Nonemployees who need to enter the building
regularly (for example, to make food or beverage deliveries to the cafeteria, or to repair copying machines or make telephone installations) can
pose a threat to your company. In addition to issuing identification to
these visitors, make sure your employees are trained to spot a visitor
without a badge and know how to act in that situation.
4-4 Disabling computer accounts for contractors

Policy: Whenever a contractor who has been issued a computer account
has completed his or her assignment, or when the contract expires, the
responsible manager will immediately notify the information technology

281
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Whenever a company employee changes positions or is given
increased or decreased job responsibilities, the employee’s manager will
notify IT of the change in the employee’s responsibilities so that the
appropriate security profile can be assigned.
Explanation/Notes: Managing the access rights of personnel is necessary to limit disclosure of protected information. The rule of least
privilege will apply: The access rights assigned to users will be the minimum necessary to perform their jobs. Any requests for changes that result
in elevated access rights must be in accordance with a policy on granting
elevated access rights.
The worker’s manager or the human resources department will have the
responsibility of notifying the information technology department to
properly adjust the account holder’s access rights as needed.

17237124 Ch16.F





department to disable the contractor’s computer accounts, including any
accounts used for database access, dial-up, or Internet access from remote
locations.
Explanation/Notes: When a worker’s employment is terminated, there
is a danger that he or she will use knowledge of your company’s systems
and procedures to gain access to data. All computer accounts used by or
known to the worker must be promptly disabled. This includes accounts
that provide access to production databases, remote dial-in accounts, and
any accounts used to access computer-related devices.
4-5 Incident reporting organization

Chapter 16

282

Policy: An incident reporting organization must be established or, in
smaller companies, an incident reporting individual and backup person
designated, for receiving and distributing alerts concerning possible security incidents in progress.
Explanation/Notes: By centralizing the reporting of suspected security
incidents, an attack that may otherwise have gone unnoticed can be
detected. In the event that systematic attacks across the organization are
detected and reported, the incident reporting organization may be able to
determine what the attacker is targeting so that special efforts can be made
to protect those assets.
Employees assigned to receive incident reports must become familiar
with social engineering methods and tactics, enabling them to evaluate
reports and recognize when an attack may be in progress.
4-6 Incident reporting hotline

Policy: A hotline to the incident reporting organization or person,
which may consist of an easy-to-remember phone extension, must be
established.
Explanation/Notes: When employees suspect that they are the target of
a social engineering attack, they must be able to immediately notify the
incident reporting organization. In order for the notification to be timely,
all company telephone operators and receptionists must have the number
posted or otherwise immediately available to them.
A company-wide early warning system can substantially aid the organization in detecting and responding to an ongoing attack. Employees must
be sufficiently well trained that one who suspects he or she has been the
target of a social engineering attack will immediately call the incident
reporting hotline. In accordance with published procedures, the incident

17237124 Ch16.F





reporting personnel will immediately notify the targeted groups that an
intrusion may be in progress so personnel will be on alert. In order for the
notification to be timely, the reporting hotline number must be widely
distributed throughout the company.
4-7 Sensitive areas must be secured

Policy: A security guard will screen access to sensitive or secure areas and
should require two forms of authentication.
Explanation/Notes: One acceptable form of authentication uses a
digital electronic lock that requires an employee to swipe his employee
badge and enter an access code. The best method to secure sensitive areas
is to post a security guard who observes any access-controlled entry. In
organizations where this is not cost-effective, two forms of authentication should be used to validate identity. Depending on risk and cost, a
biometric-enabled access card is recommended.
4-8 Network and phone cabinets

4-9 Intracompany mail bins

Policy: Intracompany mail bins must not be located in publicly accessible areas.
Explanation/Notes: Industrial spies or computer intruders who have
access to any intracompany mail pickup points can easily send forged
authorization letters or internal forms that authorize personnel to release
Confidential information or to perform an action that assists the attacker.
Additionally, the attacker can mail a floppy disk or electronic media with
instructions to install a software update, or open a file that has embedded
macro commands that serve the intruder’s objectives. Naturally, any
request received by intracompany mail is assumed to be authentic by the
party who receives it.

283
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Cabinets, closets, or rooms containing network cabling, phone
wiring, or network access points must be secured at all times.
Explanation/Notes: Only authorized personnel will be permitted
access to telephone and network closets, rooms, or cabinets. Any outside
maintenance people or vendor personnel must be positively identified
using the procedures published by the department responsible for information security. Access to phone lines, network hubs, switches, bridges, or
other related equipment could be used by an attacker to compromise
computer and network security.

17237124 Ch16.F





4-10 The company bulletin board

Policy: Bulletin boards for the benefit of company workers should not
be posted in locations where the public has access.
Explanation/Notes: Many businesses have bulletin boards where private company or personnel information is posted for anyone to read.
Employer notices, employee lists, internal memorandums, employee
home contact numbers listed in advertisements, and other, similar information are frequently posted on the board.
Bulletin boards may be located near company cafeterias, or in close proximity to smoking or break areas where visitors have free access. This type
of information should not be made available to visitors or the public.
4-11 Computer center entrance

Policy: The computer room or data center should be locked at all times
and personnel must authenticate their identity prior to entering.
Explanation/Notes: Corporate security ought to consider deploying an
electronic badge or access card reader so all entries can be electronically
logged and audited.
284
Chapter 16

4-12 Customer accounts with service providers

Policy: Company personnel who place service orders with vendors that
supply critical services to the company must set up an account password
to prevent unauthorized persons from placing orders on behalf of the
company.
Explanation/Notes: Utility companies and many other vendors allow
customers to set up a password on request; the company should establish
passwords with all vendors that provide mission-critical services. This policy is especially critical to telecommunication and Internet services. Any
time critical services can be affected, a shared secret is necessary to verify
that the caller is authorized to place such orders. Note, too, identifiers
such as social security number, corporate taxpayer identification number,
mother’s maiden name, or similar identifiers must not be used.
A social engineer might, for example, call the telephone company and
give orders to add features such as call forwarding to dial-in modem lines,
or make a request to the Internet Service Provider to change translation
information to provide a bogus IP address when users perform a hostname
lookup.

17237124 Ch16.F





4-13 Departmental contact person

Policy: Your company may institute a program under which each
department or workgroup assigns an employee the responsibility of acting
as a point contact so that any personnel can easily verify the identity of
unknown persons claiming to be from that department. For example, the
help desk may contact the departmental point person to verify the identity of an employee who is requesting support.
Explanation/Notes: This method of verifying identity reduces the pool
of employees who are authorized to vouch for employees within their
department when such employees request support such as resetting passwords or other computer account-related issues.
Social engineering attacks are successful in part because technical support personnel are pressed for time and do not properly verify the identity
of requesters. Typically support staff cannot personally recognize all
authorized personnel because of the number of employees in larger organizations. The point-person method of vouching limits the number of
employees that technical support staff need to be personally familiar with
for verification purposes.
4-14 Customer passwords

4-15 Vulnerability testing

Policy: Notification of company use of social engineering tactics to test
security vulnerabilities is required during security awareness training and
employee orientation.

Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Customer service representatives shall not have the ability to
retrieve customer account passwords.
Explanation/Notes: Social engineers frequently call customer service
departments and, under a pretext, attempt to obtain a customer’s authentication information, such as the password or social security number.
With this information, the social engineer can then call another service
representative, pretend to be the customer, and obtain information or
place fraudulent orders.
To prevent these attempts from succeeding, customer service software
must be designed so that representatives can only type in the authentication information provided by the caller, and receive a response from the
system indicating whether the password is correct or not.

285

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: Without notification of social engineeringpenetration testing, company personnel may suffer embarrassment, anger,
or other emotional trauma from the use of deceptive tactics used against
them by other employees or contractors. By placing new hires on notice
during the orientation process that they may be subject to this testing, you
prevent such conflict.
4-16 Display of company Confidential information

Policy: Company information not designated for public release shall
not be displayed in any publicly accessible areas.
Explanation/Notes: In addition to Confidential product or procedure
information, internal contact information such as internal telephone
or employee lists, or building rosters that contain a list of management
personnel for each department within the company must also be kept out
of view.
4-17 Security awareness training

Chapter 16

286

Policy: All persons employed by the company must complete a security
awareness training course during employee orientation. Furthermore,
each employee must take a security awareness refresher course at periodic
intervals, not to exceed twelve months, as required by the department
assigned with security-training responsibility.
Explanation/Notes: Many organizations disregard end-user awareness
training altogether. According to the 2001 Global Information Security
Survey, only 30 percent of the surveyed organizations spend money on
awareness training for their user-community. Awareness training is an
essential requirement to mitigate successful security breaches utilizing
social engineering techniques.
4-18 Security training course for computer access

Policy: Personnel must attend and successfully complete a security
information course before being given access to any corporate computer
systems.
Explanation/Notes: Social engineers frequently target new employees,
knowing that as a group they are generally the people least likely to be
aware of the company’s security policies and the proper procedures to
determine classification and handling of sensitive information.

17237124 Ch16.F





Training should include an opportunity for employees to ask questions
about security policies. After training, the account holder should be
required to sign a document acknowledging their understanding of the
security policies, and their agreement to abide by the policies.
4-19 Employee badge must be color-coded

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY POLICIES
The information technology department of any company has a special
need for policies that help it protect the organization’s information assets.
To reflect the typical structure of IT operations in an organization, I have
divided the IT policies into General, Help Desk, Computer Administration,
and Computer Operations.
General
5-1 IT department employee contact information

Policy: Phone numbers and email addresses of individual IT department employees should not be disclosed to any person without a need to
know.
Explanation/Notes: The purpose of this policy is to prevent contact
information from being abused by social engineers. By only disclosing a

287
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Identification badges must be color-coded to indicate whether
the badge holder is an employee, contractor, temporary, vendor, consultant, visitor, or intern.
Explanation/Notes: The color of the badge is an excellent way to determine the status of a person from a distance. An alternative would be to use
large lettering to indicate the badgeholder’s status, but using a color-coded
scheme is unmistakable and easier to see.
A common social engineering tactic to gain access to a physical building
is to dress up as a delivery person or repair technician. Once inside the
facility, the attacker will masquerade as another employee or lie about his
status to obtain cooperation from unsuspecting employees. The purpose
of this policy is to prevent people from entering the building legitimately
and then entering areas they should not have access to. For example, a
person entering the facility as a telephone repair technician would not be
able to masquerade as an employee: The color of the badge would give
him away.

17237124 Ch16.F





general contact number or email address for IT, outsiders will be blocked
from contacting IT department personnel directly. The email address
for site administrative and technical contacts should only consist of
generic names such as admin@companyname.com; published telephone
numbers should connect to a departmental voice mailbox, not to individual workers.
When direct contact information is available, it becomes easy for a
computer intruder to reach specific IT employees and trick them into
providing information that can be used in an attack, or to impersonate
IT employees by using their names and contact information.
5-2 Technical support requests

Chapter 16

288

Policy: All technical support requests must be referred to the group that
handles such requests.
Explanation/Notes: Social engineers may attempt to target IT personnel who do not ordinarily handle technical support issues, and who may
not be aware of the proper security procedures when handling such
requests. Accordingly, IT staff must be trained to deny these requests
and refer the caller to the group that has the responsibility of providing
support.
Help Desk
6-1 Remote access procedures

Policy: Help desk personnel must not divulge details or instructions
regarding remote access, including external network access points or dialup numbers, unless the requester has been:
•
•

Verified as authorized to receive Internal information; and,
Verified as authorized to connect to the corporate network as
an external user. Unless known on a person-to-person basis,
the requester must be positively identified in accordance with
the Verification and Authorization Procedures outlined at the
beginning of this chapter.

Explanation/Notes: The corporate help desk is often a primary target
for the social engineer, both because the nature of their work is to assist
users with computer-related issues, and because they usually have elevated
system privileges. All help desk personnel must be trained to act as a
human firewall to prevent unauthorized disclosure of information that

17237124 Ch16.F





will assist any unauthorized persons from gaining access to company
resources. The simple rule is to never disclose remote access procedures to
anyone until positive verification of identity has been made.
6-2 Resetting passwords

Policy: The password to a user account may be reset only at the request
of the account holder.
Explanation/Notes: The most common ploy used by social engineers is
to have another person’s account password reset or changed. The attacker
poses as the employee using the pretext that their password was lost or forgotten. In an effort to reduce the success of this type of attack, an IT
employee receiving a request for a password reset must call the employee
back prior to taking any action; the callback must not be made to a phone
number provided by the requester, but to a number obtained from the
employee telephone directory. See Verification and Authorization
Procedures for more about this procedure.
6-3 Changing access privileges

6-4 New account authorization

Policy: A request to create a new account for an employee, contractor,
or other authorized person must be made either in writing and signed by
the employee’s manager, or sent by digitally signed electronic mail. These
requests must also be verified by sending a confirmation of the request
through intracompany mail.

289
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: All requests to increase a user’s privileges or access rights must be
approved in writing by the account holder’s manager. When the change is
made a confirmation must be sent to the requesting manager via intracompany mail. Furthermore, such requests must be verified as authentic
in accordance with the Verification and Authorization Procedures.
Explanation/Notes: Once a computer intruder has compromised a
standard user account, the next step is to elevate his or her privileges so
that the attacker has complete control over the compromised system. An
attacker who has knowledge of the authorization process can spoof an
authorized request when email, fax, or telephone are used to transmit it.
For example, the attacker may phone technical support or the help desk
and attempt to persuade a technician to grant additional access rights to
the compromised account.

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: Because passwords and other information useful in
breaking into computer systems are the highest priority targets of information thieves for gaining access, special precautions are necessary. The
intention of this policy is to prevent computer intruders from impersonating authorized personnel or forging requests for new accounts.
Therefore, all such requests must be positively verified using the
Verification and Authorization Procedures.
6-5 Delivery of new passwords

Chapter 16

290

Policy: New passwords must be handled as company Confidential
information, delivered by secure methods including in person; by a signature-required delivery service such as registered mail; or by UPS or FedEx.
See policies concerning distribution of Confidential information.
Explanation/Notes: Intracompany mail may also be used, but it is recommended that passwords be sent in secure envelopes that obscure the
content. A suggested method is to establish a computer point person in
each department who has the responsibility of handling distribution of
new account details and vouching for the identity of personnel who lose
or forget their passwords. In these circumstances, support personnel
would always be working with a smaller group of employees that would
be personally recognized.
6-6 Disabling an account

Policy: Prior to disabling a user’s account you must require positive verification that the request was made by authorized personnel.
Explanation/Notes: The intention of this policy is to prevent an
attacker from spoofing a request to disable an account, and then calling to
troubleshoot the user’s inability to access the computer system. When the
social engineer calls posing as a technician with preexisting knowledge of
the user’s inability to log in, the victim often complies with a request to
reveal his or her password during the troubleshooting process.
6-7 Disabling network ports or devices

Policy: No employee should disable any network device or port for any
unverified technical support personnel.
Explanation/Notes: The intention of this policy is to prevent an
attacker from spoofing a request to disable a network port, and then calling the worker to troubleshoot his or her inability to access the network.

17237124 Ch16.F





When the social engineer, posing as a helpful technician, calls with preexisting knowledge of the user’s network problem, the victim often complies
with a request to reveal his or her password during the troubleshooting
process.
6-8 Disclosure of procedures for wireless access

Policy: No personnel should disclose procedures for accessing company
systems over wireless networks to any parties not authorized to connect to
the wireless network.
Explanation/Notes: Always obtain prior verification of a requester as
a person authorized to connect to the corporate network as an external
user before releasing wireless access information. See Verification and
Authorization Procedures.
6-9 User trouble tickets

6-10 Initiating execute commands or running programs

Policy: Personnel employed in the IT department who have privileged
accounts should not execute any commands or run any application programs at the request of any person not personally known to them.
Explanation/Notes: A common method attackers use to install a Trojan
Horse program or other malicious software is to change the name of an
existing program, and then call the help desk complaining that an error
message is displayed whenever an attempt is made to run the program.
The attacker persuades the help desk technician to run the program himself. When the technician complies, the malicious software inherits the

291
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: The names of any employees who have reported computerrelated problems should not be revealed outside the information technology department.
Explanation/Notes: In a typical attack, a social engineer will call the
help desk and request the names of any personnel who have reported
recent computer problems. The caller may pretend to be an employee,
vendor, or an employee of the telephone company. Once he obtains the
names of persons reporting trouble, the social engineer, posing as a help
desk or technical support person, contacts the employee and says he/she
is calling to troubleshoot the problem. During the call, the attacker
deceives the victim into providing the desired information or into performing an action that facilitates the attacker’s objective.

17237124 Ch16.F





privileges of the user executing the program and performs a task, which
gives the attacker the same computer privileges as the help desk employee.
This may allow the attacker to take control of the company system.
This policy establishes a countermeasure to this tactic by requiring that
support personnel verify employment status prior to running any program
at the request of a caller.
Computer Administration
7-1 Changing global access rights

Policy: A request to change the global access rights associated with an
electronic job profile must be approved by the group assigned the responsibility of managing access rights on the corporate network.
Explanation/Notes: Authorized personnel will analyze each such
request to determine whether the change might entail a threat to information security. If so, the responsible employee will address the pertinent
issues with the requester and jointly arrive at a decision about the changes
to be made.

Chapter 16

292

7-2 Remote access requests

Policy: Remote computer access will only be provided to personnel
who have a demonstrated need to access corporate computer systems from
off-site locations. The request must be made by an employee’s manager
and verified as described in the Verification and Authorization Procedures
section.
Explanation/Notes: Recognizing the need for off-site access into the
corporate network by authorized personnel, limiting such access only to
people with a need may dramatically reduce risk and management of
remote access users. The smaller the number of people with external dialup privileges, the smaller the pool of potential targets for an attacker.
Never forget that the attacker also may target remote users with the intent
of hijacking their connection into the corporate network, or by masquerading as them during a pretext call.
7-3 Resetting privileged account passwords

Policy: A request to reset a password to a privileged account must be
approved by the system manager or administrator responsible for the computer on which the account exists. The new password must be sent
through intracompany mail or delivered in person.

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: Privileged accounts have access to all system
resources and files stored on the computer system. Naturally, these
accounts deserve the greatest protection possible.
7-4 Outside support personnel remote access

7-5 Strong authentication for remote access to
corporate systems

Policy: All connection points into the corporate network from remote
locations must be protected through the use of strong authentication
devices, such as dynamic passwords or biometrics.
Explanation/Notes: Many businesses rely on static passwords as the
sole means of authentication for remote users. This practice is dangerous
because it is insecure: computer intruders target any remote access point
that might be the weak link in the victim’s network. Remember that you
never know when someone else knows your password.
Accordingly, any remote access points must be protected with strong
authentication such as time-based tokens, smart cards, or biometric
devices, so that intercepted passwords are of no value to an attacker.

293
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: No outside support person (such as software or hardware vendor personnel) may be given any remote access information or be allowed
to access any company computer system or related devices without positive verification of identity and authorization to perform such services. If
the vendor requires privileged access to provide support services, the password to the account used by the vendor shall be changed immediately
after the vendor services have been completed.
Explanation/Notes: Computer attackers may pose as vendors to gain
access to corporate computer or telecommunication networks. Therefore,
it is essential that the identity of the vendor be verified in addition to their
authorization to perform any work on the system. Moreover, the doors
into the system must be slammed shut once their job is done by changing
the account password used by the vendor.
No vendor should be allowed to pick his or her own password for any
account, even temporarily. Some vendors have been known to use the
same or similar passwords across multiple customer systems. For example,
one network security company set up privileged accounts on all their customers’ systems with the same password, and, to add insult to injury, with
outside Telnet access enabled.

17237124 Ch16.F





When authentication based on dynamic passwords is impractical, computer users must religiously adhere to the policy for choosing hard-toguess passwords.
7-6 Operating system configuration

Policy: Systems administrators shall ensure that, wherever possible,
operating systems are configured so that they are consistent with all pertinent security policies and procedures.
Explanation/Notes: Drafting and distributing security policies is a
fundamental step toward reducing risk, but in most cases, compliance is
necessarily left up to the individual employee. There are, however, any
number of computer-related policies that can be made mandatory
through operating-system settings, such as the required length of passwords. Automating security policies by configuration of operating system
parameters effectively takes the decision out of the human element’s
hands, increasing the overall security of the organization.
7-7 Mandatory expiration
Chapter 16

294

Policy: All computer accounts must be set to expire after one year.
Explanation/Notes: The intention of this policy is to eliminate the existence of computer accounts that are no longer being used, since computer
intruders commonly target dormant accounts. The process insures that
any computer accounts belonging to former employees or contractors that
have been inadvertently left in place are automatically disabled.
At management discretion, you may require that employees must take a
security refresher training course at renewal time, or must review information security policies and sign an acknowledgment of their agreement
to adhere to them.
7-8 Generic email addresses

Policy: The information technology department shall set up a generic
email address for each department within the organization that ordinarily
communicates with the public.
Explanation/Notes: The generic email address can be released to the
public by the telephone receptionist or published on the company Web
site. Otherwise, each employee shall only disclose his or her personal email
address to people who have genuine need to know.

17237124 Ch16.F





During the first phase of a social engineering attack, the attacker often
tries to obtain telephone numbers, names, and titles of employees. In most
cases, this information is publicly available on the company Web site or
just for the asking. Creation of generic voice mailboxes and/or email
addresses makes it difficult to associate employee names with particular
departments or responsibilities.
7-9 Contact information for domain registrations

7-10 Installation of security and operating system
updates

Policy: All security patches for operating system and application
software shall be installed as soon as they become available. If this policy
conflicts with the operation of mission-critical productions systems, such
updates should be performed as soon as practicable.
Explanation/Notes: Once a vulnerability has been identified, the
software manufacturer should be contacted immediately to determine
whether a patch or a temporary fix has been made available to close the
vulnerability. An unpatched computer system represents one of the greatest security threats to the enterprise. When system administrators procrastinate about applying the necessary fixes, the window of exposure is
open wide so that any attacker can climb through.

295
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: When registering for acquisition of Internet address space or
host names, the contact information for administrative, technical, or other
personnel should not identify any individual personnel by name. Instead,
you should list a generic email address and the main corporate telephone
number.
Explanation/Notes: The purpose of this policy is to prevent contact
information from being abused by a computer intruder. When the names
and phone numbers of individuals are provided, an intruder can use this
information to contact the individuals and attempt to deceive them into
revealing system information, or to perform an action item that facilitates
an attacker’s objective. Or the social engineer can impersonate a listed
person in an effort to deceive other company personnel.
Instead of an email address to a particular employee, contact information must be in the form of administrator@company.com. Telecommunications department personnel can establish a generic voice mailbox for
administrative or technical contacts so as to limit information disclosure
that would be useful in a social engineering attack.

17237124 Ch16.F





Dozens of security vulnerabilities are identified and published weekly on
the Internet. Until information technology staff are vigilant in their efforts
to apply all security patches and fixes as soon as practical, despite these systems being behind the company firewall, the corporate network will
always be at risk of suffering a security incident. It is extremely important
to keep apprised of published security vulnerabilities identified in the
operating system or any application programs used during the course of
business.
7-11 Contact information on Web sites

Chapter 16

296

Policy: The company’s external Web site shall not reveal any details of
corporate structure or identify any employees by name.
Explanation/Notes: Corporate structure information such as organization charts, hierarchy charts, employee or departmental lists, reporting
structure, names, positions, internal contact numbers, employee numbers,
or similar information that is used for internal processes should not be
made available on publicly accessible Web sites.
Computer intruders often obtain very useful information on a target’s
Web site. The attacker uses this information to appear as a knowledgeable
employee when using a pretext or ruse. The social engineer is more likely
to establish credibility by having this information at his or her disposal.
Moreover, the attacker can analyze this information to find out the likely
targets who have access to valuable, sensitive, or critical information.
7-12 Creation of privileged accounts

Policy: No privileged account should be created or system privileges
granted to any account unless authorized by the system administrator or
system manager.
Explanation/Notes: Computer intruders frequently pose as hardware
or software vendors in an attempt to dupe information technology personnel into creating unauthorized accounts. The intention of this policy
is to block these attacks by establishing greater control over the creation of
privileged accounts. The system manager or administrator of the computer system must approve any request to create an account with elevated
privileges.
7-13 Guest accounts

Policy: Guest accounts on any computer systems or related networked
devices shall be disabled or removed, except for an FTP (file transfer protocol) server approved by management with anonymous access enabled.

17237124 Ch16.F


