


Explanation/Notes: The intention of the guest account is to provide
temporary access for persons who do not need to have their own account.
Several operating systems are installed by default with a guest account
enabled. Guest accounts should always be disabled because their existence
violates the principle of user accountability. IT should be able to audit any
computer-related activity and relate it to a specific user.
Social engineers are easily able to take advantage of these guest accounts
for gaining unauthorized access, either directly or by duping authorized
personnel into using a guest account.
7-14 Encryption of off-site backup data

Policy: Any company data that is stored off site should be encrypted to
prevent unauthorized access.
Explanation/Notes: Operations staff must insure that all data is recoverable in the event that any information needs to be restored. This requires
regular test decryption of a random sampling of encrypted files to make
sure the data can be recovered. Furthermore, keys used to encrypt data
shall be escrowed with a trusted manager in the event the encryption keys
are lost or unavailable.
297

Policy: All publicly accessible Ethernet access points must be on a segmented network to prevent unauthorized access to the internal network.
Explanation/Notes: The intention of this policy is to prevent any outsiders from connecting to the internal network when on company premises. Ethernet jacks installed in conference rooms, the cafeteria, training
centers, or other areas accessible to visitors shall be filtered to prevent
unauthorized access by visitors to the corporate computer systems.
The network or security administrator may choose to set up a virtual
LAN in a switch, if available, to control access from these locations.
7-16 Dial-in modems

Policy: Modems used for dial-in calls shall be set to answer no earlier
than the fourth ring.
Explanation/Notes: As depicted in the movie War Games, hackers use
a technique known as war-dialing to locate telephone lines that have
modems connected to them. The process begins with the attacker identifying the telephone prefixes used in the area where the target company is
located. A scanning program is then used to try every telephone number

Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

7-15 Visitor access to network connections

17237124 Ch16.F





in those prefixes, to locate those that answer with a modem. To speed up
the process, these programs are configured to wait for one or two rings for
a modem response before going on to try the next number. When a company sets the auto answer on modem lines to at least four rings, scanning
programs will fail to recognize the line as a modem line.
7-17 Antivirus software

Chapter 16

298

Policy: Every computer system shall have current versions of antivirus
software installed and activated.
Explanation/Notes: For those businesses that do not automatically
push down antivirus software and pattern files (programs that recognize
patterns common to virus software to recognize new viruses) to user desktops or workstations, individual users must take the responsibility for
installing and maintaining the software on their own systems, including
any computer systems used for accessing the corporate network remotely.
If feasible, this software must be set for automatic update of virus and
Trojan signatures nightly. When pattern or signature files are not pushed
down to user desktops, computer users shall have the responsibility to
update pattern files at least on a weekly basis.
These provisions apply to all desktop machines and laptops used to
access company computer systems, and apply whether the computer is
company property or personally owned.
7-18 Incoming email attachments (high security
requirements)

Policy: In an organization with high security requirements, the corporate firewall shall be configured to filter out all email attachments.
Explanation/Notes: This policy applies only to businesses with high
security requirements, or to those that have no business need to receive
attachments through electronic mail.
7-19 Authentication of software

Policy: All new software or software fixes or upgrades, whether on physical media or obtained over the Internet, must be verified as authentic
prior to installation. This policy is especially relevant to the information
technology department when installing any software that requires system
privileges.
Explanation/Notes: Computer software referred to in this policy
includes operating system components, application software, hot fixes,

17237124 Ch16.F





patches, or any software updates. Many software manufacturers have
implemented methods whereby customers can check the integrity of any
distribution, usually by a digital signature. In any case where the integrity
cannot be verified, the manufacturer must be consulted to verify that the
software is authentic.
Computer attackers have been known to send software to a victim,
packaged to appear as if the software manufacturer had produced it and
shipped it to the company. It is essential that you verify any software you
receive as authentic, especially if unsolicited, before installing it on company systems.
Note that a sophisticated attacker might find out that your organization
has ordered software from a manufacturer. With that information in
hand, the attacker can cancel the order with the real manufacturer, and
order the software himself. The software is then modified to perform some
malicious function, and is shipped or delivered to your company, in the
original packaging, with shrink-wrapping if necessary. Once the product
is installed, the attacker is in control.
7-20 Default passwords

7-21 Invalid access attempts lockout (low to medium
security)

Policy: Especially in an organization with low to medium security
requirements, whenever a specified number of successive invalid login
attempts to a particular account have been made, the account should be
locked out for a period of time.
Explanation/Notes: All company workstations and servers must be set
to limit the number of successive invalid attempts to sign in. This policy
is necessary to prevent password guessing by trial and error, dictionary
attacks, or brute force attempts to gain unauthorized access.

299
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: All operating system software and hardware devices that initially
have a password set to a default value must have their passwords reset in
accordance with the company password policy.
Explanation/Notes: Several operating systems and computer-related
devices are shipped with default passwords—that is, with the same password enabled on every unit sold. Failure to change default passwords is a
grave mistake that places the company at risk.
Default passwords are widely known and are available on Internet Web
sites. In an attack, the first password an intruder tries is the manufacturer’s
default password.

17237124 Ch16.F





The system administrator must configure the security settings to lock
out an account whenever the desired threshold of successive invalid
attempts has been reached. It is recommended that an account be locked
out for at least thirty minutes after seven successive login attempts.
7-22 Invalid access attempts account disabled
(high security)

Chapter 16

300

Policy: In an organization with high security requirements, whenever a
specified number of successive invalid login attempts to a particular
account has been made, the account should be disabled until reset by the
group responsible for providing account support.
Explanation/Notes: All company workstations and servers must be
set to limit the number of successive invalid attempts to sign in. This
policy is a necessary control to prevent password guessing by trial and
error, dictionary attacks, or brute force attempts to gain unauthorized
access.
The system administrator must configure the security settings to disable
the account after five invalid login attempts. Following such an attack, the
account holder will need to call technical support or the group responsible for account support to enable the account. Prior to resetting the
account, the department responsible must positively identify the account
holder, following the Verification and Authorization Procedures.
7-23 Periodic change of privileged
account passwords

Policy: All privileged account holders shall be required to change their
passwords at least every thirty days.
Explanation/Notes: Depending on operating system limitations, the
systems administrator must enforce this policy by configuration of security parameters in system software.
7-24 Periodic change of user passwords

Policy: All account holders must change their passwords at least every
sixty days.
Explanation/Notes: With operating systems that provide this feature,
the systems administrator must enforce this policy by configuration of
security parameters in the software.

17237124 Ch16.F





7-25 New account password set up

Policy: New computer accounts must be established with an initial
password that is preexpired, requiring the account holder to select a new
password upon initial use.
Explanation/Notes: This requirement ensures that only the account
holder will have knowledge of his or her password.
7-26 Boot-up passwords

Policy: All computer systems must be configured to require a boot-up
password.
Explanation/Notes: Computers must be configured so that when the
computer is turned on, a password is required before the operating system
will boot. This prevents any unauthorized person from turning on and
using another person’s computer. This policy applies to all computers on
company premises.
7-27 Password requirements for privileged accounts

Policy: All privileged accounts must have a strong password: The password must:

•
•

Not be a word found in a dictionary in any language
Be mixed upper and lower case with at least one letter, one
symbol, and one numeral
Be at least 12 characters in length
Not be related to the company or individual in any way.

Explanation/Notes: In most cases computer intruders will target specific accounts that have system privileges. Occasionally the attacker will
exploit other vulnerabilities to gain full control over the system.
The first passwords an intruder will try are the simple, commonly used
words found in a dictionary. Selecting strong passwords enhances the
security by reducing the chance an attacker will find the password by trial
and error, dictionary attack, or brute force attack.
7-28 Wireless access points

Policy: All users who access a wireless network must use VPN (Virtual
Private Network) technology to protect the corporate network.

Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

•
•

301

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: Wireless networks are being attacked by a new
technique called war driving. This technique involves simply driving or
walking around with a laptop equipped with an 802.11B NIC card until
a wireless network is detected.
Many companies have deployed wireless networks without even
enabling WEP (wireless equivalency protocol), which is used to secure the
wireless connection through use of encryption. But even when activated,
the current version of WEP (mid-2002) is ineffective: It has been cracked
wide open, and several Web sites are devoted to providing the means for
locating open wireless systems and cracking WEP-enabled wireless access
points.
Accordingly, it is essential to add a layer of protection around the
802.11B protocol by deploying VPN technology.
7-29 Updating antivirus pattern files

Chapter 16

302

Policy: Every computer system must be programmed to automatically
update antivirus/anti-Trojan pattern files.
Explanation/Notes: At a minimum, such updates shall occur at least
weekly. In businesses where employees leave their computers turned on, it
is highly recommended that pattern files be updated on a nightly basis.
Antivirus software is ineffective if it is not updated to detect all new
forms of malicious code. Since the threat of virus, worm, and Trojan
Horse infections is substantially increased if pattern files are not updated,
it is essential that antivirus or malicious code products be kept up to date.
Computer Operations
8-1 Entering commands or running programs

Policy: Computer operations personnel must not enter commands or
run programs at the request of any person not known to them. If a situation arises where an Unverified Person seems to have reason to make such
a request, it should not be complied with without first getting manager
approval.
Explanation/Notes: Computer operations employees are popular targets of social engineers, since their positions usually require privileged
account access, and the attacker expects that they will be less experienced
and less knowledgeable about company procedures than other IT workers. The intention of this policy is to add an appropriate check and
balance to prevent social engineers from duping computer operations
personnel.

17237124 Ch16.F





8-2 Workers with privileged accounts

Policy: Employees with privileged accounts must not provide assistance
or information to any Unverified Person. In particular this refers to not
providing computer help (such as training on application use), accessing
any company database, downloading software, or revealing names of
personnel who have remote access capabilities,
Explanation/Notes: Social engineers often target employees with
privileged accounts. The intent of this policy is to direct IT staff with
privileged accounts to successfully handle calls that might represent social
engineering attacks.
8-3 Internal systems information

8-4 Disclosure of passwords

Policy: Computer operations staff must never reveal their password, or
any other passwords entrusted to them, without prior approval of an
information technology manager.
Explanation/Notes: In general terms, revealing any password to
another is strictly prohibited. This policy recognizes that operations
personnel may need to disclose a password to a third party when exigent
situations arise. This exception to the general policy prohibiting disclosure

303
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Computer Operations staff must never disclose any information
related to enterprise computer systems or related devices without positively verifying the identity of the requester.
Explanation/Notes: Computer intruders often contact computer operations employees to obtain valuable information such as system access
procedures, external points for remote access, and dial-in telephone
numbers that are of substantial value to the attacker.
In companies that have technical support staff or a help desk, requests
to the computer operations staff for information about computer systems
or related devices should be considered unusual. Any information request
should be scrutinized under the corporate data classification policy to
determine whether the requester is authorized to have such information.
When the class of information cannot be determined, the information
should be considered to be Internal.
In some cases, outside vendor technical support will need to communicate with persons who have access to enterprise computer systems.
Vendors must have specific contacts in the IT department so that those
individuals can recognize each other for verification purposes.

17237124 Ch16.F





of any password requires specific approval of an information technology
manager. For extra precaution, this responsibility of disclosing authentication information should be limited to a small group of individuals who
have received special training on verification procedures.
8-5 Electronic media

Policy: All electronic media that contains information not designated
for public release shall be locked in a physically secure location.
Explanation/Notes: The intention of this policy is to prevent physical
theft of Sensitive information stored on electronic media.
8-6 Backup media

Chapter 16

304

Policy: Operations personnel should store backup media in a company
safe or other secure location.
Explanation/Notes: Backup media is another prime target of computer
intruders. An attacker is not going to spend time attempting to compromise a computer system or network when the weakest link in the chain
might be physically unprotected backup media. Once backup media is
stolen, the attacker can compromise the confidentiality of any data stored
on it, unless the data is encrypted. Therefore, physically securing backup
media is an essential process to protect the confidentiality of corporate
information.

POLICIES FOR ALL EMPLOYEES
Whether in IT or human resources, the accounting department, or the
maintenance staff, there are certain security policies that every employee
of your company must know. These policies fall into the categories of
General, Computer Use, Email Use, policies for Telecommuters, Phone
Use, Fax Use, Voice Mail Use, and Passwords.
General
9-1 Reporting suspicious calls

Policy: Employees who suspect that they may be the subject of a security violation, including any suspicious requests to disclose information or
to perform action items on a computer, must immediately report the
event to the company’s incident reporting group.

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: When a social engineer fails to convince his or her
target to comply with a demand, the attacker will always try someone else.
By reporting a suspicious call or event, an employee takes the first step in
alerting the company that an attack may be under way. Thus, individual
employees are the first line of defense against social engineering attacks.
9-2 Documenting suspicious calls

Policy: In the event of a suspicious phone call that appears to be a social
engineering attack, the employee shall, to the extent practical, draw out
the caller to learn details that might reveal what the attacker is attempting
to accomplish, and make notes of these details for reporting purposes.
Explanation/Notes: When reported to the incident reporting group,
such details can help them spot the object or pattern of an attack.
9-3 Disclosure of dial-up numbers

9-4 Corporate ID badges

Policy: Except when in their immediate office area, all company personnel, including management and executive staff, must wear their
employee badges at all times.
Explanation/Notes: All workers, including corporate executives, should
be trained and motivated to understand that wearing an ID badge is
mandatory everywhere on company premises other than public areas and
the person’s own office or workgroup area.

305
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Company personnel must not disclose company modem telephone numbers, but should always refer such requests to the help desk or
to technical support personnel.
Explanation/Notes: Dial-up telephone numbers must be treated as
Internal information, to be provided only to employees who have a need
to know such information to carry out their job responsibilities.
Social engineers routinely target employees or departments that are
likely to be less protective of the requested information. For example, the
attacker may call the accounts payable department masquerading as a telephone company employee who is trying to resolve a billing problem. The
attacker then asks for any known fax or dial-in numbers in order to resolve
the problem. The intruder often targets an employee who is unlikely to
realize the danger of releasing such information, or who lacks training
with respect to company disclosure policy and procedures.

17237124 Ch16.F





9-5 Challenging ID badge violations

Policy: All employees must immediately challenge any unfamiliar person who is not wearing an employee badge or visitor’s badge.
Explanation/Notes: While no company wants to create a culture where
eagle-eyed employees look for a way to ensnare coworkers for venturing
into the hallway without their badges, nonetheless any company concerned with protecting its information needs to take seriously the threat
of a social engineer wandering its facilities unchallenged. Motivation for
employees who prove diligent in helping enforce the badges-always policy
may be acknowledged in familiar ways, such as recognition in the company newspaper or on bulletin boards; a few hours off with pay; or a
letter of commendation in their personnel records.
9-6 Piggybacking (passing through secure entrances)

Chapter 16

306

Policy: Employees entering a building must not allow anyone not personally known to them to follow behind them when they have used a
secure means, such as a card key, to gain entrance (piggybacking).
Explanation/Notes: Employees must understand that it is not rude to
require unknown persons to authenticate themselves before helping them
enter a facility or access a secure area.
Social engineers frequently use a technique known as piggybacking, in
which they lie in wait for another person who is entering a facility or
Sensitive area, and then simply enter with them. Most people feel uncomfortable challenging others, assuming that they are probably legitimate
employees. Another piggybacking technique is to carry several boxes so
that an unsuspecting worker opens or holds the door to help.
9-7 Shredding Sensitive documents

Policy: Sensitive documents to be discarded must be cross-shredded;
media including hard drives that have ever contained Sensitive information or materials must be destroyed in accordance with the procedures set
forth by the group responsible for information security.
Explanation/Notes: Standard shredders do not adequately destroy
documents; cross-shredders turn documents into pulp. The best security
practice is to presume that the organization’s chief competitors will be
rifling through discarded materials looking for any intelligence that could
be beneficial to them.

17237124 Ch16.F





Industrial spies and computer attackers regularly obtain Sensitive information from materials tossed in the trash. In some cases, business competitors have been known to attempt bribery of cleaning crews to turn
over company trash. In one recent example, an employee at Goldman
Sachs discovered items that were used in an insider-trading scheme from
the trash.
9-8 Personal identifiers

Policy: Personal identifiers such as employee number, social security
number, driver’s license number, date and place of birth, and mother’s
maiden name should never be used as a means of verifying identity. These
identifiers are not secret and can be obtained by numerous means.
Explanation/Notes: A social engineer can obtain other people’s personal identifiers for a price. And in fact, contrary to popular belief, anyone with a credit card and access to the Internet can obtain these pieces of
personal identification. Yet despite the obvious danger, banks, utility companies, and credit card companies commonly use these identifiers. This is
one reason that identity theft is the fastest growing crime of the decade.
9-9 Organization charts

9-10 Private information about employees

Policy: Any requests for private employee information must be referred
to human resources.

Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Details shown on the company’s organization chart must not be
disclosed to anyone other than company employees.
Explanation/Notes: Corporate structure information includes organization charts, hierarchy charts, departmental employee lists, reporting
structure, employee names, employee positions, internal contact numbers,
employee numbers, or similar information.
In the first phase of a social engineering attack, the goal is to gather
information about the internal structure of the company. This information is then used to strategize an attack plan. The attacker can also analyze
this information to determine which employees are likely to have access to
the data that he seeks. During the attack, the information makes the
attacker appear as a knowledgeable employee; making it more likely he’ll
dupe his victim into compliance.

307

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: An exception to this policy may be the telephone
number for an employee who needs to be contacted regarding a workrelated issue or who is acting in an on-call role. However, it is always
preferable to get the requester’s phone number, and have the employee call
him or her back.
Computer Use
10-1 Entering commands into a computer

Policy: Company personnel should never enter commands into a computer or computer-related equipment at the request of another person
unless the requester has been verified as an employee of the information
technology department.
Explanation/Notes: One common ploy of social engineers is to request
that an employee enter a command that makes a change to the system’s
configuration, allows the attacker to access the victim’s computer without
providing authentication, or allows the attacker to retrieve information
that can be used to facilitate a technical attack.
10-2 Internal naming conventions
Chapter 16

308

Policy: Employees must not disclose the internal names of computer
systems or databases without prior verification that the requester is
employed by the company.
Explanation/Notes: Social engineers will sometimes attempt to obtain
the names of company computer systems; once the names are known, the
attacker places a call to the company and masquerades as a legitimate
employee having trouble accessing or using one of the systems. By knowing the internal name assigned to the particular system, the social engineer
gains credibility.
10-3 Requests to run programs

Policy: Company personnel should never run any computer applications or programs at the request of another person unless the requester has
been verified as an employee of the information technology department.
Explanation/Notes: Any request to run programs, applications, or perform any activity on a computer must be refused unless the requester is
positively identified as an employee in the information technology department. If the request involves revealing Confidential information from any

17237124 Ch16.F





file or electronic message, responding to the request must be in accordance
with the procedures for releasing Confidential information. See
Information Disclosure Policy.
Computer attackers deceive people into executing programs that enable
the intruder to gain control of the system. When an unsuspecting user
runs a program planted by an attacker, the result may give the intruder
access to the victim’s computer system. Other programs record the activities of the computer user and return that information to the attacker.
While a social engineer can trick a person into executing computer
instructions that may do damage, a technically based attack tricks the
computer’s operating system into executing computer instructions that
may cause the same sort of damage.
10-4 Downloading or installing software

10-5 Plain text passwords and email

Policy: Passwords shall not be sent through email unless encrypted.
Explanation/Notes: While it’s discouraged, this policy may be waived
by e-commerce sites in certain limited circumstances, such as:
•
•

Sending passwords to customers who have registered on the
site.
Sending passwords to customers who have lost or forgotten
their passwords.

309
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Company personnel must never download or install software at
the request of another person, unless the requester has been verified as an
employee with the information technology department.
Explanation/Notes: Employees should be on the alert for any unusual request that involves any sort of transaction with computer-related
equipment.
A common tactic used by social engineers is to deceive unsuspecting
victims into downloading and installing a program that helps the attacker
accomplish his or her goal of compromising computer or network security. In some instances, the program may covertly spy on the user or allow
the attacker to take control of the computer system through use of a covert
remote control application.

17237124 Ch16.F





10-6 Security-related software

Policy: Company personnel must never remove or disable antivirus/
Trojan Horse, firewall, or other security-related software without prior
approval from the information technology department.
Explanation/Notes: Computer users sometimes disable security-related
software without provocation, thinking it will increase the speed of their
computer.
A social engineer may attempt to deceive an employee into disabling or
removing software that is needed to protect the company against securityrelated threats.
10-7 Installation of modems

Chapter 16

310

Policy: No modems may be connected to any computer until prior
approval has been obtained from the IT department.
Explanation/Notes: It is important to recognize that modems on desktops or workstations in the workplace pose a substantial security threat,
especially if connected to the corporate network. Accordingly, this policy
controls modem connection procedures.
Hackers use a technique called war dialing to identify any active modem
lines within a range of telephone numbers. The same technique may be
used to locate telephone numbers connected to modems within the enterprise. An attacker can easily compromise the corporate network if he or
she identifies a computer system connected to a modem running vulnerable remote access software, which is configured with an easily guessed
password or no password at all.
10-8 Modems and auto-answer settings

Policy: All desktops or workstations with IT-approved modems shall
have the modem auto-answer feature disabled to prevent anyone from
dialing into the computer system.
Explanation/Notes: Whenever feasible, the information technology
department should deploy a dial-out modem pool for those employees
who need to dial out to external computer systems via modem.
10-9 Cracking tools

Policy: Employees will not download or use any software tools designed
to defeat software protection mechanisms.

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: The Internet has dozens of sites devoted to software designed to crack shareware and commercial software products. The
use of these tools not only violates a software owner’s copyright, but also
is extremely dangerous. Because these programs originate from unknown
sources, they may contain hidden malicious code that may cause damage
to the user’s computer or plant a Trojan Horse that gives the author of the
program access to the user’s computer.
10-10 Posting company information on line

10-11 Floppy disks and other electronic media

Policy: If media used to store computer information, such as floppy
disks or CD-ROMS have been left in a work area or on an employee’s
desk, and that media is from an unknown source, it must not be inserted
into any computer system.

311
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Employees shall not disclose any details regarding company
hardware or software in any public newsgroup, forum, or bulletin board,
and shall not disclose contact information other than in accordance with
policy.
Explanation/Notes: Any message posted to the Usenet, on-line forums,
bulletin boards, or mailing lists can be searched to gather intelligence on
a target company or a target individual. During the research phase of a
social engineering attack, the attacker may search the Internet for any
posts that contain useful information about the company, its products or
its people.
Some posts contain very useful tidbits of information that the attacker
can use to further an attack. For example, a network administrator may
post a question about configuring firewall filters on a particular brand and
model of firewall. An attacker who discovers this message will learn valuable information about the type and configuration of the company’s firewall that enables him to circumvent it to gain access to the enterprise
network.
This problem can be reduced or avoided by implementing a policy that
allows employees to post to newsgroups from anonymous accounts that
do not identify the company from which they originated. Naturally, the
policy must require employees not to include any contact information
that may identify the company.

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: One method used by attackers to install malicious
code is to place programs onto a floppy or CD-ROM and label it with
something very enticing (for example, “Personnel Payroll Data—
Confidential”). They then drop several copies in areas used by employees. If
a single copy is inserted into a computer and the files on it opened, the
attacker’s malicious code is executed. This may create a backdoor, which is
used to compromise the system, or may cause other damage to the network.
10-12 Discarding removable media

Chapter 16

312

Policy: Before discarding any electronic media that ever contained
Sensitive company information, even if that information has been deleted,
the item shall be thoroughly degaussed or damaged beyond recovery.
Explanation/Notes: While shredding hard-copy documents is commonplace these days, company workers may overlook the threat of
discarding electronic media that contained Sensitive data at any time.
Computer attackers attempt to recover any data stored on discarded
electronic media. Workers may presume that by just deleting files, they
ensure that those files cannot be recovered. This presumption is absolutely
incorrect and can cause confidential business information to fall into the
wrong hands. Accordingly, all electronic media that contains or previously
contained information not designated as Public must be wiped clean or
destroyed using the procedures approved by the responsible group.
10-13 Password-protected screen savers

Policy: All computer users must set a screen saver password and the inactivity time-out limit to lock the computer after a certain period of inactivity.
Explanation/Notes: All employees are responsible for setting a screen
saver password, and setting the inactivity timeout for no more than ten
minutes. The intention of this policy is to prevent any unauthorized
person from using another person’s computer. Additionally, this policy
protects company computer systems from being easily accessed by outsiders who have gained access to the building.
10-14 Disclosure or sharing of passwords statement

Policy: Prior to creation of a new computer account, the employee or
contractor must sign a written statement acknowledging that he or she

17237124 Ch16.F





understands that passwords must never be disclosed or shared with anyone, and that he or she agrees to abide by this policy.
Explanation/Notes: The agreement should also include a notice that
violation of such agreement may lead to disciplinary action up to and
including termination.
Email Use
11-1 Email attachments

11-2 Automatic forwarding to external addresses

Policy: Automatic forwarding of incoming email to an external email
address is prohibited.
Explanation/Notes: The intention of this policy is to prevent an outsider from receiving email sent to an internal email address.
Employees occasionally set up email forwarding of their incoming mail
to an email address outside the company when they will be away from the
office. Or an attacker may be able to deceive an employee into setting up
an internal email address that forwards to an address outside the company.
The attacker can then pose as a legitimate insider by having an internal
company email address and get people to email Sensitive information to
the internal email address.

313
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Email attachments must not be opened unless the attachment
was expected in the course of business or was sent by a Trusted Person.
Explanation/Notes: All email attachments must be scrutinized closely.
You may require that prior notice be given by a Trusted Person that an
email attachment is being sent before the recipient opens any attachment.
This will reduce the risk of attackers using social engineering tactics to
deceive people into opening attachments.
One method of compromising a computer system is to trick an
employee into running a malicious program that creates a vulnerability,
providing the attacker with access to the system. By sending an email
attachment that has executable code or macros, the attacker may be able
to gain control of the user’s computer.
A social engineer may send a malicious email attachment, then call and
attempt to persuade the recipient to open the attachment.

17237124 Ch16.F





11-3 Forwarding emails

Policy: Any request from an Unverified Person to relay an electronic
mail message to another Unverified Person requires verification of the
requester’s identity.
11-4 Verifying email

Policy: An email message that appears to be from a Trusted Person that
contains a request to provide information not designated as Public, or to
perform an action with any computer-related equipment, requires an
additional form of authentication. See Verification and Authorization
Procedures.
Explanation/Notes: An attacker can easily forge an email message and
its header, making it appear as if the message originated from another
email address. An attacker can also send an email message from a compromised computer system, providing phony authorization to disclose
information or perform an action. Even by examining the header of an
email message you cannot detect email messages sent from a compromised
internal computer system.

Chapter 16

314

Phone Use
12-1 Participating in telephone surveys

Policy: Employees may not participate in surveys by answering any
questions from any outside organization or person. Such requests must be
referred to the public relations department or other designated person.
Explanation/Notes: A method used by social engineers to obtain valuable information that may be used against the enterprise is to call an
employee and claim to be doing a survey. It’s surprising how many people
are happy to provide information about the company and themselves to
strangers when they believe they’re taking part in legitimate research.
Among the innocuous questions, the caller will insert a few questions that
the attacker wants to know. Eventually, such information may be used to
compromise the corporate network.
12-2 Disclosure of internal telephone numbers

Policy: If an Unverified Person asks an employee for his phone number
the employee may make a reasonable determination of whether disclosure
is necessary to conduct company business.
Explanation/Notes: The intention of this policy is to require employees to make a considered decision on whether disclosure of their telephone

17237124 Ch16.F





extension is necessary. When dealing with people who have not demonstrated a genuine need to know the extension, the safest course is to
require them to call the main company phone number and be transferred.
12-3 Passwords in voice mail messages

Policy: Leaving messages containing password information on anyone’s
voice mailbox is prohibited.
Explanation/Notes: A social engineer can often gain access to an
employee’s voice mailbox because it is inadequately protected with an
easy-to-guess access code. In one type of attack, a sophisticated computer
intruder is able to create his own phony voice mailbox and persuade
another employee to leave a message relaying password information. This
policy defeats such a ruse.
Fax Use
13-1 Relaying faxes

13-2 Verification of faxed authorizations

Policy: Prior to carrying out any instructions received by facsimile, the
sender must be verified as an employee or other Trusted Person. Placing a
telephone call to the sender to verify the request is usually sufficient.
Explanation/Notes: Employees must exercise caution when unusual
requests are sent by fax, such as a request to enter commands into a computer or disclose information. The data in the header of a faxed document
can be falsified by changing the settings of the sending fax machine.
Therefore the header on a fax must not be accepted as a means of establishing identity or authorization.

315
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: No fax may be received and forwarded to another party without
verification of the requester’s identity.
Explanation/Notes: Information thieves may trick trusted employees
into faxing sensitive information to a fax machine located on the company’s premises. Prior to the attacker giving the fax number to the victim,
the imposter telephones an unsuspecting employee, such as a secretary or
administrative assistant, and asks if a document can be faxed to them for
later pickup. Subsequently, after the unsuspecting employee receives the
fax, the attacker telephones the employee and requests that the fax be sent
to another location, perhaps claiming that it is needed for an urgent meeting. Since the person asked to relay the fax usually has no understanding
of the value of the information, he or she complies with the request.

17237124 Ch16.F





13-3 Sending sensitive information by fax

Policy: Before sending Sensitive information by fax to a machine that is
located in an area accessible to other personnel, the sender shall transmit
a cover page. The recipient, on receiving the page, transmits a page in
response, demonstrating that he/she is physically present at the fax
machine. The sender then transmits the fax.
Explanation/Notes: This handshake process assures the sender that the
recipient is physically present at the receiving end. Moreover, this process
verifies that the receiving fax telephone number has not been forwarded
to another location.
13-4 Faxing passwords prohibited

Chapter 16

316

Policy: Passwords must not be sent via facsimile under any circumstances.
Explanation/Notes: Sending authentication information by facsimile is
not secure. Most fax machines are accessible to a number of employees.
Furthermore, they rely on the public telephone switched network, which
can be manipulated by call forwarding the phone number for the receiving fax machine so that the fax is actually sent to the attacker at another
number.
Voice Mail Use
14-1 Voice mail passwords

Policy: Voice mail passwords must never be disclosed to anyone for any
purpose. In addition, voice mail passwords must be changed every ninety
days or sooner.
Explanation/Notes: Confidential company information may be left in
voice mail messages. To protect this information, employees should
change their voice mail passwords frequently, and never disclose them. In
addition, voice mail users should not use the same or similar voice mail
passwords within a twelve-month period.
14-2 Passwords on multiple systems

Policy: Voice mail users must not use the same password on any
other phone or computer system, whether internal or external to the
company.
Explanation/Notes: Use of a similar or identical password for multiple
devices, such as voice mail and computer, makes it easier for social engineers to guess all the passwords of a user after identifying only one.

17237124 Ch16.F





14-3 Setting voice mail passwords

Policy: Voice mail users and administrators must create voice mail passwords that are difficult to guess. They must not be related in any way to
the person using it, or the company, and should not contain a predictable
pattern that is likely to be guessed.
Explanation/Notes: Passwords must not contain sequential or repeating digits (i.e. 1111, 1234, 1010), must not be the same as or based on
the telephone extension number, and must not be related to address, zip
code, birth date, license plate, phone number, weight, I.Q., or other predictable personal information.
14-4 Mail messages marked as “old”

14-5 External voice mail greetings

Policy: Company workers shall limit their disclosure of information on
their external outgoing greeting on their voice mail. Ordinarily information related to a worker’s daily routine or travel schedule should not be
disclosed.
Explanation/Notes: An external greeting (played to outside callers)
should not include last name, extension, or reason for absence (such as
travel, vacation schedule, or daily itinerary). An attacker can use this information to develop a plausible story in his attempt to dupe other personnel.
14-6 Voice mail password patterns

Policy: Voice mail users shall not select a password where one part of
the password remains fixed, while another part changes in a predictable
pattern.
Explanation/Notes: For example, do not use a password such as
743501, 743502, 743503, and so on, where the last two digits correspond
to the current month.

317
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: When previously unheard voice mail messages are not marked
as new messages, the voice mail administrator must be notified of a possible security violation and the voice mail password must immediately be
changed.
Explanation/Notes: Social engineers may gain access to a voice mailbox
in a variety of ways. An employee who becomes aware that messages they
have never listened to are not being announced as new messages must
assume that another person has obtained unauthorized access to the voice
mailbox and listened to the messages themselves.

17237124 Ch16.F





14-7 Confidential or Private information

Policy: Confidential or Private information shall not be disclosed in a
voice mail message.
Explanation/Notes: The corporate telephone system is typically more
vulnerable than corporate computer systems. The passwords are usually a
string of digits, which substantially limits the number of possibilities for
an attacker to guess. Further, in some organizations, voice mail passwords
may be shared with secretaries or another administrative staff who have
the responsibility of taking messages for their managers. In light of the
above, no Sensitive information should ever be left on anyone’s voice mail.
Passwords
15-1 Telephone security

Policy: Passwords shall not be disclosed over the telephone at any time.
Explanation/Notes: Attackers may find ways to listen in to phone conversations, either in person or through a technological device.
15-2 Revealing computer passwords
Chapter 16

318

Policy: Under no circumstances shall any computer user reveal his or
her password to anyone for any purpose without prior written consent of
the responsible information technology manager.
Explanation/Notes: The goal of many social engineering attacks
involves deceiving unsuspecting persons into revealing their account
names and passwords. This policy is a crucial step in reducing the risk of
successful social engineering attacks against the enterprise. Accordingly,
this policy needs to be followed religiously throughout the company.
15-3 Internet passwords

Policy: Personnel must never use a password that is the same as or similar to one they are using on any corporate system on an Internet site.
Explanation/Notes: Malicious Web site operators may set up a site that
purports to offer something of value or the possibility of winning a prize.
To register, a visitor to the site must enter an email address, username, and
password. Since many people use the same or similar sign-on information
repeatedly, the malicious Web site operator will attempt to use the chosen
password and variations of it for attacking the target’s work- or homecomputer system. The visitor’s work computer can sometimes be identified by the email address entered during the registration process.

17237124 Ch16.F





15-4 Passwords on multiple systems

Policy: Company personnel must never use the same or a similar password in more than one system. This policy pertains to various types of
devices (computer or voice mail); various locations of devices (home or
work); and various types of systems, devices (router or firewall), or programs (database or application).
Explanation/Notes: Attackers rely on human nature to break into
computer systems and networks. They know that, to avoid the hassle of
keeping track of several passwords, many people use the same or a similar
password on every system they access. As such, the intruder will attempt
to learn the password of one system where the target has an account. Once
obtained, it’s highly likely that this password or a variation thereof will
give access to other systems and devices used by the employee.
15-5 Reusing passwords

15-6 Password patterns

Policy: Employees must not select a password where one part remains
fixed, and another element changes in a predictable pattern.
Explanation/Notes: For example, do not use a password such as
Kevin01, Kevin02, Kevin03, and so on, where the last two digits correspond to the current month.
15-7 Choosing passwords

Policy: Computer users should create or choose a password that adheres
to the following requirements. The password must:
•
•

Be at least eight characters long for standard user accounts
and at least twelve characters long for privileged accounts.
Contain at least one number, at least one symbol (such as $,
_, !, &), at least one lowercase letter, and at least one uppercase letter (to the extent that such variables are supported by
the operating system).

319
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: No computer user shall use the same or a similar password
within the same eighteen-month period.
Explanation/Note: If an attacker does discover a user’s password, frequent changing of the password minimizes the damage that can be done.
Making the new password unique from previous passwords makes it
harder for the attacker to guess it.

17237124 Ch16.F



•

•



Not be any of the following items: words in a dictionary in
any language; any word that is related to an employee’s family, hobbies, vehicle, work, license plate, social security number, address, telephone, pet’s name, birthday, or phrases
containing those words.
Not be a variation of a previously used password, with one
element remaining the same and another element changing,
such as kevin, kevin1, kevin2; or kevinjan, kevinfeb.

Explanation/Notes: The parameters listed above will produce a password that is difficult for the social engineer to guess. Another option is the
consonant-vowel method, which provides an easy-to-remember and
pronounceable password. To construct this kind of password substitute
consonants for each letter C and vowels for the letter V, using the mask of
“CVCVCVCV.” Examples would be MIXOCASO; CUSOJENA.
15-8 Writing passwords down

Chapter 16

320

Policy: Employees should write passwords down only when they store
them in a secure location away from the computer or other passwordprotected device.
Explanation/Notes: Employees are discouraged from ever writing
down passwords. Under certain conditions, however, it may be necessary;
for example, for an employee who has multiple accounts on different
computer systems. Any written passwords must be secured in a safe place
away from the computer. Under no circumstances may a password be
stored under the keyboard or attached to the computer display.
15-9 Plaintext passwords in computer files

Policy: Plaintext passwords shall not be saved in any computer file or
stored as text called by pressing a function key. When necessary, passwords
may be saved using an encryption utility approved by the IT department
to prevent any unauthorized disclosures.
Explanation/Notes: Passwords can be easily recovered by an attacker if
stored in unencrypted form in computer data files, batch files, terminal
function keys, login files, macro or scripting programs, or any data files
which contain passwords to FTP sites.

17237124 Ch16.F





POLICIES FOR TELECOMMUTERS
Telecommuters are outside the corporate firewall, and therefore more vulnerable to attack. These policies will help you prevent social engineers
from using your telecommuter employees as a gateway to your data.
16-1 Thin clients

16-2 Security software for telecommuter
computer systems

Policy: Any external computer system that is used to connect to the corporate network must have antivirus software, anti-Trojan software, and a
personal firewall (hardware or software). Antivirus and anti-Trojan pattern
files must be updated at least weekly.
Explanation/Notes: Ordinarily, telecommuters are not skilled on securityrelated issues, and may inadvertently or negligently leave their computer system and the corporate network open to attack. Telecommuters

321
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: All company personnel who have been authorized to connect via
remote access shall use a thin client to connect to the corporate network.
Explanation/Notes: When an attacker analyzes an attack strategy, he or
she will try to identify users who access the corporate network from external locations. As such, telecommuters are prime targets. Their computers
are less likely to have stringent security controls, and may be a weak link
that may compromise the corporate network.
Any computer that connects to a trusted network can be booby-trapped
with keystroke loggers, or their authenticated connection can be hijacked.
A thin client strategy can be used to avoid problems. A thin client is similar to a diskless workstation or a dumb terminal; the remote computer
does not have storage capabilities but instead the operating system, application programs, and data all reside on the corporate network. Accessing
the network via a thin client substantially reduces the risk posed by
unpatched systems, outdated operating systems, and malicious code.
Accordingly, managing the security of telecommuters is effective and
made easier by centralizing security controls. Rather than relying on the
inexperienced telecommuter to properly manage security-related issues,
these responsibilities are better left with trained system, network, or security administrators.

17237124 Ch16.F





therefore pose a serious security risk if they are not properly trained.
In addition to installing antivirus and anti-Trojan Horse software to protect against malicious code, a firewall is necessary to block any hostile
users from obtaining access to any services enabled on the telecommuter’s
system.
The risk of not deploying the minimal security technologies to prevent
malicious code from propagating cannot be underestimated, as an attack
on Microsoft proves. A computer system belonging to a Microsoft
telecommuter, used to connect to Microsoft’s corporate network, became
infected with a Trojan Horse program. The intruder or intruders were able
to use the telecommuter’s trusted connection to Microsoft’s development
network to steal developmental source code.

POLICIES FOR HUMAN RESOURCES
Human resources departments have a special charge to protect employees
from those attempting to discover personal information through their
workplace. HR professionals also have a responsibility to protect their
company from the actions of unhappy ex-employees.

Chapter 16

322

17-1 Departing employees

Policy: Whenever a person employed by the company leaves or is terminated, Human Resources must immediately do the following:
•
•
•

Remove the person’s listing from the on-line employee/
telephone directory and disable or forward their voice mail;
Notify personnel at building entrances or company lobbies;
and
Add the employee’s name to the employee departure list,
which shall be emailed to all personnel no less often than
once a week.

Explanation/Notes: Employees who are stationed at building entrances
must be notified to prevent a former employee from reentering the premises. Further, notifying other personnel may prevent the former employee
from successfully masquerading as an active employee and duping personnel into taking some action damaging to the company.
In some circumstances, it may be necessary to require every user within
the former employee’s department to change his or her passwords. (When
I was terminated from GTE solely because of my reputation as a hacker,

17237124 Ch16.F





the company required all employees throughout the company to change
their password.)
17-2 IT department notification

Policy: Whenever a person employed by the company leaves or is terminated, Human Resources should immediately notify the information
technology department to disable the former employee’s computer
accounts, including any accounts used for database access, dial-up, or
Internet access from remote locations.
Explanation/Notes: It’s essential to disable any former worker’s access
to all computer systems, network devices, databases, or any other computerrelated devices immediately upon termination. Otherwise, the company
may leave the door wide open for a disgruntled employee to access company computer systems and cause significant damage.
17-3 Confidential information used in hiring process

17-4 Employee personal information

Policy: The human resources department must never release personal
information about any current or former employee, contractor, consultant, temporary worker, or intern, except with prior express written consent of the employee or human resources manager.

323
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Advertisements and other forms of public solicitation of candidates to fill job openings should, to the extent possible, avoid identifying
computer hardware and software used by the company.
Explanation/Notes: Managers and human resources personnel should
only disclose information related to enterprise computer hardware and
software that is reasonably necessary to obtain resumes from qualified
candidates.
Computer intruders read newspapers and company press releases, and
visit Internet sites, to find job listings. Often, companies disclose too
much information about the types of hardware and software used to
attract prospective employees. Once the intruder has knowledge of the
target’s information systems, he is armed for the next phase of attack. For
example, by knowing that a particular company uses the VMS operating
system, the attacker may place pretext calls to determine the release version, and then send a phony emergency security patch made to appear as
if it came from the software developer. Once the patch is installed, the
attacker is in.

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: Head-hunters, private investigators, and identity
thieves target private employee information such as employee numbers,
social security numbers, birth dates, salary history, financial data including direct deposit information, and health-related benefit information.
The social engineer may obtain this information so as to masquerade as
the individual. In addition, disclosing the names of new hires may be
extremely valuable to information thieves. New hires are likely to comply
with any request by persons with seniority or in a position of authority, or
anyone claiming to be from corporate security.
17-5 Background checks

Chapter 16

324

Policy: A background check should be required for all new hires, contractors, consultants, temporary workers, or interns prior to an offer of
employment or establishing of a contractual relationship.
Explanation/Notes: Because of cost considerations, the requirement for
background checks may be limited to specific positions of trust. Note,
however, that any person who is given physical access to corporate offices
may be a potential threat. For example, cleaning crews have access to personnel offices, which gives them access to any computer systems located
there. An attacker with physical access to a computer can install a hardware keystroke logger in less than a minute to capture passwords.
Computer intruders will sometimes go to the effort of obtaining a job
as a means of gaining access to a target company’s computer systems and
networks. An attacker can easily obtain the name of a company’s cleaning
contractor by calling the responsible employee at the target company,
claiming to be from a janitorial company looking for their business, and
then obtaining the name of the company that is currently providing such
services.

POLICIES FOR PHYSICAL SECURITY
Though social engineers try to avoid showing up in person at a workplace
they want to target, there are times when they will violate your space.
These policies will help you to keep your physical premises secure from
threat.
18-1 Identification for nonemployees

Policy: Delivery people and other nonemployees who need to enter company premises on a regular basis must have a special badge or other form of
identification in accordance with policy established by corporate security.

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: Nonemployees who need to enter the building regularly (for example, to make food or beverage deliveries to the cafeteria, or
to repair copying machines or install telephones) should be issued a special form of company identification badge provided for this purpose.
Others who need to enter only occasionally or on a one-time basis must
be treated as visitors and should be escorted at all times.
18-2 Visitor identification

18-3 Escorting visitors

Policy: Visitors must be escorted or in the company of an employee at
all times.
Explanation/Notes: One popular ruse of social engineers is to arrange
to visit a company employee (for example, visiting with a product engineer on the pretext of being the employee of a strategic partner). After
being escorted to the initial meeting, the social engineer assures his host
that he can find his own way back to the lobby. By this means he gains
the freedom to roam the building and possibly gain access to Sensitive
information.
18-4 Temporary badges

Policy: Company employees from another location who do not have
their employee badges with them must present a valid driver’s license or
other picture ID and be issued a temporary visitor’s badge.
Explanation/Notes: Attackers often pose as employees from a different
office or branch of a company to gain entrance to a company.

325
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: All visitors must present a valid driver’s license or other picture
identification to be admitted to the premises.
Explanation/Notes: The security staff or receptionist should make a
photocopy of the identification document prior to issuing a visitor’s
badge. The copy should be kept with the visitor’s log. Alternatively, the
identification information can be recorded in the visitor’s log by the receptionist or guard; visitors should not be permitted to write down their own
ID information.
Social engineers seeking to gain entrance to a building will always write
false information in the log. Even though it’s not difficult to obtain false
ID and to learn the name of an employee he or she can claim to be visiting, requiring that the responsible employee must log the entry adds one
level of security to the process.

17237124 Ch16.F





18-5 Emergency evacuation

Policy: In any emergency situation or drill, security personnel must
ensure that everybody has evacuated the premises.
Explanation/Notes: Security personnel must check for any stragglers
that may be left behind in restrooms or office areas. As authorized by the
fire department or other authority in charge of the scene, the security
force needs to be on the alert for anyone departing the building long after
the evacuation.
Industrial spies or sophisticated computer intruders may cause a diversion to gain access to a building or secure area. One diversion used is to
release a harmless chemical known as butyl mercaptan into the air. The
effect is to create the impression that there is a natural gas leak. Once
personnel start evacuation procedures, the bold attacker uses this diversion
to either steal information or to gain access to enterprise computer
systems. Another tactic used by information thieves involves remaining
behind, sometimes in a restroom or closet, at the time of a scheduled evacuation drill, or after setting off a smoke flare or other device to cause an
emergency evacuation.

Chapter 16

326

18-6 Visitors in mail room

Policy: No visitors should be permitted in the mail room without the
supervision of a company worker.
Explanation/Notes: The intention of this policy is to prevent an outsider from exchanging, sending, or stealing intracompany mail.
18-7 Vehicle license plate numbers

Policy: If the company has a guarded parking area, security staff shall
log vehicle license plate numbers for any vehicle entering the area.
18-8 Trash Dumpsters

Policy: Trash Dumpsters must remain on company premises at all times
and should be inaccessible to the public.
Explanation/Notes: Computer attackers and industrial spies can obtain
valuable information from company trash bins. The courts have held that
trash is considered legally abandoned property, so the act of Dumpster
diving is perfectly legal, as long as the trash receptacles are on public property. For this reason, it is important that trash receptacles be situated on

17237124 Ch16.F





company property, where the company has a legal right to protect the containers and their contents.

POLICIES FOR RECEPTIONISTS
Receptionists are often on the front lines when it comes to dealing with
social engineers, yet they are rarely given enough security training to recognize and stop an invader. Institute these policies to help your receptionist better protect your company and its data.
19-1 Internal directory

19-2 Telephone numbers for specific
departments/groups

Policy: Employees shall not provide direct telephone numbers for the
company help desk, telecommunications department, computer operations, or system administrator personnel without verifying that the
requester has a legitimate need to contact these groups. The receptionist,
when transferring a call to these groups, must announce the caller’s name.
Explanation/Notes: Although some organizations may find this policy
overly restrictive, this rule makes it more difficult for a social engineer to
masquerade as an employee by deceiving other employees into transferring the call from their extension (which in some phone systems causes the
call to appear to originate from within the company), or demonstrating
knowledge of these extensions to the victim in order to create a sense of
authenticity.

327
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

Policy: Disclosure of information in the internal company directory
should be limited to persons employed by the company.
Explanation/Notes: All employee titles, names, telephone numbers,
and addresses contained within the company directory should be considered Internal information, and should only be disclosed in accordance
with the policy related to data classification and Internal information.
Additionally, any calling party must have the name or extension of the
party they are trying to contact. Although the receptionist can put a call
through to an individual when a caller does not know the extension,
telling the caller the extension number should be prohibited. (For those
curious folks who follow by example, you can experience this procedure
by calling any U.S. government agency and asking the operator to provide
an extension.)

17237124 Ch16.F





19-3 Relaying information

Policy: Telephone operators and receptionists should not take messages
or relay information on behalf of any party not personally known to be an
active employee.
Explanation/Notes: Social engineers are adept at deceiving employees
into inadvertently vouching for their identity. One social engineering trick
is to obtain the telephone number of the receptionist and, on a pretext,
ask the receptionist to take any messages that may come for him. Then,
during a call to the victim, the attacker pretends to be an employee, asks
for some sensitive information or to perform a task, and gives the main
switchboard number as a callback number. The attacker later calls back to
the receptionist and is given any message left for him by the unsuspecting
victim.
19-4 Items left for pickup

Chapter 16

328

Policy: Before releasing any item to a messenger or other Unverified
Person, the receptionist or security guard must obtain picture identification and enter the identification information into the pickup log as
required by approved procedures.
Explanation/Notes: One social engineering tactic is to deceive an
employee into releasing sensitive materials to another supposedly authorized employee by dropping off such materials at the receptionist or lobby
desk for pickup. Naturally, the receptionist or security guard assumes the
package is authorized for release. The social engineer either shows up himself or has a messenger service pick up the package.

POLICIES FOR THE INCIDENT
REPORTING GROUP
Every company should set up a centralized group that should be notified
when any form of attack on corporate security is identified. What follows
are some guidelines for setting up and structuring the activities of this
group.
20-1 Incident reporting group

Policy: An individual or group must be designated and employees
should be instructed to report security incidents to them. All employees
should be provided with the contact information for the group.

17237124 Ch16.F





Explanation/Notes: Employees must understand how to identify a
security threat, and be trained to report any threat to a specific incident
reporting group. It is also important that an organization establish specific
procedures and authority for such a group to act when a threat is reported.
20-2 Attacks in progress

Policy: Whenever the incident reporting group has received reports
of an ongoing social engineering attack they shall immediately initiate
procedures for alerting all employees assigned to the targeted groups.
Explanation/Notes: The incident reporting group or responsible manager should also make a determination about whether to send a companywide alert. Once the responsible person or group has a good faith belief
that an attack may be in progress, mitigation of damage must be made a
priority by notifying company personnel to be on their guard.

329
Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies

17237124 Ch16.F





18237124 SecurityataGlance.F


