


Security at a Glance

t

he following lists and charts provide a quick reference version of
social engineering methods discussed in Chapters 2 to 14, and verification procedures detailed in Chapter 16. Modify this information
for your organization, and make it available for employees to refer to when
an information security question arises.

IDENTIFYING A SECURITY ATTACK
These tables and checklists will assist you in spotting a social engineering
attack.
The Social Engineering Cycle
ACTION
Research

DESCRIPTION
May include open source information such as SEC
filings and annual reports, marketing brochures,
patent applications, press clippings, industry magazines, Web site content. Also Dumpster diving.
Developing
Use of insider information, misrepresenting
rapport and trust identity, citing those known to victim, need for
help, or authority.
Exploiting trust Asking for information or an action on the part
of the victim. In reverse sting, manipulate victim
to ask attacker for help.
Utilize
If the information obtained is only a step to
information
final goal, attacker returns to earlier steps in
cycle till goal is reached.

18237124 SecurityataGlance.F





Common Social Engineering Methods
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Security at a Glance

332

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Posing as a fellow employee
Posing as an employee of a vendor, partner company, or law
enforcement
Posing as someone in authority
Posing as a new employee requesting help
Posing as a vendor or systems manufacturer calling to offer a
system patch or update
Offering help if a problem occurs, then making the problem
occur, thereby manipulating the victim to call them for help
Sending free software or patch for victim to install
Sending a virus or Trojan Horse as an email attachment
Using a false pop-up window asking user to log in again or
sign on with password
Capturing victim keystrokes with expendable computer
system or program
Leaving a floppy disk or CD around the workplace with
malicious software on it
Using insider lingo and terminology to gain trust
Offering a prize for registering at a Web site with username
and password
Dropping a document or file at company mail room for
intraoffice delivery
Modifying fax machine heading to appear to come from an
internal location
Asking receptionist to receive then forward a fax
Asking for a file to be transferred to an apparently internal
location
Getting a voice mailbox set up so callbacks perceive attacker
as internal
Pretending to be from remote office and asking for email
access locally

18237124 SecurityataGlance.F





Warning Signs of an Attack
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Refusal to give callback number
Out-of-ordinary request
Claim of authority
Stresses urgency
Threatens negative consequences of noncompliance
Shows discomfort when questioned
Name dropping
Compliments or flattery
Flirting

Common Targets of Attacks
TARGET TYPE
Unaware of value
of information
Special privileges

Factors That Make Companies More Vulnerable
to Attacks
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Large number of employees
Multiple facilities
Information on employee whereabouts left in voice mail
messages
Phone extension information made available
Lack of security training
Lack of data classification system
No incident reporting/response plan in place

333
Security at a Glance

EXAMPLES
Receptionists, telephone operators,
administrative assistants, security guards.
Help desk or technical support, system
administrators, computer operators, telephone system administrators.
Manufacturer/
Computer hardware, software manufacturers,
vendor
voice mail systems vendors.
Specific departments Accounting, human resources.

18237124 SecurityataGlance.F





VERIFICATION AND DATA CLASSIFICATION
These tables and charts will help you to respond to requests for information or action that may be social engineering attacks.
Verification of Identity Procedure
ACTION
Caller ID
Callback
Vouching
Shared common
secret
Supervisor or
manager

Security at a Glance

334

Secure email
Personal voice
recognition
Dynamic
passwords
In person

DESCRIPTION
Verify call is internal, and name or extension
number matches the identity of the caller.
Look up requester in company directory and call
back the listed extension.
Ask a trusted employee to vouch for requester’s
identity.
Request enterprise-wide shared secret, such as a
password or daily code.
Contact employee’s immediate supervisor and
request verification of identity and employment
status.
Request a digitally signed message.
For a caller known to employee, validate by
caller’s voice.
Verify against a dynamic password solution such
as Secure ID or other strong authentication
device.
Require requester to appear in person with an
employee badge or other identification.

Verification of Employment Status Procedure
ACTION
DESCRIPTION
Employee directory check Verify that requester is listed in on-line
directory.
Requester’s manager
Call requester’s manager using phone
verification
number listed in company directory.
Requester’s department
Call requester’s department or
or workgroup verification workgroup and determine that
requester is still employed by company.

18237124 SecurityataGlance.F





Procedure to Determine Need to Know
ACTION
Consult job title/
workgroup/
responsibilities list
Obtain authority
from manager
Obtain authority
from the information
Owner or designee
Obtain authority with
an automated tool

DESCRIPTION
Check published lists of which employees
are entitled to specific classified
information.
Contact your manager, or the manager of
the requester, for authority to comply
with the request.
Ask Owner of information if requester has
a need to know.
Check proprietary software database for
authorized personnel.

Criteria for Verifying Non-Employees
CRITERION
Relationship

Nondisclosure
Access

Data Classification
CLASSIFICATION DESCRIPTION
Public
Can be freely
released to the
public.
Internal
For use within
the company.

PROCEDURE
No need to verify.

Verify identity of requester
as active employee or
verify nondisclosure
agreement on file and
management approval
for nonemployees.

335
Security at a Glance

Identity

ACTION
Verify that requester’s firm has a vendor, strategic
partner, or other appropriate relationship.
Verify requester’s identity and employment status
at the vendor/partner firm.
Verify that the requester has a signed nondisclosure agreement on file.
Refer the request to management when the
information is classified above Internal.

18237124 SecurityataGlance.F





Data Classification (Continued)

Security at a Glance

336

CLASSIFICATION
Private

DESCRIPTION
Information of a
personal nature
intended for use
only within
the organization.

Confidential

Shared only with
people with an
absolute need to
know within the
organization.

PROCEDURE
Verify identity of
requester as active
employee or
nonemployee with
authorization. Check
with human resources
department to disclose
Private information to
authorized employees
or external requesters.
Verify identity
of requester and
need to know
from designated
information Owner.
Release only with prior
written consent of
manager, or information Owner or
designee. Check for
nondisclosure agreement on file. Only
management personnel
may disclose to persons
not employed by the
company.

18237124 SecurityataGlance.F





Responding to a Request for Information
The Golden Questions
How do I know this person is who he says he is?
How do I know this person has the authority to make this request?
Request Information
About...

EXAMPLES

Any Passwords

Yes

NEVER disclose
your password
under any
circumstances.

No

Personnel reporting
structure, employee names
and titles

Organizational
Chart Details

Yes

Follow procedures
for disclosure
of internal
information.

No

Company Directory/
Telephone Lists

Yes

Follow procedures
for disclosure
of internal
information.

No

Personal telephone numbers
(home or cellular), social
security number, home
address, prior work
history, and salary

Personal
Information

Yes

Follow procedures
for disclosure
of internal
information.

No

Type of operating system,
remote access procedures,
dial-up numbers, and names
assigned to computer
systems

Computer System
Procedures or
Information

Yes

Follow procedures
for disclosure
of internal
information.

No

Manufacturing processes,
strategic plans, proprietary
source code, customer lists,
and trade secrets

Confidential or
Private Information

Yes

Determine data
classification;
follow appropriate
procedures for
disclosure.

All information is considered sensitive unless specifically designated for public disclosure.

337
Security at a Glance

Internal telephone numbers
assigned to staff, internal fax
numbers, internal building
numbers, and departmental
lists

18237124 SecurityataGlance.F





Responding to a Request for Action
The Golden Rules
No Implicit Trust of Anyone without Verification.
Challenging Requests Is Encouraged.

Request Action
Regarding...
No

NOTES

Open Email
Attachment

Yes

Do not open
attachment unless
previously
expected; scan all
attachments with
anitvirus
software.

No

Change Your
Password

Yes

NEVER change
your password to
something known
to anyone else,
even for a moment!

No

Security at a Glance

338

Propriety source code,
trade secrets, manufacturing
process, formulas, product
specifications, marketing
data or business plans

Electronically
Transfer Internal
Information

Yes

Determine data
classification;
follow appropriate
disclosure
procedures.

No

Never enter unfamiliar
commands or run programs
at the request of any person
unless specifically approved
by the IT department

Entering Commands
into Any Computer

Yes

Requestor must be
IT department only;
go to Employee
Verification
Procedures.

No

Only install software from
trusted sources that can be
authenticated by digital
signature

Download, Install,
Remove, or Disable
Any Software

Yes

Requestor must be
IT department only;
go to Employee
Verification
Procedures.

No

Do not change any settings
within BIOS, the operating
system, or any applications
(including personal firewall
or antivirus utilities) unless
specifically approved by the
IT department

Change Computer
System/Network
Settings

Yes

Requestor must be
IT department only;
go to Employee
Verification
Procedures.

All actions you take on the behalf of others may result in compromising
your company's assets. Verify. Verify. Verify.

19237124 Resources.F





sources
CHAPTER 1
BloomBecker, Buck. 1990. Spectacular Computer Crimes: What They
Are and How They Cost American Business Half a Billion Dollars a
Year. Irwin Professional Publishing.
Littman, Jonathan. 1997. The Fugitive Game: Online with Kevin
Mitnick. Little Brown & Co.
Penenberg, Adam L. April 19, 1999. “The Demonizing of a Hacker.”
Forbes.

CHAPTER 2
The Stanley Rifkin story is based on the following accounts:
Computer Security Insitute. Undated. “Financial losses due to
Internet intrusions, trade secret theft and other cyber crimes soar.”
Press release.
Epstein, Edward Jay. Unpublished. “The Diamond Invention.”
Holwick, Rev. David. Unpublished account.
Mr. Rifkin himself was gracious in acknowledging that accounts of his
exploit differ because he has protected his anonymity by declining
to be interviewed.

CHAPTER 16
Cialdini, Robert B. 2000. Influence: Science and Practice, 4th edition.
Allyn and Bacon.
Cialdini, Robert B. February 2001. “The Science of Persuasion.”
Scientific American. 284:2.

19237124 Resources.F





CHAPTER 17
Some policies in this chapter are based on ideas contained in: Wood,
Charles Cresson. 1999. “Information Security Policies Made Easy.”
Baseline Software.

Sources

340

20237124 Acknowledgments.F





Acknowledgments
FROM KEVIN MITNICK
True friendship has been defined as one mind in two bodies; not many
people in anyone’s life can be called a true friend. Jack Biello was a loving
and caring person who spoke out against the extraordinary mistreatment
I endured at the hands of unethical journalists and overzealous government prosecutors. He was a key voice in the Free Kevin movement and a
writer who had an extraordinary talent for writing compelling articles
exposing the information that the government doesn’t want you to know.
Jack was always there to fearlessly speak out on my behalf and to work
together with me preparing speeches and articles, and, at one point, represented me as a media liaison.
This book is therefore dedicated with love to my dearest friend Jack
Biello, whose recent death from cancer just as we finished the manuscript
has left me feeling a great sense of loss and sadness.
This book would not have been possible without the love and support
of my family. My mother, Shelly Jaffe, and my grandmother, Reba
Vartanian, have given me unconditional love and support throughout my
life. I am so fortunate to have been raised by such a loving and dedicated
mother, who I also consider my best friend. My grandmother has been
like a second mom to me, providing me with the same nurturing and love
that only a mother could give. As caring and compassionate people,
they’ve taught me the principles of caring about others and lending a helping hand to the less fortunate. And so, by imitating the pattern of giving
and caring, I in a sense follow the paths of their lives. I hope they’ll forgive me for putting them in second place during the process of writing
this book, passing up chances to see them with the excuse of work and

20237124 Acknowledgments.F

Acknowledgments

342





deadlines to meet. This book would not have been possible without their
continued love and support that I’ll forever hold close to my heart.
How I wish my dad, Alan Mitnick, and my brother, Adam Mitnick,
would have lived long enough to break open a bottle of champagne with
me on the day this book first appears in a bookstore. As a salesman and
business owner, my father taught me many of the finer things that I will
never forget. During the last months of my Dad’s life I was fortunate
enough to be able to be at his side to comfort him the best I could, but it
was a very painful experience from which I still have not recovered.
My aunt Chickie Leventhal will always have a special place in my heart;
although she was disappointed with some of the stupid mistakes I’ve
made, nevertheless she was always there for me, offering her love and support. During my intense devotion to writing this book, I sacrificed many
opportunities to join her, my cousin, Mitch Leventhal, and her boyfriend,
Dr. Robert Berkowitz, for our weekly Shabbat celebration.
I must also give my warmest thanks to my mother’s boyfriend, Steven
Knittle, who was there to fill in for me and provide my mother with love
and support.
My dad’s brother clearly deserves much praise; one could say I inherited
my craft of social engineering from Uncle Mitchell, who knew how to
manipulate the world and its people in ways that I never even hope to
understand, much less master. Lucky for him, he never had my passion for
computing technology during the years he used his charming personality
to influence anyone he desired. He will always hold the title of the grandmaster social engineer.
And as I write these acknowledgements, I realize I have so many people
to thank and to express appreciation to for offering their love, friendship,
and support. I cannot begin to remember the names of all the kind and
generous people that I’ve met in recent years, but suffice it to say I would
need a computer to store them all. There have been so many people from
all over the world who have written to me with words of encouragement,
praise, and support. These words have meant a great deal to me, especially
during the times I needed it most.
I’m especially thankful to all my supporters who stood by me and spent
their valuable time and energy getting the word out to anyone who would
listen, voicing their concern and objection over my unfair treatment and
the hyperbole created by those who sought to profit from the “The Myth
of Kevin Mitnick.”

20237124 Acknowledgments.F





343
Acknowledgments

I have had the extraordinary fortune of being teamed up with best-selling
author Bill Simon, and we worked diligently together despite our different work patterns. Bill is highly organized, rises early, and works in a
deliberate and well-planned style. I’m grateful that Bill was kind enough
to accommodate my late-night work schedule. My dedication to this project and long working hours kept me up well into the early morning that
conflicted with Bill’s regular working schedule.
Not only was I lucky to be teamed with someone who could transform
my ideas into sentences worthy of a sophisticated reader, but also Bill is
(mostly) a very patient man who put up with my programmer’s style of
focusing on the details. Indeed we made it happen. Still, I want to apologize to Bill in these acknowledgments that I will always regret being the
one, because of my orientation to accuracy and detail, who caused him to
be late for a deadline for the first and only time in his long writing career.
He has a writer’s pride that I have finally come to understand and share;
we hope to do other books together.
The delight of being at the Simon home in Rancho Santa Fe to work
and to be pampered by Bill’s wife, Arynne, could be considered a highlight
of this writing project. Arynne’s conversation and cooking will battle in
my memory for first place. She is a lady of quality and wisdom, full of fun,
who has created a home of warmth and beauty. And I’ll never drink a diet
soda again without hearing Arynne’s voice in the back of my mind
admonishing me on the dangers of Aspartame.
Stacey Kirkland means a great deal to me. She has dedicated many hours
of her time assisting me on the Macintosh to design the charts and graphics that helped give visual authority to my ideas. I admire her wonderful
qualities; she is truly a loving and compassionate person who deserves only
the good things in life. She gave me encouragement as a caring friend and
is someone who I care deeply about. I wish to thank her for all her loving
support, and for being there for me whenever I needed it.
Alex Kasper, Nexspace, is not only my best friend, but also a business
partner and colleague. Together we hosted a popular Internet talk radio
show known as “The Darkside of the Internet” on KFI AM 640 in Los
Angeles under the skillful guidance of Program Director David G. Hall.
Alex graciously provided his invaluable assistance and advice to this book
project. His influence has always been positive and helpful with a kindness and generosity that often extended far beyond midnight. Alex and I
recently completed a film/video to help businesses train their people on
preventing social engineering attacks.

20237124 Acknowledgments.F

Acknowledgments

344





Paul Dryman, Informed Decision, is a family friend and beyond. This
highly respected and trusted private investigator helped me to understand
trends and processes of conducting background investigations. Paul’s
knowledge and experience helped me address the personnel security issues
described in Part 4 of this book.
One of my best friends, Candi Layman, has consistently offered me support and love. She is truly a wonderful person who deserves the best out
of life. During the tragic days of my life, Candi always offered encouragement and friendship. I am fortunate to have met such a wonderful,
caring, and compassionate human being, and want to thank her for being
there for me.
Surely my first royalty check will go to my cellular phone company for
all the time I spent talking with Erin Finn. Without a doubt, Erin is like
my soul mate. We are alike in so many ways it’s scary. We both have a love
for technology, the same tastes in food, music, and movies. AT&T
Wireless is definitely losing money for giving me all the “free nights and
weekend” calls to her home in Chicago. At least I am not using the Kevin
Mitnick plan anymore. Her enthusiasm and belief in this book boosted
my spirits. How lucky I am to have her as a friend.
I’m eager to thank those people who represent my professional career
and are dedicated in extraordinary ways. My speaking engagements are
managed by Amy Gray (an honest and caring person who I admire and
adore); David Fugate, of Waterside Productions, is a book agent who went
to bat for me on many occasions before and after the book contract was
signed; and Los Angeles attorney Gregory Vinson, who was on my defense
team during my years-long battle with the government. I’m sure he can
relate to Bill’s understanding and patience for my close attention to detail;
he has had the same experience working with me on legal briefs he has
written on my behalf.
I have had too many experiences with lawyers but I am eager to have a
place to express my thanks for the lawyers who, during the years of my
negative interactions with the criminal justice system, stepped up and
offered to help me when I was in desperate need. From kind words to deep
involvement with my case, I met many who don’t at all fit the stereotype
of the self-centered attorney. I have come to respect, admire, and appreciate the kindness and generosity of spirit given to me so freely by so many.
They each deserve to be acknowledged with a paragraph of favorable
words; I will at least mention them all by name, for every one of them lives
in my heart surrounded by appreciation: Greg Aclin, Bob Carmen, John

20237124 Acknowledgments.F





345
Acknowledgments

Dusenbury, Sherman Ellison, Omar Figueroa, Carolyn Hagin, Rob Hale,
Alvin Michaelson, Ralph Peretz, Vicki Podberesky, Donald C. Randolph,
Dave Roberts, Alan Rubin, Steven Sadowski, Tony Serra, Richard
Sherman, Skip Slates, Karen Smith, Richard Steingard, the Honorable
Robert Talcott, Barry Tarlow, John Yzurdiaga, and Gregory Vinson.
I very much appreciate the opportunity that John Wiley & Sons has
given me to author this book, and for their confidence in a first-time
author. I wish to thank the following Wiley people who made this dream
possible: Ellen Gerstein, Bob Ipsen, Carol Long (my editor and fashion
designer), and Nancy Stevenson.
Other family members, personal friends, business associates who have
given me advice and support, and have reached out in many ways, are
important to recognize and acknowledge. They are: J. J. Abrams, David
Agger, Bob Arkow, Stephen Barnes, Dr. Robert Berkowitz, Dale
Coddington, Eric Corley, Delin Cormeny, Ed Cummings, Art Davis,
Michelle Delio, Sam Downing, John Draper, Paul Dryman, Nick Duva,
Roy Eskapa, Alex Fielding, Lisa Flores, Brock Frank, Steve Gibson, Jerry
Greenblatt, Greg Grunberg, Bill Handle, David G. Hall, Dave Harrison,
Leslie Herman, Jim Hill, Dan Howard, Steve Hunt, Rez Johar, Steve
Knittle, Gary Kremen, Barry Krugel, Earl Krugel, Adrian Lamo, Leo
Laporte, Mitch Leventhal, Cynthia Levin, CJ Little, Jonathan Littman,
Mark Maifrett, Brian Martin, Forrest McDonald, Kerry McElwee, Alan
McSwain, Elliott Moore, Michael Morris, Eddie Munoz, Patrick Norton,
Shawn Nunley, Brenda Parker, Chris Pelton, Kevin Poulsen, Scott Press,
Linda and Art Pryor, Jennifer Reade, Israel and Rachel Rosencrantz, Mark
Ross, William Royer, Irv Rubin, Ryan Russell, Neil Saavedra, Wynn
Schwartu, Pete Shipley, Joh Siff, Dan Sokol, Trudy Spector, Matt Spergel,
Eliza Amadea Sultan, Douglas Thomas, Roy Tucker, Bryan Turbow,
Ron Wetzel, Don David Wilson, Darci Wood, Kevin Wortman, Steve
Wozniak, and all my friends on the W6NUT (147.435 MHz) repeater in
Los Angeles.
And my probation officer, Larry Hawley, deserves special thanks for giving me permission to act as advisor and consultant on security-related
matters by authoring this book.
And finally I must acknowledge the men and women of law enforcement. I simply do not hold any malice towards these people who are just
doing their jobs. I firmly believe that putting the public’s interest ahead of
one’s own and dedicating your life to public service is something that
deserves respect, and while I’ve been arrogant at times, I want all of you

20237124 Acknowledgments.F





to know that I love this country, and will do everything in my power to
help make it the safest place in the world, which is precisely one of the reasons why I’ve written this book.

FROM BILL SIMON

Acknowledgments

346

I have this notion that there is a right person out there for everyone; it’s
just that some people aren’t lucky enough ever to find their Mr. or Ms.
Right. Others get lucky. I got lucky early enough in life to spend a good
many years already (and count on spending many more) with one of
God’s treasures, my wife, Arynne. If I ever forget how lucky I am, I only
need to pay attention to how many people seek and cherish her company.
Arynne—I thank you for walking through life with me.
During the writing of this book, I counted on the help of a loyal group
of friends who provided the assurance that Kevin and I were achieving our
goal of combining fact and fascination into this unusual book. Each of
these people represents true and loyal value and knows he or she may be
called on as I get into my next writing project. In alphabetical order: JeanClaude Beneventi, Linda Brown, Walt Brown, Lt. Gen. Don Johnson,
Dorothy Ryan, Guri Stark, Chris Steep, Michael Steep, and John Votaw.
Special recognition goes to John Lucich, president of the Network
Security Group, who was willing to take time for a friend-of-a-friend
request, and to Gordon Garb, who graciously fielded numerous phone
calls about IT operations.
Sometimes in life, a friend earns an exalted place by introducing you to
someone else who becomes a good friend. At literary agency Waterside
Productions, in Cardiff, California, Agent David Fugate was responsible
for conceiving the idea for this book, and for putting me together with
coauthor-turned-friend Kevin. Thanks, David. And to the head of
Waterside, the incomparable Bill Gladstone, who manages to keep me
busy with one book project after another: I’m happy to have you in my
corner.
In our home and my office-at-home, Arynne is helped by an able staff
that includes administrative assistant Jessica Dudgeon and housekeeper
Josie Rodriguez.
I thank my parents Marjorie and I. B. Simon, who I wish were here on
earth to enjoy my success as a writer. I also thank my daughter, Victoria.
When I am with her I realize how much I admire, respect, and take pride
in who she is.

21237124 Index.F


