chapter

2

When Innocuous
Information Isn’t

w

hat do most people think is the real threat from social engineers?
What should you do to be on your guard?
If the goal is to capture some highly valuable prize—say, a vital component of the company’s intellectual capital—then perhaps what’s needed is,
figuratively, just a stronger vault and more heavily armed guards. Right?
But in reality penetrating a company’s security often starts with the bad
guy obtaining some piece of information or some document that seems so
innocent, so everyday and unimportant, that most people in the organization wouldn’t see any reason why the item should be protected and
restricted.

THE HIDDEN VALUE OF INFORMATION
Much of the seemingly innocuous information in a company’s possession
is prized by a social engineering attacker because it can play a vital role in
his effort to dress himself in a cloak of believability.
Throughout these pages, I’m going to show you how social engineers do
what they do by letting you “witness” the attacks for yourself—sometimes
presenting the action from the viewpoint of the people being victimized,
allowing you to put yourself in their shoes and gauge how you yourself (or
maybe one of your employees or coworkers) might have responded. In
many cases you’ll also experience the same events from the perspective of
the social engineer.
The first story looks at a vulnerability in the financial industry.

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





CREDITCHEX

Chapter 2

16

For a long time, the British put up with a very stuffy banking system. As
an ordinary, upstanding citizen, you couldn’t walk in off the street and
open a bank account. No, the bank wouldn’t consider accepting you as a
customer unless some person already well established as a customer provided you with a letter of recommendation
Quite a difference, of course, in the seemingly egalitarian banking world
of today. And our modern ease of doing business is nowhere more in evidence than in friendly, democratic America, where almost anyone can
walk into a bank and easily open a checking account, right? Well, not
exactly. The truth is that banks understandably have a natural reluctance
to open an account for somebody who just might have a history of
writing bad checks—that would be about as welcome as a rap sheet of
bank robbery or embezzlement charges. So it’s standard practice at many
banks to get a quick thumbs-up or thumbs-down on a prospective new
customer.
One of the major companies that banks contract with for this information is an outfit we’ll call CreditChex. They provide a valuable service to
their clients, but like many companies, can also unknowingly provide a
handy service to knowing social engineers.

The First Call: Kim Andrews
“National Bank, this is Kim. Did you want to open an
account today?”
“Hi, Kim. I have a question for you. Do you guys use
CreditChex?”
“Yes.”
“When you phone in to CreditChex, what do you call the
number you give them—is it a ‘Merchant ID’?”
A pause; she was weighing the question, wondering what
this was about and whether she should answer.
The caller quickly continued without missing a beat:
“Because, Kim, I’m working on a book. It deals with private investigations.”
“Yes,” she said, answering the question with new confidence, pleased to be helping a writer.
“So it’s called a Merchant ID, right?”
“Uh huh.”

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





“Okay, great. Because I wanted to make sure I had the lingo
right. For the book. Thanks for your help. Good-bye,
Kim.”

The Second Call: Chris Talbert
“National Bank, New Accounts, this is Chris.”
“Hi, Chris. This is Alex,” the caller said. “I’m a customer
service rep with CreditChex. We’re doing a survey to
improve our services. Can you spare me a couple of
minutes?”
She was glad to, and the caller went on:
“Okay—what are the hours your branch is open for business?” She answered, and continued answering his
string of questions.
“How many employees at your branch use our service?”
“How often do you call us with an inquiry?”
“Which of our 800-numbers have we assigned you for calling us?”
“Have our representatives always been courteous?”
“How’s our response time?”
“What Merchant ID are you currently using?”
“Have you ever found any inaccuracies with the information
we’ve provided you?”
“If you had any suggestions for improving our service, what
would they be?”
And:
“Would you be willing to fill out periodic questionnaires if
we send them to your branch?”
She agreed, they chatted a bit, the caller rang off, and Chris
went back to work.

The Third Call: Henry McKinsey
“CreditChex, this is Henry McKinsey, how can I help you?”
The caller said he was from National Bank. He gave the
proper Merchant ID and then gave the name and social security number of the person he was looking for information on.
Henry asked for the birth date, and the caller gave that, too.

When Innocuous Information Isn’t

“How long have you been with the bank?”

17

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





After a few moments, Henry read the listing from his computer screen.
“Wells Fargo reported NSF in 1998, one time, amount of
$2,066.” NSF—nonsufficient funds—is the familiar banking lingo for checks that have been written when there
isn’t enough money in the account to cover them.
“Any activities since then?”
“No activities.”
“Have there been any other inquiries?”
“Let’s see. Okay, two of them, both last month. Third United
Credit Union of Chicago.” He stumbled over the next
name, Schenectady Mutual Investments, and had to
spell it. “That’s in New York State,” he added.

Chapter 2

18

Private Investigator at Work
All three of those calls were made by the same person: a private investigator we’ll call Oscar Grace. Grace had a new client, one of his first. A cop
until a few months before, he found that some of this new work came naturally, but some offered a challenge to his resources and inventiveness.
This one came down firmly in the challenge category.
The hardboiled private eyes of fiction—the Sam Spades and the Philip
Marlowes—spend long nighttime hours sitting in cars waiting to catch a
cheating spouse. Real-life PIs do the same. They also do a less written
about, but no less important kind of snooping for warring spouses, a
method that leans more heavily on social engineering skills than on fighting off the boredom of nighttime vigils.
Grace’s new client was a lady who looked as if she had a pretty comfortable budget for clothes and jewelry. She walked into his office one day
and took a seat in the leather chair, the only one that didn’t have papers
piled on it. She settled her large Gucci handbag on his desk with the logo
turned to face him and announced she was planning to tell her husband
that she wanted a divorce, but admitted to “just a very little problem.”
It seemed her hubby was one step ahead. He had already pulled the cash
out of their savings account and an even larger sum from their brokerage
account. She wanted to know where their assets had been squirreled away,
and her divorce lawyer wasn’t any help at all. Grace surmised the lawyer
was one of those uptown, high-rise counselors who wouldn’t get his hands
dirty on something messy like where-did-the-money-go.
Could Grace help?

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





He assured her it would be a breeze, quoted a fee, expenses billed at cost,
and collected a check for the first payment.
Then he faced his problem. What do you do if you’ve never handled a
piece of work like this before and don’t quite know how to go about tracking down a money trail? You move forward by baby steps. Here, according to our source, is Grace’s story.

lingo
MARK

The victim of a con.

BURN THE SOURCE An attacker is said to have burned the source when
he allows a victim to recognize that an attack has taken place. Once the victim becomes aware and notifies other employees or management of the
attempt, it becomes extremely difficult to exploit the same source in future
attacks.

19
When Innocuous Information Isn’t

I knew about CreditChex and how banks used the outfit—my ex-wife
used to work at a bank. But I didn’t know the lingo and procedures, and
trying to ask my ex- would be a waste of time.
Step one: Get the terminology straight and figure out how to make the
request so it sounds like I know what I’m talking about. At the bank I
called, the first young lady, Kim, was suspicious when I asked about how
they identify themselves when they phone CreditChex. She hesitated; she
didn’t know whether to tell me. Was I put off by that? Not a bit. In fact,
the hesitation gave me an important clue, a sign that I had to supply a reason she’d find believable. When I worked the con on her about doing
research for a book, it relieved her suspicions. You say you’re an author or
a movie writer, and everybody opens up.
She had other knowledge that would have helped—things like what
information CreditChex requires to identify the person you’re calling
about, what information you can ask for, and the big one, what was Kim’s
bank Merchant ID number. I was ready to ask those questions, but her
hesitation sent up the red flag. She bought the book research story, but she
already had a few niggling suspicions. If she’d been more willing right way,
I would have asked her to reveal more details about their procedures.
You have to go on gut instinct, listen closely to what the mark is saying
and how she’s saying it. This lady sounded smart enough for alarm bells
to start going off if I asked too many unusual questions. And even though
she didn’t know who I was or what number I was calling from, still in this

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F

Chapter 2

20





business you never want anybody putting out the word to be on the lookout for someone calling to get information about the business. That’s
because you don’t want to burn the source—you may want to call the
same office back another time.
I’m always on the watch for little signs that give me a read on how cooperative a person is, on a scale that runs from “You sound like a nice person and I believe everything you’re saying” to “Call the cops, alert the
National Guard, this guy’s up to no good.”
I read Kim as a little bit on edge, so I just called somebody at a different branch. On my second call with Chris, the survey trick played like a
charm. The tactic here is to slip the important questions in among inconsequential ones that are used to create a sense of believability. Before I
dropped the question about the Merchant ID number with CreditChex,
I ran a little last-minute test by asking her a personal question about how
long she’d been with the bank.
A personal question is like a land mine—some people step right over it
and never notice; for other people, it blows up and sends them scurrying
for safety. So if I ask a personal question and she answers the question and
the tone of her voice doesn’t change, that means she probably isn’t skeptical about the nature of the request. I can safely ask the sought-after question without arousing her suspicions, and she’ll probably give me the
answer I’m looking for.
One more thing a good PI knows: Never end the conversation after getting the key information. Another two or three questions, a little chat, and
then it’s okay to say good-bye. Later, if the victim remembers anything
about what you asked, it will probably be the last couple of questions. The
rest will usually be forgotten.
So Chris gave me their Merchant ID number, and the phone number
they call to make requests. I would have been happier if I had gotten to
ask some questions about how much information you can get from
CreditChex. But it was better not to push my luck.
It was like having a blank check on CreditChex. I could now call and
get information whenever I wanted. I didn’t even have to pay for the service. As it turned out, the CreditChex rep was happy to share exactly the
information I wanted: two places my client’s husband had recently applied
to open an account. So where were the assets his soon-to-be ex-wife was
looking for? Where else but at the banking institutions the guy at
CreditChex listed?

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





mitnick
message
A Merchant ID in this situation is analogous to a password. If bank personnel
treated it like an ATM PIN, they might appreciate the sensitive nature of the information. Is there an internal code or number in your organization that people
aren’t treating with enough care?

21
When Innocuous Information Isn’t

Analyzing the Con
This entire ruse was based on one of the fundamental tactics of social
engineering: gaining access to information that a company employee
treats as innocuous, when it isn’t.
The first bank clerk confirmed the terminology to describe the identifying number used when calling CreditChex: the Merchant ID. The second provided the phone number for calling CreditChex, and the most
vital piece of information, the bank’s Merchant ID number. All this information appeared to the clerk to be innocuous. After all, the bank clerk
thought she was talking to someone from CreditChex—so what could be
the harm in disclosing the number?
All of this laid the groundwork for the third call. Grace had everything
he needed to phone CreditChex, pass himself off as a rep from one of their
customer banks, National, and simply ask for the information he was
after.
With as much skill at stealing information as a good swindler has at
stealing your money, Grace had well-honed talents for reading people. He
knew the common tactic of burying the key questions among innocent
ones. He knew a personal question would test the second clerk’s willingness to cooperate, before innocently asking for the Merchant ID number.
The first clerk’s error in confirming the terminology for the CreditChex
ID number would be almost impossible to protect against. The information is so widely known within the banking industry that it appears to be
unimportant—the very model of the innocuous. But the second clerk,
Chris, should not have been so willing to answer questions without positively verifying that the caller was really who he claimed to be. She should,
at the very least, have taken his name and number and called back; that
way, if any questions arose later, she may have kept a record of what phone
number the person had used. In this case, making a call like that would
have made it much more difficult for the attacker to masquerade as a representative from CreditChex.

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





Better still would have been a call to CreditChex using a number the
bank already had on record—not a number provided by the caller—to
verify that the person really worked there, and that the company was really
doing a customer survey. Given the practicalities of the real world and the
time pressures that most people work under today, though, this kind of
verification phone call is a lot to expect, except when an employee is suspicious that some kind of attack is being made.

THE ENGINEER TRAP

Chapter 2

22

It is widely known that head-hunter firms use social engineering tactics to
recruit corporate talent. Here’s an example of how it can happen.
In the late 1990s, a not very ethical employment agency signed a new
client, a company looking for electrical engineers with experience in the
telephone industry. The honcho on the project was a lady endowed with
a throaty voice and sexy manner that she had learned to use to develop initial trust and rapport over the phone.
The lady decided to stage a raid on a cellular phone service provider, to
see if she could locate some engineers who might be tempted to take a
walk across the street to a competitor. She couldn’t exactly call the switchboard and say, “Let me talk to anybody with five years of engineering
experience.” Instead, for reasons that will become clear in a moment, she
began the talent assault by seeking a piece of information that appeared to
have no sensitivity at all, information that company people give out to
almost anybody who asks.
The First Call: The Receptionist
The attacker, using the name Didi Sands, placed a call to the
corporate offices of the cellular phone service. In part, the
conversation went like this:
Receptionist: Good afternoon. This is Marie, how may I
help you?
Didi: Can you connect me to the Transportation
Department?
R: I’m not sure if we have one, I’ll look in my directory.
Who’s calling?
D: It’s Didi.
R: Are you in the building, or . . . ?
D: No, I’m outside the building.

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





R: Didi who?
D: Didi Sands. I had the extension for Transportation, but I
forgot what it was.
R: One moment.
To allay suspicions, at this point Didi asked a casual, justmaking-conversation question designed to establish that she
was on the “inside,” familiar with company locations.
D: What building are you in—Lakeview or Main Place?
R: Main Place. (pause) It’s 805 555 6469.
To provide herself with a backup in case the call to
Transportation didn’t provide what she was looking for, Didi
said she also wanted to talk to Real Estate. The receptionist
gave her that number, as well. When Didi asked to be connected to the Transportation number, the receptionist tried,
but the line was busy.

The Second Call: Peggy
The next conversation went like this:
Peggy:
Didi:
P:

Accounts Receivable, Peggy.

Hi, Peggy. This is Didi, in Thousand Oaks.

Hi, Didi.

D: How ya doing?
P:

Fine.

Didi then used a familiar term in the corporate world that
describes the charge code for assigning expenses against the
budget of a specific organization or workgroup:
D: Excellent. I have a question for you. How do I find out
the cost center for a particular department?
P:

You’d have to get ahold of the budget analyst for the
department.

23
When Innocuous Information Isn’t

At that point Didi asked for a third phone number, for
Accounts Receivable, located at a corporate facility in Austin,
Texas. The receptionist asked her to wait a moment, and
went off the line. Reporting to Security that she had a suspicious phone call and thought there was something fishy
going on? Not at all, and Didi didn’t have the least bit of concern. She was being a bit of a nuisance, but to the receptionist it was all part of a typical workday. After about a minute,
the receptionist came back on the line, looked up the Accounts
Receivable number, tried it, and put Didi through.

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





D: Do you know who’d be the budget analyst for Thousand
Oaks— headquarters? I’m trying to fill out a form and I
don’t know the proper cost center.
P:

I just know when y’all need a cost center number, you
call your budget analyst.

D: Do you have a cost center for your department there in
Texas?
P:

We have our own cost center but they don’t give us a
complete list of them.

D: How many digits is the cost center? For example, what’s
your cost center?
P:

Well, like, are you with 9WC or with SAT?

Didi had no idea what departments or groups these referred
to, but it didn’t matter. She answered:
D: 9WC.
P:

Then it’s usually four digits. Who did you say you were
with?

D: Headquarters—Thousand Oaks.
P:

Chapter 2

24

Well, here’s one for Thousand Oaks. It’s 1A5N, that’s N
like in Nancy.

By just hanging out long enough with somebody willing to be
helpful, Didi had the cost center number she needed—one of
those pieces of information that no one thinks to protect
because it seems like something that couldn’t be of any value
to an outsider.

The Third Call: A Helpful Wrong Number
Didi’s next step would be to parlay the cost center number
into something of real value by using it as a poker chip.
She began by calling the Real Estate department, pretending
she had reached a wrong number. Starting with a “Sorry to
bother you, but . . . ,” she claimed she was an employee who
had lost her company directory, and asked who you were
supposed to call to get a new copy. The man said the print
copy was out of date because it was available on the company intranet site.
Didi said she preferred using a hard copy, and the man told
her to call Publications, and then, without being asked—
maybe just to keep the sexy-sounding lady on the phone a little longer—helpfully looked up the number and gave it to her.

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





The Fourth Call: Bart in Publications
In Publications, she spoke with a man named Bart. Didi said
she was from Thousand Oaks, and they had a new consultant
who needed a copy of the company directory. She told him a
print copy would work better for the consultant, even if it
was somewhat out of date. Bart told her she’d have to fill out
a requisition form and send the form over to him.
Didi said she was out of forms and it was a rush, and could
Bart be a sweetheart and fill out the form for her? He agreed
with a little too much enthusiasm, and Didi gave him the
details. For the address of the fictional contractor, she
drawled the number of what social engineers call a mail drop,
in this case a Mail Boxes Etc.-type of commercial business
where her company rented boxes for situations just like this.
The earlier spadework now came in handy: There would be a
charge for the cost and shipping of the directory. Fine—Didi
gave the cost center for Thousand Oaks:
“1A5N, that’s N like in Nancy.”

The lady of the husky voice was ready to start making her
head-hunter, people-raiding phone calls. She had conned the
information she needed to launch her raid using the gift of
gab honed to a high polish by every skilled social engineer.
Now she was ready for the payoff.

Analyzing the Con
In this social engineering attack, Didi started by getting phone numbers
for three departments in the target company. This was easy, because the
numbers she was asking for were no secret, especially to employees. A
social engineer learns to sound like an insider, and Didi was skilled at this

lingo
MAIL DROP The social engineer’s term for a rental mailbox, typically
rented under an assumed name, which is used to deliver documents or packages the victim has been duped into sending.

25
When Innocuous Information Isn’t

A few days later, when the corporate directory arrived, Didi
found it was an even bigger payoff than she had expected: It
not only listed the names and phone numbers, but also
showed who worked for whom—the corporate structure of
the whole organization.

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





mitnick
message
Just like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, each piece of information may be irrelevant by
itself. However, when the pieces are put together, a clear picture emerges. In this
case, the picture the social engineer saw was the entire internal structure of the
company

game. One of the phone numbers led her to a cost center number, which
she then used to obtain a copy of the firm’s employee directory.
The main tools she needed: sounding friendly, using some corporate
lingo, and, with the last victim, throwing in a little verbal eyelash-batting.
And one more tool, an essential element not easily acquired—the
manipulative skills of the social engineer, refined through extensive practice and the unwritten lessons of bygone generations of confidence men.

MORE “WORTHLESS” INFO
Besides a cost center number and internal phone extensions, what other
seemingly useless information can be extremely valuable to your enemy?

Chapter 2

26

Peter Abel’s Phone Call
“Hi,” the voice at the other end of the line says. “This is Tom
at Parkhurst Travel. Your tickets to San Francisco are
ready. Do you want us to deliver them, or do you want
to pick them up?”
“San Francisco?” Peter says. “I’m not going to San Francisco.”
“Is this Peter Abels?”
“Yes, but I don’t have any trips coming up.”
“Well,” the caller says with a friendly laugh, “you sure you
don’t want to go to San Francisco?”
“If you think you can talk my boss into it . . .” Peter says,
playing along with the friendly conversation.
“Sounds like a mix-up,” the caller says. “On our system, we
book travel arrangements under the employee number.
Maybe somebody used the wrong number. What’s your
employee number?”
Peter obligingly recites his number. And why not? It goes on
just about every personnel form he fills out, lots of people in
the company have access to it—human resources, payroll,
and, obviously, the outside travel agency. No one treats an
employee number like some sort of secret. What difference
could it make?

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





The answer isn’t hard to figure out. Two or three pieces of
information might be all it takes to mount an effective impersonation—the social engineer cloaking himself in someone
else’s identity. Get hold of an employee’s name, his phone
number, his employee number—and maybe, for good measure, his manager’s name and phone number—and a halfwaycompetent social engineer is equipped with most of what he’s
likely to need to sound authentic to the next target he calls.
If someone who said he was from another department in your
company had called yesterday, given a plausible reason, and
asked for your employee number, would you have had any
reluctance in giving it to him?
And by the way, what is your social security number?

mitnick
message
The moral of the story is, don’t give out any personal or internal company information or identifiers to anyone, unless his or her voice is recognizable and the
requestor has a need to know.

PREVENTING THE CON

•

The Information Security Department needs to conduct
awareness training detailing the methods used by social engineers. One method, as described above, is to obtain seemingly
nonsensitive information and use it as a poker chip to gain
short-term trust. Each and every employee needs to be aware
that when a caller has knowledge about company procedures,
lingo, and internal identifiers it does not in any way, shape, or
form authenticate the requestor or authorize him or her as having a need to know. A caller could be a former employee or

When Innocuous Information Isn’t

Your company has a responsibility to make employees aware of how a serious mistake can occur from mishandling nonpublic information. A wellthought-out information security policy, combined with proper education
and training, will dramatically increase employee awareness about the
proper handling of corporate business information. A data classification
policy will help you to implement proper controls with respect to disclosing information. Without a data classification policy, all internal information must be considered confidential, unless otherwise specified.
Take these steps to protect your company from the release of seemingly
innocuous information:

27

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F

•

•

Chapter 2

28

•





contractor with the requisite insider information. Accordingly,
each corporation has a responsibility to determine the appropriate authentication method to be used when employees
interact with people they don’t recognize in person or over the
telephone.
The person or persons with the role and responsibility of drafting a data classification policy should examine the types of
details that may be used to gain access for legitimate employees that seem innocuous, but could lead to information that is
sensitive. Though you’d never give out the access codes for
your ATM card, would you tell somebody what server you use
to develop company software products? Could that information be used by a person pretending to be somebody who has
legitimate access to the corporate network?
Sometimes just knowing inside terminology can make the
social engineer appear authoritative and knowledgeable. The
attacker often relies on this common misconception to dupe
his or her victims into compliance. For example, a Merchant
ID is an identifier that people in the New Accounts department of a bank casually use every day. But such an identifier is
exactly the same as a password. If each and every employee
understands the nature of this identifier—that it is used to
positively authenticate a requestor—they might treat it with
more respect.
No companies—well, very few, at least—give out the directdial phone numbers of their CEO or board chairman. Most
companies, though, have no concern about giving out
phone numbers to most departments and workgroups in the
organization—especially to someone who is, or appears to be,
an employee. A possible countermeasure: Implement a policy

mitnick
message
As the old adage goes—even real paranoids probably have enemies. We must
assume that every business has its enemies, too—attackers that target the network infrastructure to compromise business secrets. Don’t end up being a statistic on computer crime—it’s high time to shore up the necessary defenses
by implementing proper controls through well-thought-out security policies and
procedures.

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F

•

•

•





As the stories in this chapter have shown, seemingly innocuous information can be the key to your company’s most prized secrets.

29
When Innocuous Information Isn’t

that prohibits giving internal phone numbers of employees,
contractors, consultants, and temps to outsiders. More importantly, develop a step-by-step procedure to positively identify
whether a caller asking for phone numbers is really an employee.
Accounting codes for workgroups and departments, as well as
copies of the corporate directory (whether hard copy, data
file, or electronic phone book on the intranet) are frequent targets of social engineers. Every company needs a written, wellpublicized policy on disclosure of this type of information.
The safeguards should include maintaining an audit log that
records instances when sensitive information is disclosed to
people outside of the company.
Information such as an employee number, by itself, should not
be used as any sort of authentication. Every employee must be
trained to verify not just the identity of a requestor, but also
the requestor’s need to know.
In your security training, consider teaching employees this
approach: Whenever asked a question or asked for a favor by a
stranger, learn first to politely decline until the request can be
verified. Then—before giving in to the natural desire to be Mr.
or Ms. Helpful—follow company policies and procedures with
respect to verification and disclosure of nonpublic information. This style may go against our natural tendency to help
others, but a little healthy paranoia may be necessary to avoid
being the social engineer’s next dupe.

03237124 Part02/Ch02.F





04237124 Ch03.F





