chapter

3

The Direct Attack: Just
Asking for It

m

any social engineering attacks are intricate, involving a number of steps and elaborate planning, combining a mix of
manipulation and technological know-how.
But I always find it striking that a skillful social engineer can often
achieve his goal with a simple, straightforward, direct attack. Just asking
outright for the information may be all that’s needed—as you’ll see.

AN MLAC QUICKIE
Want to know someone’s unlisted phone number? A social engineer can
tell you half a dozen ways (and you’ll find some of them described in other
stories in these pages), but probably the simplest scenario is one that uses
a single phone call, like this one.
Number, Please
The attacker dialed the private phone company number for the MLAC,
the Mechanized Line Assignment Center. To the woman who answered,
he said:
“Hey, this is Paul Anthony. I’m a cable splicer. Listen, a terminal box out
here got fried in a fire. Cops think some creep tried to burn his own house
down for the insurance. They got me out here alone trying to rewire this
entire two hundred-pair terminal. I could really use some help right now.
What facilities should be working at 6723 South Main?”

04237124 Ch03.F





In other parts of the phone company, the person called would know that
reverse lookup information on nonpub (nonpublished) numbers is supposed to be given out only to authorized phone company people. But
MLAC is supposed to be known only to company employees. And while
they’d never give out information to the public, who would want to refuse
a little help to a company man coping with that heavy-duty assignment?
She feels sorry for him, she’s had bad days on the job herself, and she’ll
bend the rules a little to help out a fellow employee with a problem. She
gives him the cable and pairs and each working number assigned to the
address.
Analyzing the Con
As you’ll notice repeatedly in these stories, knowledge of a company’s
lingo, and of its corporate structure—its various offices and departments,
what each does and what information each has—is part of the essential
bag of tricks of the successful social engineer.
mitnick
message

Chapter 3

32

It’s human nature to trust our fellow man, especially when the request meets the
test of being reasonable. Social engineers use this knowledge to exploit their victims and to achieve their goals.

YOUNG MAN ON THE RUN
A man we’ll call Frank Parsons had been on the run for years, still wanted
by the federal government for being part of an underground antiwar
group in the 1960s. In restaurants he sat facing the door and he had a way
of glancing over his shoulder every once in a while that other people found
disconcerting. He moved every few years.
At one point Frank landed in a city he didn’t know, and set about job
hunting. For someone like Frank, with his well-developed computer skills
(and social engineering skills as well, even though he never listed those on
a job application), finding a good job usually wasn’t a problem. Except in
times when the economy is very tight, people with good technical computer knowledge usually find their talents in high demand and they have
little problem landing on their feet. Frank quickly located a well-paying

04237124 Ch03.F





mitnick
message
Savvy information swindlers have no qualms about ringing up federal, state, or
local government officials to learn about the procedures of law enforcement. With
such information in hand, the social engineer may be able to circumvent your
company’s standard security checks.

33
The Direct Attack: Just Asking for It

job opportunity at a large, upscale, long-term care facility near where he
was living.
Just the ticket, he thought. But when he started plodding his way
through the application forms, he came upon an uh-oh: The employer
required the applicant to provide a copy of his state criminal history
record, which he had to obtain himself from the state police. The stack of
employment papers included a form to request this document, and the
form had a little box for providing a fingerprint. Even though they were
asking for a print of just the right index finger, if they matched his print
with one in the FBI’s database, he’d probably soon be working in food
service at a federally funded resort.
On the other hand, it occurred to Frank that maybe, just maybe, he
might still be able to get away with this. Perhaps the state didn’t send those
fingerprint samples to the FBI at all. How could he find out?
How? He was a social engineer—how do you think he found out? He
placed a phone call to the state patrol: “Hi. We’re doing a study for the
State Department of Justice. We’re researching the requirements to implement a new fingerprint identification system. Can I talk to somebody
there that’s really familiar with what you’re doing who could maybe help
us out?”
And when the local expert came on the phone, Frank asked a series of
questions about what systems they were using, and the capabilities to
search and store fingerprint data. Had they had any equipment problems?
Were they tied into the National Crime Information Center’s (NCIC)
Fingerprint Search or just within the state? Was the equipment pretty easy
for everybody to learn to use?
Slyly, he sneaked the key question in among the rest.
The answer was music to his ears: No, they weren’t tied into the NCIC,
they only checked against the state’s Criminal Information Index (CII).

04237124 Ch03.F





That was all Frank needed to know. He didn’t have any record in that
state, so he submitted his application, was hired for the job, and nobody
ever showed up at his desk one day with the greeting, “These gentlemen
are from the FBI and they’d like to have a little talk with you.”
And, according to him, he proved to be a model employee.

ON THE DOORSTEP
In spite of the myth of the paperless office, companies continue to print out
reams of paper every day. Information in print at your company may be vulnerable, even if you use security precautions and stamp it confidential.
Here’s one story that shows you how social engineers might obtain your
most secret documents.

Chapter 3

34

Loop-Around Deception
Every year the phone company publishes a volume called the Test Number
Directory (or at least they used to, and because I am still on supervised
release, I’m not going to ask if they still do). This document was highly
prized by phone phreaks because it was packed with a list of all the closely
guarded phone numbers used by company craftsmen, technicians, and
others for things like trunk testing or checking numbers that always
ring busy.
One of these test numbers, known in the lingo as a loop-around, was particularly useful. Phone phreaks used it as a way to find other phone
phreaks to chat with, at no cost to them. Phone phreaks also used it as
a way to create a callback number to give to, say, a bank. A social engineer
would tell somebody at the bank the phone number to call to reach him
at his office. When the bank called back to the test number (loop-around),
the phone phreak would be able to receive the call, yet he had the
protection of having used a phone number that could not be traced back
to him.
A Test Number Directory provided a lot of neat information that could
be used by any information-hungry, testosteroned, phone phreak. So
when the new directories were published each year, they were coveted
by a lot of youngsters whose hobby was exploring the telephone network.

04237124 Ch03.F





mitnick
message
Security training with respect to company policy designed to protect information
assets needs to be for everyone in the company, not just any employee who has
electronic or physical access to the company’s IT assets.

Stevie’s Scam
Naturally phone companies don’t make these books easy to get hold of, so
phone phreaks have to be creative to get one. How can they do this? An
eager youngster with a mind bent on acquiring the directory might enact
a scenario like this.

35
The Direct Attack: Just Asking for It

Late one day, a mild evening in the southern California autumn, a guy I’ll
call Stevie phones a small telephone company central office, which is the
building from which phone lines run to all the homes and businesses in
the established service area.
When the switchman on duty answers the call, Stevie announces that
he’s from the division of the phone company that publishes and distributes printed materials. “We have your new Test Number Directory,” he
says. “But for security reasons, we can’t deliver your copy until we pick up
the old one. And the delivery guy is running late. If you wanna leave your
copy just outside your door, he can swing by, pick up yours, drop the new
one, and be on his way.”
The unsuspecting switchman seems to think that sounds reasonable.
He does exactly as asked, putting out on the doorstep of the building his
copy of the directory, its cover clearly marked in big red letters with the
warning, “COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL—WHEN NO LONGER
NEEDED, THIS DOCUMENT MUST BE SHREDDED.”
Stevie drives by and looks around carefully to spot any cops or phone
company security people who might be lurking behind trees or watching
for him from parked cars. Nobody in sight. He casually picks up the coveted directory and drives away.
Here’s just one more example of how easy it can be for a social engineer
to get what he wants by following the simple principle of “just ask for it.”

04237124 Ch03.F





GAS ATTACK
Not only company assets are at risk in a social engineering scenario.
Sometimes it’s a company’s customers who are the victims.
Working as a customer-service clerk brings its share of frustrations, its
share of laughs, and its share of innocent mistakes—some of which can
have unhappy consequences for a company’s customers.
Janie Acton’s Story
Janie Acton had been manning a cubicle as a customer service rep for
Hometown Electric Power, in Washington, D.C., for just over three years.
She was considered to be one of the better clerks, smart and conscientious.

Chapter 3

36

It was Thanksgiving week when this one particular call came in. The caller
said, “This is Eduardo in the Billing Department. I’ve got a lady on hold,
she’s a secretary in the executive offices that works for one of the vice presidents, and she’s asking for some information and I can’t use my computer.
I got an email from this girl in Human Resources that said ‘ILOVEYOU,’
and when I opened the attachment, I couldn’t use my machine any more.
A virus. I got caught by a stupid virus. Anyways, could you look up some
customer information for me?”
“Sure,” Janie answered. “It crashed your computer? That’s terrible.”
“Yeah.”
“How can I help?” Janie asked.
Here the attacker called on information from his advance research to
make himself sound authentic. He had learned that the information he
wanted was stored in something called the Customer Billing Information
System, and he had found out how employees referred to the system. He
asked, “Can you bring up an account on CBIS?”
“Yes, what’s the account number?”
“I don’t have the number; I need you to bring it up by name.”
“Okay, what’s the name?”
“It’s Heather Marning.” He spelled the name, and Janie typed it in.
“Okay, I have it up.”
“Great. Is the account current?”
“Uh huh, it’s current.”
“What’s the account number?” he asked.
“Do you have a pencil?”

04237124 Ch03.F





“Ready to write.”
“Account number BAZ6573NR27Q.”
He read the number back and then said, “And what’s the service
address?”
She gave him the address.
“And what’s the phone?”
Janie obligingly read off that information, too.
The caller thanked her, said good-bye, and hung up. Janie went on to
the next call, never thinking further about it.

A man contacted me who was writing a book about the Cabinet in the
Nixon years, and was looking for a researcher who could get the inside
scoop on William E. Simon, who had been Nixon’s Treasury secretary. Mr.
Simon had died, but the author had the name of a woman who had
been on his staff. He was pretty sure she still lived in D.C., but hadn’t been
able to get an address. She didn’t have a telephone in her name, or at least
none that was listed. So that’s when he called me. I told him, sure, no
problem.
This is the kind of job you can usually bring off in a phone call or two,
if you know what you’re doing. Every local utility company can generally
be counted on to give the information away. Of course, you have to BS a
little. But what’s a little white lie now and then—right?
I like to use a different approach each time, just to keep things interesting. “This is so-and-so in the executive offices” has always worked well
for me. So has “I’ve got somebody on the line from Vice President
Somebody’s office,” which worked this time, too.

37
The Direct Attack: Just Asking for It

Art Sealy’s Research Project
Art Sealy had given up working as a freelance editor for small publishing
houses when he found he could make more money doing research for
writers and businesses. He soon figured out that the fee he could charge
went up in proportion to how close the assignment took him to the sometimes hazy line between the legal and the illegal. Without ever realizing it,
certainly without ever giving it a name, Art became a social engineer,
using techniques familiar to every information broker. He turned out to
have a native talent for the business, figuring out for himself techniques
that most social engineers had to learn from others. After a while, he
crossed the line without the least twinge of guilt.

04237124 Ch03.F





mitnick
message
Never think all social engineering attacks need to be elaborate ruses so complex
that they’re likely to be recognized before they can be completed. Some are inand-out, strike-and-disappear, very simple attacks that are no more than . . . well,
just asking for it.

You have to sort of develop the social engineer’s instinct, get a sense of
how cooperative the person on the other end is going to be with you. This
time I lucked out with a friendly, helpful lady. In a single phone call, I had
the address and phone number. Mission accomplished.

Chapter 3

38

Analyzing the Con
Certainly Janie knew that customer information is sensitive. She would
never discuss one customer’s account with another customer, or give out
private information to the public.
But naturally, for a caller from within the company, different rules apply.
For a fellow employee it’s all about being a team player and helping each
other get the job done. The man from Billing could have looked up the
details himself if his computer hadn’t been down with a virus, and she was
glad to be able to help a coworker.
Art built up gradually to the key information he was really after, asking
questions along the way about things he didn’t really need, such as the
account number. Yet at the same time, the account number information
provided a fallback: If the clerk had become suspicious, he’d call a second
time and stand a better chance of success, because knowing the account
number would make him sound all the more authentic to the next clerk
he reached.
It never occurred to Janie that somebody might actually lie about something like this, that the caller might not really be from the billing department at all. Of course, the blame doesn’t lie at Janie’s feet. She wasn’t well
versed in the rule about making sure you know who you’re talking to
before discussing information in a customer’s file. Nobody had ever told
her about the danger of a phone call like the one from Art. It wasn’t in the
company policy, it wasn’t part of her training, and her supervisor had
never mentioned it.

04237124 Ch03.F





PREVENTING THE CON

39
The Direct Attack: Just Asking for It

A point to include in your security training: Just because a caller or visitor knows the names of some people in the company, or knows some of
the corporate lingo or procedures, doesn’t mean he is who he claims to be.
And it definitely doesn’t establish him as anybody authorized to be given
internal information, or access to your computer system or network.
Security training needs to emphasize: When in doubt, verify, verify,
verify.
In earlier times, access to information within a company was a mark of
rank and privilege. Workers stoked the furnaces, ran the machines, typed
the letters, and filed the reports. The foreman or boss told them what to
do, when, and how. It was the foreman or boss who knew how many
widgets each worker should be producing on a shift, how many and in
what colors and sizes the factory needed to turn out this week, next week,
and by the end of the month.
Workers handled machines and tools and materials, and bosses handled
information. Workers needed only the information specific to their specific jobs.
The picture is a little different today, isn’t it? Many factory workers use
some form of computer or computer-driven machine. For a large part of
the workforce, critical information is pushed down to the users’ desktops
so that they can fulfill their responsibility to get their work done. In
today’s environment, almost everything employees do involves the handling of information.
That’s why a company’s security policy needs to be distributed enterprisewide, regardless of position. Everybody must understand that it’s not just
the bosses and executives who have the information that an attacker might
be after. Today, workers at every level, even those who don’t use a computer, are liable to be targeted. The newly hired rep in the customer service group may be just the weak link that a social engineer breaks to achieve
his objective.
Security training and corporate security policies need to strengthen that
link.

04237124 Ch03.F





05237124 Ch04.F





