chapter

6

“Can You Help Me?”

y

ou’ve seen how social engineers trick people by offering to help.
Another favorite approach turns the tables: The social engineer
manipulates by pretending he needs the other person to help
him. We can all sympathize with people in a tight spot, and the approach
proves effective over and over again in allowing a social engineer to reach
his goal.

THE OUT-OF-TOWNER
A story in Chapter 3 showed how an attacker can talk a victim into revealing his employee number. This one uses a different approach for achieving the same result, and then shows how the attacker can make use of that
information.
Keeping Up with the Joneses
In Silicon Valley there is a certain global company that shall be nameless.
The scattered sales offices and other field installations around the world
are all connected to that company’s headquarters over a WAN, a wide area
network. The intruder, a smart, feisty guy named Brian Atterby, knew
it was almost always easier to break into a network at one of the remote
sites, where security is practically guaranteed to be more lax than at
headquarters.
The intruder phoned the Chicago office and asked to speak with
Mr. Jones. The receptionist asked if he knew Mr. Jones’s first name; he

07237124 Ch06.F

Chapter 6

78





answered, “I had it here, I’m looking for it. How many Joneses do you
have?” She said, “Three. Which department would he be in?”
He said, “If you read me the names, maybe I’ll recognize it.” So she did:
“Barry, Joseph, and Gordon.”
“Joe. I’m pretty sure that was it,” he said. “And he was in . . . which
department?”
“Business Development.”
“Fine. Can you connect me, please?”
She put the call through. When Jones answered, the attacker said, “Mr.
Jones? Hi, this is Tony in Payroll. We just put through your request to
have your paycheck deposited directly to your credit union account.”
“WHAT???!!! You’ve got to be kidding. I didn’t make any request like
that. I don’t even have an account at a credit union.”
“Oh, damn, I already put it through.”
Jones was more than a little upset at the idea that his paycheck might be
going to someone else’s account, and he was beginning to think the guy
on the other end of the phone must be a little slow. Before he could even
reply, the attacker said, “I better see what happened. Payroll changes are
entered by employee number. What’s your employee number?”
Jones gave the number. The caller said, “No, you’re right, the request
wasn’t from you, then.”They get more stupid every year, Jones thought.
“Look, I’ll see it’s taken care of. I’ll put in a correction right now. So
don’t worry—you’ll get your next paycheck okay,” the guy said reassuringly.
A Business Trip
Not long after, the system administrator in the company’s Austin, Texas,
sales office received a phone call. “This is Joseph Jones,” the caller
announced. “I’m in Business Development at corporate. I’ll be in town
for the week, at the Driskill Hotel. I’d like to have you set me up with a
temporary account so I can access my email without making a long distance call.”
“Let me get that name again, and give me your employee number,” the
sys admin said. The false Jones gave the number and went on, “Do you
have any high speed dial-up numbers?”
“Hold on, buddy. I gotta verify you in the database.” After a bit, he said,
“Okay, Joe. Tell me, what’s your building number?” The attacker had done
his homework and had the answer ready.

07237124 Ch06.F





mitnick
message
Don’t rely on network safeguards and firewalls to protect your information. Look
to your most vulnerable spot. You’ll usually find that vulnerability lies in your
people.

“Okay,” the sys admin told him, “you convinced me.”
It was as simple as that. The sys admin had verified the name Joseph
Jones, the department, and the employee number, and “Joe” had given the
right answer to the test question. “Your username’s going to be the same
as your corporate one, jbjones,” the sys admin said, “and I’m giving you
an initial password of ‘changeme.’”

lingo
CANDY SECURITY A term coined by Bellovin and Cheswick of Bell Labs to
describe a security scenario where the outer perimeter, such as a firewall, is
strong, but the infrastructure behind it is weak. The term refers to M&M
candy, which has a hard outer shell and soft center.

79
“Can You Help Me?”

Analyzing the Con
With a couple of phone calls and fifteen minutes of time, the attacker had
gained access to the company’s wide area network. This was a company
that, like many, had what I refer to as candy security, after a description
first used by two Bell Labs researchers, Steve Bellovin and Steven
Cheswick. They described such security as “a hard crunchy shell with a
soft chewy center”—like an M&M candy. The outer shell, the firewall,
Bellovin and Cheswick argued, is not sufficient protection, because once
an intruder is able to circumvent it, the internal computer systems have
soft, chewy security. Most of the time, they are inadequately protected.
This story fits the definition. With a dial-up number and an account,
the attacker didn’t even have to bother trying to defeat an Internet firewall, and, once inside, he was easily able to compromise most of the
systems on the internal network.
Through my sources, I understand this exact ruse was worked on one of
the largest computer software manufacturers in the world. You would
think the systems administrators in such a company would be trained to
detect this type of ruse. But in my experience, nobody is completely safe
if a social engineer is clever and persuasive enough.

07237124 Ch06.F





lingo
SPEAKEASY SECURITY Security that relies on knowing where desired
information is, and using a word or name to gain access to that information
or computer system.

SPEAKEASY SECURITY

Chapter 6

80

In the old days of speakeasies—those Prohibition-era nightclubs where socalled bathtub gin flowed—a would-be customer gained admission by
showing up at the door and knocking. After a few moments, a small flap
in the door would swing open and a tough, intimidating face would peer
out. If the visitor was in the know, he would speak the name of some frequent patron of the place (“Joe sent me” was often enough), whereupon
the bouncer inside would unlatch the door and let him in.
The real trick lay in knowing the location of the speakeasy because the
door was unmarked, and the owners didn’t exactly hang out neon signs
to mark their presence. For the most part, just showing up at the right
place was about all it took to get in. The same degree of safekeeping is,
unhappily, practiced widely in the corporate world, providing a level of
nonprotection that I call speakeasy security.
I Saw It at the Movies
Here’s an illustration from a favorite movie that many people will remember. In Three Days of the Condor the central character, Turner (played by
Robert Redford), works for a small research firm contracted by the CIA.
One day he comes back from a lunch run to find that all his coworkers
have been gunned down. He’s left to figure out who has done this and
why, all the while knowing that the bad guys, whoever they are, are looking for him.
Late in the story, Turner manages to get the phone number of one the
bad guys. But who is this person, and how can Turner pin down his location? He’s in luck: The screenwriter, David Rayfiel, has happily given
Turner a background that includes training as a telephone lineman with
the Army Signal Corps, making him knowledgeable about techniques and
practices of the phone company. With the bad guy’s phone number in
hand, Turner knows exactly what to do. In the screenplay, the scene reads
like this:

07237124 Ch06.F





TURNER RECONNECTS and TAPS OUT ANOTHER NUMBER.
RING! RING! Then:
WOMAN’S VOICE (FILTER)
CNA, Mrs. Coleman speaking.
TURNER (into test set)
This is Harold Thomas, Mrs. Coleman. Customer Service.
CNA on 202-555-7389, please.
WOMAN’S VOICE (FILTER)
One moment, please.
(almost at once)
Leonard Atwood, 765 MacKensie Lane, Chevy Chase,
Maryland.

Fooling the Phone Company
In the real world, the phone number for CNA is a closely guarded secret.
Although the phone companies finally caught on and these days are less
generous about handing out information so readily, at the time they operated on a variation of speakeasy security that security professionals call
security through obscurity. They presumed that anybody who called CNA
and knew the proper lingo (“Customer service. CNA on 555-1234,
please,” for example) was a person authorized to have the information.

lingo
SECURITY THROUGH OBSCURITY An ineffective method of computer
security that relies on keeping secret the details of how the system works
(protocols, algorithms, and internal systems). Security through obscurity
relies on the false assumption that no one outside a trusted group of people
will be able to circumvent the system.

81
“Can You Help Me?”

Ignoring the fact that the screenwriter mistakenly uses a Washington,
D.C., area code for a Maryland address, can you spot what just happened
here?
Turner, because of his training as a telephone lineman, knew what number to dial in order to reach a phone company office called CNA, the
Customer Name and Address bureau. CNA is set up for the convenience
of installers and other authorized phone company personnel. An installer
could call CNA, and give them a phone number. The CNA clerk would
respond by providing the name of the person the phone belongs to and
his address.

07237124 Ch06.F





mitnick
message
Security through obscurity does not have any effect in blocking social engineering attacks. Every computer system in the world has at least one human that uses
it. So, if the attacker is able to manipulate people who use the systems, the
obscurity of the system is irrelevant.

Chapter 6

82

There was no need to verify or identify oneself, no need to give an
employee number, no need for a password that was changed daily. If you
knew the number to call and you sounded authentic, then you must be
entitled to the information.
That was not a very solid assumption on the part of the telephone company. Their only effort at security was to change the phone number on a
periodic basis, at least once a year. Even so, the current number at any particular moment was very widely known among phone phreaks, who
delighted in taking advantage of this convenient source of information,
and in sharing the how-to-do-it with their fellow phreaks. The CNA
Bureau trick was one of the first things I learned when I was introduced
to the hobby of phone phreaking as a teenager.
Throughout the world of business and government, speakeasy security
is still prevalent. It’s likely that any semiskilled intruder can pass himself
off as an authorized person just by putting together enough information
about your company’s departments, people, and lingo. Sometimes less
than that: Sometimes an internal phone number is all it takes.

THE CARELESS COMPUTER MANAGER
Though many employees in organizations are negligent, unconcerned, or
unaware of security dangers, you’d expect someone with the title of
manager in the computer center of a Fortune 500 corporation to be thoroughly knowledgeable about best security practices, right?
You would not expect a computer center manager—someone who is
part of his company’s Information Technology department—to fall victim
to a simplistic and obvious social engineering con game. Especially not if
the social engineer is hardly more than a kid, barely out of his teens. But
sometimes your expectations can be wrong.
Tuning In
Years ago it was an amusing pastime for many people to keep a radio
tuned to the local police or fire department frequencies, listening in on the

07237124 Ch06.F





occasional highly charged conversations about a bank robbery in progress,
an office building on fire, or a high-speed chase as the event unfolded. The
radio frequencies used by law enforcement agencies and fire departments
used to be available in books at the corner bookstore; today they’re
provided in listings on the Web, and from a book you can buy at Radio
Shack—frequencies for local, county, state, and, in some cases, even federal agencies.
Of course, it wasn’t just the curious who were listening in. Crooks robbing a store in the middle of the night could tune in to hear if a police car
was being dispatched to the location. Drug dealers could keep a check on
activities of the local Drug Enforcement Agency agents. An arsonist could
enhance his sick pleasure by lighting a blaze and then listening to all the
radio traffic while firemen struggled to put it out.
Over recent years developments in computer technology have made it
possible to encrypt voice messages. As engineers found ways to cram more
and more computing power onto a single microchip, they began to build
small, encrypted radios for law enforcement that kept the bad guys and
the curious from listening in.
83
“Can You Help Me?”

Danny the Eavesdropper
A scanner enthusiast and skilled hacker we’ll call Danny decided to see
if he couldn’t find a way to get his hands on the super-secret encryption
software—the source code—from one of the top manufacturers of secure
radio systems. He was hoping a study of the code would enable him to
learn how to eavesdrop on law enforcement, and possibly also use the
technology so that even the most powerful government agencies would
find it difficult to monitor his conversations with his friends.
The Dannys of the shadowy world of hackers belong to a special category that falls somewhere in between the merely-curious-but-entirelybenign and the dangerous. Dannys have the knowledge of the expert,
combined with the mischievous hacker’s desire to break into systems and
networks for the intellectual challenge and for the pleasure of gaining
insight into how technology works. But their electronic breaking-andentering stunts are just that—stunts. These folks, these benign hackers,
illegally enter sites for the sheer fun and exhilaration of proving they can
do it. They don’t steal anything, they don’t make any money from their
exploits; they don’t destroy any files, disrupt any network connections, or
crash any computer system. The mere fact of their being there, snaring
copies of files and searching emails for passwords behind the backs of
security and network administrators, tweaks the noses of the people

07237124 Ch06.F

Chapter 6

84





responsible for keeping out intruders like them. The one-upmanship is a
big part of the satisfaction.
In keeping with this profile, our Danny wanted to examine the details
of his target company’s most closely guarded product just to satisfy his
own burning curiosity and to admire whatever clever innovations the
manufacturer might have come up with.
The product designs were, needless to say, carefully guarded trade
secrets, as precious and protected as just about anything in the company’s
possession. Danny knew that. And he didn’t care a bit. After all, it was just
some big, nameless company.
But how to get the software source code? As it turned out, grabbing the
crown jewels of the company’s Secure Communications Group proved to
be all too easy, even though the company was one of those that used twofactor authentication, an arrangement under which people are required to
use not one but two separate identifiers to prove their identity.
Here’s an example you’re probably already familiar with. When your
renewal credit card arrives, you’re asked to phone the issuing company to
let them know that the card is in possession of the intended customer, and
not somebody who stole the envelope from the mail. The instructions
with the card these days generally tell you to call from home. When you
call, software at the credit card company analyzes the ANI, the automatic
number identification, which is provided by the telephone switch on tollfree calls that the credit card company is paying for.
A computer at the credit card company uses the calling party’s number
provided by the ANI, and matches that number against the company’s
database of cardholders. By the time the clerk comes on the line, her or
his display shows information from the database giving details about the
customer. So the clerk already knows the call is coming from the home of
a customer; that’s one form of authentication.
The clerk then picks an item from the information displayed about
you—most often social security number, date of birth, or mother’s maiden
name—and asks you for this piece of information. If you give the right

lingo
TWO-FACTOR AUTHENTICATION The use of two different types of authentication to verify identity. For example, a person might have to identify himself by calling from a certain identifiable location and knowing a password.

07237124 Ch06.F





Storming the Fortress
Danny began by doing his homework. Before long he had managed to put
together enough pieces to masquerade as a real employee. He had an
employee’s name, department, phone number, and employee number, as
well as the manager’s name and phone number.
Now was the calm before the storm. Literally. Going by the plan he had
worked out, Danny needed one more thing before he could take the next
step, and it was something he had no control over: He needed a snowstorm. Danny needed a little help from Mother Nature in the form of
weather so bad that it would keep workers from getting into the office.
In the winter in South Dakota, where the manufacturing plant in question was located, anyone hoping for bad weather did not have very long

85
“Can You Help Me?”

answer, that’s a second form of authentication—based on information you
should know.
At the company manufacturing the secure radio systems in our story,
every employee with computer access had their usual account name and
password, but in addition was provided with a small electronic device
called Secure ID. This is what’s called a time-based token. These devices
come in two types: One is about half the size of a credit card but a little
thicker; another is small enough that people simply attach it to their key
chains.
Derived from the world of cryptography, this particular gadget has a
small window that displays a series of six digits. Every sixty seconds, the
display changes to show a different six-digit number. When an authorized
person needs to access the network from offsite, she must first identify
herself as an authorized user by typing in her secret PIN and the digits displayed on her token device. Once verified by the internal system, she then
authenticates with her account name and password.
For the young hacker Danny to get at the source code he so coveted, he
would have to not only compromise some employee’s account name and
password (not much of a challenge for the experienced social engineer)
but also get around the time-based token.
Defeating the two-factor authentication of a time-based token combined with a user’s secret PIN code sounds like a challenge right out of
Mission Impossible. But for social engineers, the challenge is similar to that
faced by a poker player who has more than the usual skill at reading his
opponents. With a little luck, when he sits down at a table he knows he’s
likely to walk away with a large pile of other people’s money.

07237124 Ch06.F

Chapter 6

86





to wait. On Friday night, a storm arrived. What had begun as snow
quickly turned to freezing rain so that, by morning, the roads were coated
with a slick, dangerous sheet of ice. For Danny, this was a perfect
opportunity.
He telephoned the plant, asked for the computer room and reached one
of the worker bees of IT, a computer operator who announced himself as
Roger Kowalski.
Giving the name of the real employee he had obtained, Danny said,
“This is Bob Billings. I work in the Secure Communications Group. I’m
at home right now and I can’t drive in because of the storm. And the problem is that I need to access my workstation and the server from home, and
I left my Secure ID in my desk. Can you go fetch it for me? Or can somebody? And then read off my code when I need to get in? Because my team
has a critical deadline and there’s no way I can get my work done. And
there’s no way I can get to the office—the roads are much too dangerous
up my way.”
The computer operator said, “I can’t leave the Computer Center.”
Danny jumped right in: “Do you have a Secure ID yourself?”
“There’s one here in the Computer Center,” he said. “We keep one for
the operators in case of an emergency.”
“Listen,” Danny said. “Can you do me a big favor? When I need to dial
into the network, can you let me borrow your Secure ID? Just until it’s safe
to drive in.”
“Who are you again?” Kowalski asked.
“Bob Billings.”
“Who do you work for?”
“For Ed Trenton.”
“Oh, yeah, I know him.”
When he’s liable to be faced with tough sledding, a good social engineer
does more than the usual amount of research. “I’m on the second floor,”
Danny went on. “Next to Roy Tucker.”
He knew that name, as well. Danny went back to work on him. “It’d be
much easier just to go to my desk and fetch my Secure ID for me.”
Danny was pretty certain the guy would not buy into this. First of all,
he would not want to leave in the middle of his shift to go traipsing down
corridors and up staircases to some distant part of the building. He would
also not want to have to paw through someone else’s desk, violating somebody’s personal space. No, it was a safe bet he wouldn’t want to do that.

07237124 Ch06.F





An Inside Job
Once he was inside the company’s computer system, then what? How
would Danny find his way to the server with the software he wanted?
He had already prepared for this.
Many computer users are familiar with newsgroups, that extensive set of
electronic bulletin boards where people can post questions that other
people answer, or find virtual companions who share an interest in music,
computers, or any of hundreds of other topics.
What few people realize when they post any message on a newsgroup
site is that their message remains on line and available for years. Google,
for example, now maintains an archive of seven hundred million messages,
some dating back twenty years! Danny started by going to the Web address
http://groups.google.com.

87
“Can You Help Me?”

Kowalski didn’t want to say no to a guy who needed some help, but he
didn’t want to say yes and get in trouble, either. So he sidestepped the
decision: “I’ll have to ask my boss. Hang on.” He put the phone down,
and Danny could hear him pick up another phone, put in the call, and
explain the request. Kowalski then did something unexplainable: He actually vouched for the man using the name Bob Billings. “I know him,” he
told his manager. “He works for Ed Trenton. Can we let him use the
Secure ID in the Computer Center?” Danny, holding on to the phone,
was amazed to overhear this extraordinary and unexpected support for his
cause. He couldn’t believe his ears or his luck.
After another couple of moments, Kowalski came back on the line and
said, “My manager wants to talk to you himself,” and gave him the man’s
name and cell phone number.
Danny called the manager and went through the whole story one more
time, adding details about the project he was working on and why his
product team needed to meet a critical deadline. “It’d be easier if someone
just goes and fetches my card,” he said. “I don’t think the desk is locked,
it should be there in my upper left drawer.”
“Well,” said the manager, “just for the weekend, I think we can let you
use the one in the Computer Center. I’ll tell the guys on duty that when
you call, they should read off the random-access code for you,” and he
gave him the PIN number to use with it.
For the whole weekend, every time Danny wanted to get into the corporate computer system, he only had to call the Computer Center and ask
them to read off the six digits displayed on the Secure ID token.

07237124 Ch06.F

Chapter 6

88





As search terms, Danny entered “encryption radio communications”
and the name of the company, and found a years-old message on the subject from an employee. It was a posting that had been made back when
the company was first developing the product, probably long before police
departments and federal agencies had considered scrambling radio signals.
The message contained the sender’s signature, giving not just the man’s
name, Scott Press, but his phone number and even the name of his workgroup, the Secure Communications Group.
Danny picked up the phone and dialed the number. It seemed like a long
shot—would he still be working in the same organization years later? Would
he be at work on such a stormy weekend? The phone rang once, twice, three
times, and then a voice came on the line. “This is Scott,” he said.
Claiming to be from the company’s IT Department, Danny manipulated Press (in one of the ways now familiar to you from earlier chapters)
into revealing the names of the servers he used for development work.
These were the servers that could be expected to hold the source code
containing the proprietary encryption algorithm and firmware used in the
company’s secure radio products.
Danny was moving closer and closer, and his excitement was building.
He was anticipating the rush, the great high he always felt when he succeeded at something he knew only a very limited number of people could
accomplish.
Still, he wasn’t home free yet. For the rest of the weekend he’d be able to
get into the company’s network whenever he wanted to, thanks to that
cooperative computer center manager. And he knew which servers he
wanted to access. But when he dialed in, the terminal server he logged on
to would not permit him to connect to the Secure Communications
Group development systems. There must have been an internal firewall or
router protecting the computer systems of that group. He’d have to find
some other way in.
The next step took nerve: Danny called back to Kowalski in Computer
Operations and complained “My server won’t let me connect,” and told
the IT guy, “I need you to set me up with an account on one of the computers in your department so I can use Telnet to connect to my system.”
The manager had already approved disclosing the access code displayed
on the time-based token, so this new request didn’t seem unreasonable.
Kowalski set up a temporary account and password on one of the
Operation Center’s computers, and told Danny to “call me back when
you don’t need it any more and I’ll remove it.”

07237124 Ch06.F





Once logged into the temporary account, Danny was able to connect
over the network to the Secure Communications Group’s computer systems. After an hour of on-line searching for a technical vulnerability that
would give him access to a main development server, he hit the jackpot.
Apparently the system or network administrator wasn’t vigilant in keeping
up with the latest news on security bugs in the operating system that
allowed remote access. But Danny was.
Within a short time he had located the source code files that he was after
and was transferring them remotely to an e-commerce site that offered
free storage space. On this site, even if the files were ever discovered, they
would never be traced back to him.
He had one final step before signing off: the methodical process of erasing his tracks. He finished before the Jay Leno show had gone off the air
for the night. Danny figured this had been one very good weekend’s work.
And he had never had to put himself personally at risk. It was an intoxicating thrill, even better than snowboarding or skydiving.
Danny got drunk that night, not on scotch, gin, beer, or sake, but on
his sense of power and accomplishment as he poured through the files he
had stolen, closing in on the elusive, extremely secret radio software.
89
“Can You Help Me?”

Analyzing the Con
As in the previous story, this ruse only worked because one company
employee was all too willing to accept at face value that a caller was really
the employee he claimed to be. That eagerness to help out a coworker with
a problem is, on the one hand, part of what greases the wheels of industry, and part of what makes the employees of some companies more pleasant to work with than employees of others. But on the other hand, this
helpfulness can be a major vulnerability that a social engineer will attempt
to exploit.
One bit of manipulation Danny used was delicious: When he made the
request that someone get his Secure ID from his desk, he kept saying he
wanted somebody to “fetch” it for him. Fetch is a command you give your
dog. Nobody wants to be told to fetch something. With that one word,
Danny made it all the more certain the request would be refused and some
other solution accepted instead, which was exactly what he wanted.
The Computer Center operator, Kowalski, was taken in by Danny
dropping the names of people Kowalski happened to know. But why
would Kowalski’s manager—an IT manager, no less—allow some stranger
access to the company’s internal network? Simply because the call for help
can be a powerful, persuasive tool in the social engineer’s arsenal.

07237124 Ch06.F





mitnick
message
This story goes to show that time-based tokens and similar forms of authentication are not a defense against the wily social engineer. The only defense is a conscientious employee who follows security policies and understands how others
can maliciously influence his behavior.

Could something like that ever happen in your company? Has it already?

PREVENTING THE CON

Chapter 6

90

It seems to be an often-repeated element in these stories that an attacker
arranges to dial in to a computer network from outside the company,
without the person who helps him taking sufficient measures to verify that
the caller is really an employee and entitled to the access. Why do I return
to this theme so often? Because it truly is a factor in so many social engineering attacks. For the social engineer, it’s the easiest way to reach his
goal. Why should an attacker spend hours trying to break in, when he can
do it instead with a simple phone call?
One of the most powerful methods for the social engineer to carry out
this kind of attack is the simple ploy of pretending to need help—an
approach frequently used by attackers. You don’t want to stop your
employees from being helpful to coworkers or customers, so you need to
arm them with specific verification procedures to use with anybody making a request for computer access or confidential information. That way
they can be helpful to those who deserve to be helped, but at the same
time protect the organization’s information assets and computer systems.
Company security procedures need to spell out in detail what kind of
verification mechanisms should be used in various circumstances. Chapter 17 provides a detailed list of procedures, but here are some guidelines
to consider:
•

One good way to verify the identity of a person making a
request is to call the phone number listed in the company
directory for that person. If the person making the request is
actually an attacker, the verification call will either let you
speak to the real person on the phone while the imposter is on
hold, or you will reach the employee’s voice mail so that you
can listen to the sound of his voice, and compare it to the
speech of the attacker.

07237124 Ch06.F



•

•

•

•


If employee numbers are used in your company for verifying
identity, then those numbers have to be treated as sensitive
information, carefully guarded and not given out to strangers.
The same goes for all other kinds of internal identifiers, such
as internal telephone numbers, departmental billing identifiers, and even email addresses.
Corporate training should call everyone’s attention to the common practice of accepting unknown people as legitimate
employees on the grounds that they sound authoritative or
knowledgeable. Just because somebody knows a company
practice or uses internal terminology is no reason to assume
that his identity doesn’t need to be verified in other ways.
Security officers and system administrators must not narrow
their focus so that they are only alert to how security-conscious
everyone else is being. They also need to make sure they themselves are following the same rules, procedures, and practices.
Passwords and the like must, of course, never be shared, but
the restriction against sharing is even more important with
time-based tokens and other secure forms of authentication. It
should be a matter of common sense that sharing any of these
items violates the whole point of the company’s having
installed the systems. Sharing means there can be no accountability. If a security incident takes place or something goes
wrong, you won’t be able to determine who the responsible
party is.
As I reiterate throughout this book, employees need to be
familiar with social engineering strategies and methods to
thoughtfully analyze requests they receive. Consider using
role-playing as a standard part of security training, so that
employees can come to a better understanding of how the
social engineer works.

91
“Can You Help Me?”

•


07237124 Ch06.F





08237124 Ch07.F





