chapter

9

The Reverse Sting

t

he Sting, mentioned elsewhere in this book (and in my opinion
probably the best movie that’s ever been made about a con operation), lays out its tricky plot in fascinating detail. The sting operation in the movie is an exact depiction of how top grifters run “the wire,”
one of the three types of major swindles referred to as “big cons.” If you
want to know how a team of professionals pulls off a scam raking in a
great deal of money in a single evening, there’s no better textbook.
But traditional cons, whatever their particular gimmick, run according
to a pattern. Sometimes a ruse is worked in the opposite direction, which
is called a reverse sting. This is an intriguing twist in which the attacker
sets up the situation so that the victim calls on the attacker for help, or a
coworker has made a request, which the attacker is responding to.
How does this work? You’re about to find out.

THE ART OF FRIENDLY PERSUASION
When the average person conjures up the picture of a computer hacker,
what usually comes to mind is the uncomplimentary image of a lonely,
introverted nerd whose best friend is his computer and who has difficulty
carrying on a conversation, except by instant messaging. The social engineer, who often has hacker skills, also has people skills at the opposite end

lingo
REVERSE STING
attacker for help.

A con in which the person being attacked asks the

10237124 Ch09.F





of the spectrum—well-developed abilities to use and manipulate people
that allow him to talk his way into getting information in ways you would
never have believed possible.
Angela’s Caller
Place: Valley branch, Industrial Federal Bank.
Time: 11:27 A.M.

Chapter 9

134

Angela Wisnowski answered a phone call from a man who said he was just
about to receive a sizeable inheritance and he wanted information on the
different types of savings accounts, certificates of deposit, and whatever
other investments she might be able to suggest that would be safe, but
earn decent interest. She explained there were quite a number of choices
and asked if he’d like to come in and sit down with her to discuss them.
He was leaving on a trip as soon as the money arrived, he said, and had a
lot of arrangements to make. So she began suggesting some of the possibilities and giving him details of the interest rates, what happens if you sell
a CD early, and so on, while trying to pin down his investment goals.
She seemed to be making progress when he said, “Oh, sorry, I’ve got to
take this other call. What time can I finish this conversation with you so
I can make some decisions? When do you leave for lunch?” She told him
Louis’s Caller
Major banks use internal security codes that change every
day. When somebody from one branch needs information
from another branch, he proves he’s entitled to the information by demonstrating he knows the day’s code. For an added
degree of security and flexibility, some major banks issue
multiple codes each day. At a West Coast outfit I’ll call
Industrial Federal Bank, each employee finds a list of five
codes for the day, identified as A through E, on his or her
computer each morning.

Place: Same.
Time: 12:48 P.M., same day.
Louis Halpburn didn’t think anything of it when a call came in
that afternoon, a call like others he handled regularly several
times a week.

10237124 Ch09.F





“Hello,” the caller said. “This is Neil Webster. I’m calling from
branch 3182 in Boston. Angela Wisnowski, please.”
“She’s at lunch. Can I help?”
“Well, she left a message asking us to fax some information
on one of our customers.”
The caller sounded like he had been having a bad day.
“The person who normally handles those requests is out
sick,” he said. “I’ve got a stack of these to do, it’s almost
4 o’clock here and I’m supposed to be out of this place
to go to a doctor’s appointment in half an hour.”
The manipulation—giving all the reasons why the other
person should feel sorry for him—was part of softening up
the mark. He went on, “Whoever took her phone message,
the fax number is unreadable. It’s 213-something. What’s the
rest?”
Louis gave the fax number, and the caller said, “Okay, thanks.
Before I can fax this, I need to ask you for Code B.”
“But you called me,” he said with just enough chill so the
man from Boston would get the message.

To Louis, he said, “I’ve got a branch manager that’s just
turned paranoid about getting verification before we
send anything out, is all. But listen, if you don’t need
us to fax the information, it’s okay. No need to verify.”
“Look,” Louis said, “Angela will be back in half an hour or
so. I can have her call you back.”
“I’ll just tell her I couldn’t send the information today
because you wouldn’t identify this as a legitimate
request by giving me the code. If I’m not out sick
tomorrow, I’ll call her back then.”
“Okay.”
“The message says ‘Urgent.’ Never mind, without verification my hands are tied. You’ll tell her I tried to send it
but you wouldn’t give the code, okay?”
Louis gave up under the pressure. An audible sigh of annoyance came winging its way down the phone line.
“Well,” he said, “wait a minute; I have to go to my computer.
Which code did you want?”
“B,” the caller said.

135
The Reverse Sting

This is good, the caller thought. It’s so cool when people don’t
fall over at the first gentle shove. If they don’t resist a little,
the job is too easy and I could start getting lazy.

10237124 Ch09.F





He put the call on hold and then in a bit picked up the line
again. “It’s 3184.”
“That’s not the right code.”
“Yes it is—B is 3184.”
“I didn’t say B, I said E.”
“Oh, damn. Wait a minute.”
Another pause while he again looked up the codes.
“E is 9697.”
“9697—right. I’ll have the fax on the way. Okay?”
“Sure. Thanks.”

Walter’s Caller
“Industrial Federal Bank, this is Walter.”

Chapter 9

136

“Hey, Walter, it’s Bob Grabowski in Studio City, branch 38,”
the caller said. “I need you to pull a sig card on a customer account and fax it to me.” The sig card, or signature card, has more than just the customer’s signature
on it; it also has identifying information, familiar items
such as the social security number, date of birth,
mother’s maiden name, and sometimes even a driver’s
license number. Very handy to a social engineer.
“Sure thing. What’s Code C?”
“Another teller is using my computer right now,” the caller
said. “But I just used B and E, and I remember those.
Ask me one of those.”
“Okay, what’s E?”
“E is 9697.”
A few minutes later, Walter faxed the sig card as requested.

Donna Plaice’s Caller
“Hi, this is Mr. Anselmo.”
“How can I help you today?”
“What’s that 800 number I’m supposed to call when I want
to see if a deposit has been credited yet?”
“You’re a customer of the bank?”
“Yes, and I haven’t used the number in a while and now I
don’t know where I wrote it down.”
“The number is 800-555-8600.”
“Okay, thanks.”

10237124 Ch09.F





137
The Reverse Sting

Vince Capelli’s Tale
The son of a Spokane street cop, Vince knew from an early age that he
wasn’t going to spend his life slaving long hours and risking his neck for
minimum wage. His two main goals in life became getting out of
Spokane, and going into business for himself. The laughter of his homies
all through high school only fired him up all the more—they thought it
was hilarious that he was so busted on starting his own business but had
no idea what business it might be.
Secretly Vince knew they were right. The only thing he was good at was
playing catcher on the high school baseball team. But not good enough to
capture a college scholarship, no way good enough for professional baseball. So what business was he going to be able to start?
One thing the guys in Vince’s group never quite figured out: Anything
one of them had—a new switchblade knife, a nifty pair of warm gloves, a
sexy new girlfriend—if Vince admired it, before long the item was his. He
didn’t steal it, or sneak behind anybody’s back; he didn’t have to. The guy
who had it would give it up willingly, and then wonder afterward how it had
happened. Even asking Vince wouldn’t have gotten you anywhere: He didn’t
know himself. People just seemed to let him have whatever he wanted.
Vince Capelli was a social engineer from an early age, even though he
had never heard the term.
His friends stopped laughing once they all had high school diplomas in
hand. While the others slogged around town looking for jobs where you
didn’t have to say “Do you want fries with that?” Vince’s dad sent him off
to talk to an old cop pal who had left the force to start his own private
investigation business in San Francisco. He quickly spotted Vince’s talent
for the work, and took him on.
That was six years ago. He hated the part about getting the goods on
unfaithful spouses, which involved achingly dull hours of sitting and
watching, but felt continually challenged by assignments to dig up asset
information for attorneys trying to figure out if some miserable stiff was
rich enough to be worth suing. These assignments gave him plenty of
chances to use his wits.
Like the time he had to look into the bank accounts of a guy named Joe
Markowitz. Joe had maybe worked a shady deal on a one-time friend of
his, which friend now wanted to know, if he sued, was Markowitz flush
enough that the friend might get some of his money back?
Vince’s first step would be to find out at least one, but preferably two, of
the bank’s security codes for the day. That sounds like a nearly impossible

10237124 Ch09.F





challenge: What on earth would induce a bank employee to knock a chink
in his own security system? Ask yourself—if you wanted to do this, would
you have any idea of how to go about it?
For people like Vince, it’s too easy.

Chapter 9

138

People trust you if you know the inside lingo of their job and their company. It’s like showing you belong to their inner circle. It’s like a secret
handshake.
I didn’t need much of that for a job like this. Definitely not brain surgery. All’s I needed to get started was a branch number. When I dialed the
Beacon Street office in Buffalo, the guy that answered sounded like a
teller.
“This is Tim Ackerman,” I said. Any name would do, he wasn’t going
to write it down. “What’s the branch number there?”
“The phone number or the branch number?” he wanted to know, which
was pretty stupid because I had just dialed the phone number, hadn’t I?
“Branch number.”
“3182,” he said. Just like that. No, “Whad’ya wanna know for?” or anything. ’Cause it’s not sensitive information, it’s written on just about every
piece of paper they use.
Step Two, call the branch where my target did his banking, get the name
of one of their people, and find out when the person would be out for
lunch. Angela. Leaves at 12:30. So far, so good.
Step Three, call back to the same branch during Angela’s lunch break,
say I’m calling from branch number such-and-such in Boston, Angela
needs this information faxed, gimme a code for the day. This is the tricky
part; it’s where the rubber meets the road. If I was making up a test to be
a social engineer, I’d put something like this on it, where your victim gets
suspicious—for good reason—and you still stick in there until you break
him down and get the information you need. You can’t do that by reciting lines from a script or learning a routine, you got to be able to read your
victim, catch his mood, play him like landing a fish where you let out a
little line and reel in, let out and reel in. Until you get him in the net and
flop him into the boat, splat!
So I landed him and had one of the codes for the day. A big step. With
most banks, one is all they use, so I would’ve been home free. Industrial
Federal Bank uses five, so having just one out of five is long odds. With
two out of five, I’d have a much better chance of getting through the next

10237124 Ch09.F





Analyzing the Con
The key to this entire episode was obtaining the all-important day codes,
and to do that the attacker, Vince, used several different techniques.
He began with a little verbal arm-twisting when Louis proved reluctant
to give him a code. Louis was right to be suspicious—the codes are
designed to be used in the opposite direction. He knew that in the usual
flow of things, the unknown caller would be giving him a security code.
This was the critical moment for Vince, the hinge on which the entire success of his effort depended.
In the face of Louis’s suspicion, Vince simply laid it on with manipulation, using an appeal to sympathy (“going to the doctor”), and pressure
(“I’ve got a stack to do, it’s almost 4 o’clock”), and manipulation (“Tell her

139
The Reverse Sting

act of this little drama. I love that part about “I didn’t say B, I said E.”
When it works, it’s beautiful. And it works most of the time.
Getting a third one would have been even better. I’ve actually managed
to get three on a single call—“B,” “D,” and “E” sound so much alike that
you can claim they misunderstood you again. But you have to be talking
to somebody who’s a real pushover. This man wasn’t. I’d go with two.
The day codes would be my trump to get the signature card. I call, and
the guy asks for a code. C he wants, and I’ve only got B and E. But it’s not
the end of the world. You gotta stay cool at a moment like this, sound
confident, keep right on going. Real smooth, I played him with the one
about, “Somebody’s using my computer, ask me one of these others.”
We’re all employees of the same company, we’re all in this together, make
it easy on the guy—that’s what you’re hoping the victim is thinking at a
moment like this. And he played it right by the script. He took one of the
choices I offered, I gave him the right answer, he sent the fax of the sig card.
Almost home. One more call gave me the 800 number that customers
use for the automated service where an electronic voice reads you off the
information you ask for. From the sig card, I had all of my target’s account
numbers and his PIN number, because that bank used the first five or
last four digits of the social security number. Pen in hand, I called the
800 number and after a few minutes of pushing buttons, I had the latest
balance in all four of the guy’s accounts, and just for good measure, his
most recent deposits and withdrawals in each.
Everything my client had asked for and more. I always like to give a
little extra for good measure. Keep the clients happy. After all, repeat business is what keeps an operation going, right?

10237124 Ch09.F

Chapter 9

140





you wouldn’t give me the code”). Cleverly, Vince didn’t actually make a
threat, he just implied one: If you don’t give me the security code, I won’t
send the customer information that your coworker needs, and I’ll tell her
I would have sent it but you wouldn’t cooperate.
Still, let’s not be too hasty in blaming Louis. After all, the person on the
phone knew (or at least appeared to know) that coworker Angela had
requested a fax. The caller knew about the security codes, and knew they
were identified by letter designation. The caller said his branch manager
was requiring it for greater security. There didn’t really seem any reason
not to give him the verification he was asking for.
Louis isn’t alone. Bank employees give up security codes to social engineers every day. Incredible but true.
There’s a line in the sand where a private investigator’s techniques stop
being legal and start being illegal. Vince stayed legal when he obtained the
branch number. He even stayed legal when he conned Louis into giving
him two of the day’s security codes. He crossed the line when he had confidential information on a bank customer faxed to him.
But for Vince and his employer, it’s a low-risk crime. When you steal
money or goods, somebody will notice it’s gone. When you steal information, most of the time no one will notice because the information is
still in their possession.
mitnick
message
Verbal security codes are equivalent to passwords in providing a convenient and
reliable means of protecting data. But employees need to be knowledgeable
about the tricks that social engineers use, and trained not to give up the keys to
the kingdom.

COPS AS DUPES
For a shady private investigator or social engineer, there are frequent occasions when it would be handy to know someone’s driver’s license number—
for example, if you want to assume another person’s identity in order to
obtain information about her bank balances.
Short of lifting the person’s wallet or peering over her shoulder at an
opportune moment, finding out the driver’s license number ought to be
next to impossible. But for anyone with even modest social engineering
skills, it’s hardly a challenge.

10237124 Ch09.F





Eric’s Sting
First he called telephone information and asked for the phone number of
DMV headquarters in the state capitol. He was given the number 503555-5000; that, of course, is the number for calls from the general public.
He then called a nearby sheriff ’s station and asked for Teletype—the office
where communications are sent to and received from other law enforcement agencies, the national crime database, local warrants, and so forth.
When he reached Teletype, he said he was looking for the phone number
for law enforcement to use when calling the DMV state headquarters.

141
The Reverse Sting

One particular social engineer—Eric Mantini, I’ll call him, needed to
get driver’s license and vehicle registration numbers on a regular basis. Eric
figured it was unnecessarily increasing his risk to call the Department of
Motor Vehicles (DMV) and go through the same ruse time after time
whenever he needed that information. He wondered whether there wasn’t
some way to simplify the process.
Probably no one had ever thought of it before, but he figured out a way
to get the information in a blink, whenever he wanted it. He did it by taking advantage of a service provided by his state’s Department of Motor
Vehicles. Many state DMVs (or whatever the department may be called in
your state) make otherwise-privileged information about citizens available
to insurance firms, private investigators, and certain other groups that the
state legislature has deemed entitled to share it for the good of commerce
and the society at large.
The DMV, of course, has appropriate limitations on which types of data
will be given out. The insurance industry can get certain types of information from the files, but not others. A different set of limitations applies
to PIs, and so on.
For law enforcement officers, a different rule generally applies: The
DMV will supply any information in the records to any sworn peace officer who properly identifies himself. In the state Eric then lived in, the
required identification was a Requestor Code issued by the DMV, along
with the officer’s driver’s license number. The DMV employee would
always verify by matching the officer’s name against his driver’s license
number and one other piece of information—usually date of birth—
before giving out any information.
What social engineer Eric wanted to do was nothing less than cloak
himself in the identity of a law enforcement officer.
How did he manage that? By running a reverse sting on the cops!

10237124 Ch09.F





“Who are you?” the police officer in Teletype asked.
“This is Al. I was calling 503-555-5753,” he said. This was partly an
assumption, and partly a number he pulled out of thin air; certainly the
special DMV office set up to take law enforcement calls would be in the
same area code as the number given out for the public to call, and it was
almost as certain that the next three digits, the prefix, would be the same,
as well. All he really needed to find out was the last four.
A sheriff ’s Teletype room doesn’t get calls from the public. And the caller
already had most of the number. Obviously he was legitimate.
“It’s 503-555-6127,” the officer said.
So Eric now had the special phone number for law enforcement officers
to call the DMV. But just the one number wasn’t enough to satisfy him;
the office would have a good many more than the single phone line, and
Eric needed to know how many lines there were, and the phone number
of each.

Chapter 9

142

The Switch
To carry out his plan, he needed to gain access to the telephone switch
that handled the law enforcement phone lines into DMV. He called the
state Telecommunications Department and claimed he was from Nortel,
the manufacturer of the DMS-100, one of the most widely used commercial telephone switches. He said, “Can you please transfer me to one
of the switch technicians that works on the DMS-100?”
When he reached the technician, he claimed to be with the Nortel
Technical Assistance Support Center in Texas, and explained that they were
creating a master database to update all switches with the latest software
upgrades. It would all be done remotely—no need for any switch technician to participate. But they needed the dial-in number to the switch so
that they could perform the updates directly from the Support Center.
It sounded completely plausible, and the technician gave Eric the phone
number. He could now dial directly into one of the state’s telephone
switches.
To defend against outside intruders, commercial switches of this type
are password-protected, just like every corporate computer network. Any
good social engineer with a phone-phreaking background knows that
Nortel switches provide a default account name for software updates:
NTAS (the abbreviation for Nortel Technical Assistance Support; not very
subtle). But what about a password? Eric dialed in several times, each time

10237124 Ch09.F





A Call to DMV
Shortly before 8 o’clock that morning, the cell phone rang. This part was
the best, the most delicious. Here was Eric, the social engineer, talking to
a cop, someone with the authority to come and arrest him, or get a search
warrant and conduct a raid to collect evidence against him.
And not just one cop would call, but a string of them, one after another.
On one occasion, Eric was sitting in a restaurant having lunch with
friends, fielding a call every five minutes or so, writing the information on
a paper napkin using a borrowed pen. He still finds this hilarious.
But talking to police officers doesn’t faze a good social engineer in the
least. In fact, the thrill of deceiving these law enforcement agencies probably added to Eric’s enjoyment of the act.

143
The Reverse Sting

trying one of the obvious and commonly used choices. Entering the same
as the account name, NTAS, didn’t work. Neither did “helper.” Nor did
“patch.”
Then he tried “update” . . . and he was in. Typical. Using an obvious,
easily guessed password is only very slightly better than having no password at all.
It helps to be up to speed in your field; Eric probably knew as much
about that switch and how to program and troubleshoot it as the technician. Once he was able to access the switch as an authorized user, he would
gain full control over the telephone lines that were his target. From his
computer, he queried the switch for the phone number he had been given
for law enforcement calls to the DMV, 555-6127. He found there were
nineteen other phone lines into the same department. Obviously they
handled a high volume of calls.
For each incoming call, the switch was programmed to “hunt” through
the twenty lines until it found one that wasn’t busy.
He picked line number eighteen in the sequence, and entered the code
that added call forwarding to that line. For the call-forwarding number,
he entered the phone number of his new, cheap, prepaid cell phone, the
kind that drug dealers are so fond of because they’re inexpensive enough
to throw away after the job is over.
With call forwarding now activated on the eighteenth line, as soon as
the office got busy enough to have seventeen calls in progress, the next call
to come in would not ring in the DMV office but would instead be forwarded to Eric’s cell phone. He sat back and waited.

10237124 Ch09.F

Chapter 9

144





According to Eric, the calls went something like this:
“DMV, may I help you?”
“This is Detective Andrew Cole.”
“Hi, detective. What can I do for you today?”
“I need a Soundex on driver’s license 005602789,” he might say, using
the term familiar in law enforcement to ask for a photo—useful, for example, when officers are going out to arrest a suspect and want to know what
he looks like.
“Sure, let me bring up the record,” Eric would say. “And, Detective
Cole, what’s your agency?”
“Jefferson County.” And then Eric would ask the hot questions:
“Detective, what’s your requestor code?” “What’s your driver’s license
number?” “What’s your date of birth?”
The caller would give his personal identifying information. Eric would
go through some pretense of verifying the information, and then tell the
caller that the identifying information had been confirmed, and ask for
the details of what the caller wanted to find out from the DMV. He’d pretend to start looking up the name, with the caller able to hear the clicking
of the keys, and then say something like, “Oh, damn, my computer just
went down again. Sorry, detective, my computer has been on the blink
all week. Would you mind calling back and getting another clerk to
help you?”
This way he’d end the call tying up the loose ends without arousing any
suspicion about why he wasn’t able to assist the officer with his request.
Meanwhile Eric had a stolen identity—details he could use to obtain confidential DMV information whenever he needed to.
After taking calls for a few hours and obtaining dozens of requestor
codes, Eric dialed into the switch and deactivated the call forwarding.
For months after that, he’d carry on the assignments jobbed out to him
by legitimate PI firms that didn’t want to know how he was getting his
information. Whenever he needed to, he’d dial back into the switch, turn
on call forwarding, and gather another stack of police officer credentials.
Analyzing the Con
Let’s run a playback on the ruses Eric pulled on a series of people to make
this deceit work. In the first successful step, he got a sheriff ’s deputy in
a Teletype room to give out a confidential DMV phone number to a

10237124 Ch09.F





mitnick
message
If you have a telephone switch at your company facilities, what would the person
in charge do if he received a call from the vendor, asking for the dial-in number?
And by the way, has that person ever changed the default password for the
switch? Is that password an easy-to-guess word found in any dictionary?

145
The Reverse Sting

complete stranger, accepting the man as a deputy without requesting any
verification.
Then someone at the state Telecom Department did the same thing,
accepting Eric’s claim that he was with an equipment manufacturer, and
providing the stranger with a phone number for dialing into the telephone
switch serving the DMV.
Eric was able to get into the switch in large measure because of weak
security practices on the part of the switch manufacturer in using the same
account name on all their switches. That carelessness made it a walk in the
park for the social engineer to guess the password, knowing once again
that switch technicians, just like almost everybody else, choose passwords
that will be a cinch for them to remember.
With access to the switch, he set up call forwarding from one of the
DMV phone lines for law enforcement to his own cell phone.
And then, the capper and most blatant part, he conned one law enforcement officer after another into revealing not only their requestor codes but
their own personal identifying information, giving Eric the ability to
impersonate them.
While there was certainly technical knowledge required to pull off this
stunt, it could not have worked without the help of a series of people who
had no clue that they were talking to an imposter.
This story was another illustration of the phenomenon of why people
don’t ask “Why me?” Why would the Teletype officer give this information to some sheriff ’s deputy he didn’t know—or, in this case, a stranger
passing himself off as a sheriff ’s deputy—instead of suggesting he get the
information from a fellow deputy or his own sergeant? Again, the only
answer I can offer is that people rarely ask this question. It doesn’t occur
to them to ask? They don’t want to sound challenging and unhelpful?
Maybe. Any further explanation would just be guesswork. But social engineers don’t care why; they only care that this little fact makes it easy to get
information that otherwise might be a challenge to obtain.

10237124 Ch09.F





PREVENTING THE CON

Chapter 9

146

A security code, properly used, adds a valuable layer of protection. A security code improperly used can be worse than none at all because it gives
the illusion of security where it doesn’t really exist. What good are codes
if your employees don’t keep them secret?
Any company with a need for verbal security codes needs to spell out
clearly for its employees when and how the codes are used. Properly
trained, the character in the first story in this chapter would not have had
to rely on his instincts, easily overcome, when asked to give a security code
to a stranger. He sensed that he should not be asked for this information
under the circumstances, but lacking a clear security policy—and good
common sense—he readily gave in.
Security procedures should also set up steps to follow when an employee
fields an inappropriate request for a security code. All employees should
be trained to immediately report any request for authentication credentials, such as a daily code or password, made under suspicious circumstances. They should also report when an attempt to verify the identity of
a requestor doesn’t check out.
At the very least, the employee should record the caller’s name, phone
number, and office or department, and then hang up. Before calling back,
he should verify that the organization really does have an employee of that
name, and that the callback phone number matches the phone number in
the on-line or hard-copy company directory. Most of the time, this simple
tactic will be all that’s needed to verify that the caller is who he says he is.
Verifying becomes a bit trickier when the company has a published
phone directory instead of an on-line version. People get hired; people
leave; people change departments, job positions, and phone numbers. The
hard-copy directory is already out of date the day after it’s published,
even before being distributed. Even on-line directories can’t always be
relied on, because social engineers know how to modify them. If an
employee can’t verify the phone number from an independent source, she
should be instructed to verify by some other means, such as contacting the
employee’s manager.

11237124 Part03/Ch10.F





3

part

intruder
alert

11237124 Part03/Ch10.F





11237124 Part03/Ch10.F





