
Introduction





You’re in a psychiatric hospital, face-to-face with a seriously ill patient who won’t comply with the rules and who hasn’t been taking his meds. His cheeks are turning red, his voice is rising—he’s getting agitated. What do you do? This patient is delusional. He hears voices and thinks people are out to get him. He has a history of violence, having injured or killed people. He’s physically bigger than you. How do you react?

Staff at the Oregon State Hospital in Salem, Oregon, face scenarios like this every day. The hospital is a massive thirteen-hundred-bed institution that houses some of Oregon’s sickest, most violent patients, including many who have been deemed criminally insane. If you saw the movie adaptation of Ken Kesey’s classic book One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, then you know the Oregon State Hospital. The movie was filmed on its grounds, and some of its staff appeared as extras. Make no mistake, the Oregon State Hospital is every bit as intimidating as the film portrays it. To enter or exit, you traverse a series of checkpoints with locked steel doors. Cameras are everywhere. Even the bathrooms for visitors are high security. They are prison toilets, with nothing you can rip off or otherwise use as a weapon.

For years, staff at the Oregon State Hospital responded to challenging behavior by cracking down. Sometimes they had no choice but to physically restrain patients, burly staff members pouncing on them and putting them in choke holds. Other times they locked patients in padded seclusion rooms for hours, or they took away privileges, docking patients the points for good behavior that they needed to enjoy perks like movies or snacks.

If you think such measures produced a peaceful, harmonious, healing environment, you’re wrong. Oregon State Hospital has a dark history of abuse of patients and of patient attacks against staff. A 2014 survey found that a quarter of the staff “had been physically assaulted by a patient in the past year,” and “[o]nly 54 percent felt safe in their job.”1 Some unhappy staff members went so far as to post on Facebook pictures of gruesome wounds sustained at the hands of patients.

Hoping to improve conditions, staff on certain units embarked on a radical experiment, one that seemed foolhardy and even dangerous. They started being nicer. When challenging behavior arose, they didn’t crack down. Instead, they approached patients and, in a calm and orderly fashion, tried to talk through the problem without imposing a solution. They also changed how they thought about challenging behavior. Rather than assuming that patients had willfully acted out and broken the rules, they chose to believe that patients would behave well if they could, and that they weren’t behaving well because they weren’t capable of it—they lacked various cognitive skills related to the solving of problems.

With this baseline of empathy, staff tried to investigate patients’ points of view more deeply, understanding what underlying concerns had prompted their challenging behavior, while also articulating their own concerns. They hypothesized that the traditional punishments had probably sparked many violent outbursts in the past, provoking patients and causing their emotions to escalate. Dispensing with these punishments and engaging in dialogue, they hoped to resolve conflicts more peacefully, in ways that would satisfy patients and staff alike.

You can understand why this approach might have seemed “soft.” Maybe talking it through would work with relatively healthy patients, but how could you conduct a calm, rational conversation with someone who is psychotic and potentially violent? What if the patient couldn’t handle the conversation? What if he blew up? As one staff member at the hospital told me, “When you have a six-foot-four, 275-pound patient lose it . . . people have a real risk of being hurt.”

It turns out that you can resolve conflicts with challenging people using so-called softer techniques. One middle-age patient whom I’ll call Jim had a history of paranoid schizophrenia. He experienced frequent delusions, believing that the FBI was beaming thoughts into his brain, and that people around him could read his thoughts. Having gone off his medication, he was paranoid and refused to interact with others. He wouldn’t attend therapy sessions at the hospital, complaining that staff and patients were reading his thoughts. He just didn’t trust them, he said.

Instead of forcing Jim to comply, a nurse approached him to discuss his behavior. “Hey,” the nurse said, “I’ve noticed you haven’t been going in for treatment. I’m wondering why.” Initially, the question prompted a superficial answer, but after three or four tries and a lot of reassurance, the nurse uncovered his concern: People could read his thoughts. “That sounds kind of scary,” the nurse said, imagining how she would feel if everyone could hear her every thought. She then articulated her concern—the patient needed treatment if he was to get better. Instead of demanding that he comply with his treatment plan, she asked him how they might solve the problem so as to address both of their concerns. In truth, she was skeptical that talking the problem through would resolve the situation. But the patient had an idea: “What if I were to put tinfoil on my head?”

Huh?

In a way, it made sense. As the patient explained, other people read his mind through radio waves. But in his delusional state, he thought that a metallic substance like tinfoil blocked the waves. If he wore tinfoil over his head, nobody would be able to read his thoughts, and he’d feel safe.

The nurse wasn’t sure about that solution. She thought the tinfoil might distract other patients in group therapy sessions. Yet again, the patient came up with a solution: He could put a thin layer of tinfoil over his head, and then mask it by wearing a baseball hat. None of the other patients would even know.

Although certainly unorthodox, the solution worked—for both of them. The patient was allowed to wear tinfoil under a baseball hat, and he willingly attended his therapy sessions. Problem solved. Potentially violent altercation avoided. Instead of inflicting more trauma on the patient by punishing him, the conversation engendered trust between him and the staff member. Jim and his nurse had worked out their difficulties together.

Through countless daily instances such as this one, individual units at Oregon State Hospital have begun to see improvements. Across all units where this approach has been introduced, the use of seclusions dropped by 34 percent per year and restraints by 40 percent. Injuries to patients and staff declined by 24 percent and 12 percent, respectively. On one unit, acts of aggression among patients plummeted more than 70 percent.2 Staff members have described the change as palpable, observing that the hospital is transforming into a more humane and compassionate place. “It used to be cool to treat patients here like shit,” one staff member told me, but it wasn’t any longer. The new approach was “making it cool to be nice to patients.” A patient related how much he liked the new approach as well, noting that “people in this unit really are actually trying to talk to me.”





An Everyday Alternative to “Tough Love”


All of us encounter people in our daily lives who don’t do what we’d like them to. Our kids act out, or our employees come in late to work. We have a dispute with a customer service representative on the phone, or with a friend, or with a spouse, or with a total stranger standing in line at the grocery store. In these situations, we can feel tempted to respond aggressively and assert our authority, even if we don’t actually possess any. We might threaten the other person with a consequence. Or we might offer an incentive in exchange for compliance. Either way, we try to assert our will. Seldom do we take time to hear the other person out, to empathize with his or her concerns, and to work out a solution that leaves everyone satisfied.

Our institutions don’t apply empathy very often, either. Discipline in America has long proceeded on the assumption that people behave in challenging ways on purpose. It follows that to make offenders want to behave well, we must take steps to reward good behavior and punish bad behavior. Our homes, schools, prisons, mental health facilities, and workplaces all operate according to the notion that we can motivate people to behave by manipulating them using rewards and punishments. In public life as well, it’s common for politicians to play to people’s fears, promising to crack down and get tough on criminals, terrorists, or other countries that hurt us or otherwise fail to meet our expectations, and to lavish rewards on individuals and groups that appear to serve the public good.

Rewards and punishments seem like common sense, but they are abysmal failures. We incarcerate more criminals than any other nation, hoping to deter future offenses, yet roughly three-quarters of inmates are rearrested within five years of their release.3 Our schools fight challenging behavior through “zero tolerance” policies and punishments like time-outs, detentions, suspensions, and expulsions, yet research shows that zero tolerance policies make our schools less safe and hamper education for millions.4 In our workplaces, punitive human resource policies fail to curb abusive behavior and even outright violence, costing billions in productivity losses and making life miserable for many employees.5

People who misbehave don’t do so on purpose.



Although this failure seems mysterious at first glance, we actually know why rewards and punishments fail to address challenging behavior. As decades of research in the neurosciences have shown, people who misbehave don’t do so on purpose out of a desire to act out, get attention, or achieve some other end. They misbehave because they struggle with thinking skills required to meet expectations and resolve disputes. It’s the skill, not the will, that matters. Just as individuals with learning disabilities struggle with cognitive skills in the areas of reading, writing, or math, some people have difficulty with critical thinking skills like flexibility, frustration tolerance, and problem solving. They have trouble managing emotions and resolving conflict, and this leads to all kinds of challenging behavior, including aggression and defiance. Traditional discipline compounds the problem, diminishing people’s motivation to behave by leaving them feeling controlled, manipulated, and misunderstood.

Despite the overwhelming scientific consensus, conventional approaches to managing difficult or challenging behavior—defined broadly as any behavior we don’t like, or a failure to behave in ways we do like—remain locked in place because institutions and individuals aren’t aware of other options. Most staff members at Oregon State Hospital didn’t want to physically restrain sick patients or put them into seclusion rooms. But as many have told me, they didn’t see any other way to keep order and maintain safety in the facility. Countless teachers have told me that they send students to detention because they feel that if they don’t, they’ll lose control of their classrooms. If you’re a parent and you put your kids in time-out or revoke a privilege to control their behavior, ask yourself: Why do I do it? Chances are it’s because you want your kids to respect your rules and you don’t know how else to respond.

There is another way. Over the past decade and a half, my colleagues and I have trained tens of thousands of people at schools, prisons, police departments, treatment facilities, and other organizations (including the Oregon State Hospital) in an approach to conflict resolution called Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS). An alternative to rewards and punishments, CPS is a mind-set that authority figures can have about offenders, as well as a structured process for interacting in real-life situations—what my colleagues and I call Plan B. Both CPS and Plan B got their start during the late 1990s, when my former colleague and supervisor Dr. Ross Greene began seeking alternatives to traditional rewards and punishments in his work with “explosive” children. I had received my PhD and was doing a fellowship at Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School. As part of my clinical work with kids and their parents, I participated in a supervision group Dr. Greene was running for therapists working with explosive kids. Dr. Greene and I found that we both wanted to offer new, more concrete solutions to parents. The families I saw were at their wits’ end, clueless about what to do about challenging behavior, and they begged me for practical strategies. What could they do differently that would improve their family life?

In Dr. Greene’s 1998 book The Explosive Child, he conceptualized three possible approaches to challenging behavior (or as he called them then, “baskets”).6 Basket A was to respond by imposing your will on the child. You try to make the person do what you want, often by levying punishments or offering rewards. Basket C was the opposite: responding to conflict by giving the child what he or she wants. Basket B was a more ambiguous, “compromise” basket. Instead of you getting your way or the child getting his or her way, you meet in the middle and find a solution there, one that wouldn’t antagonize a child with weak skills. As conventional discipline wasn’t working for many kids, compromise seemed poised to yield better results for authority figures. By not imposing their will, authority figures would have a way to address problems that accounted for children’s skills limitations.

Dr. Greene and I taught parents about these three options in each of our clinical practices, and we explored how to apply Basket B. Working together, we eventually realized that Basket B had limitations of its own. Compromise wasn’t a great solution for many problems, and it often left one or both parties dissatisfied. Instead, you had to engage in a problem-solving process with the child. You had to sit down with her, hold a conversation, exchange views, listen, investigate possible solutions together, and agree together to embrace one of these solutions. It was precisely this collaborative process, a specific kind of dialogue between parent and child, that distinguished Basket B from the other two baskets.

We changed our terminology, speaking of “plans” instead of “baskets,” and we reframed Plan B as a collaborative process rather than a simple compromise. But we still weren’t satisfied with our understanding of Plan B. We wondered whether it was bigger than we first imagined. Perhaps it was a process that allowed not just for the solving of problems but for the building of the underlying skills. As research in neuroscience has shown, people don’t build thinking skills by practicing them from 4:00 to 4:50 on Tuesday afternoons in the therapist’s office. They develop them little by little by practicing them in the actual situations that are creating difficulty. Small, repetitive doses of “good stress” over a prolonged period are what create new neuronal pathways in the brain. You have to flex your mental muscles, so to speak, in order to hone them, which is exactly what practicing thinking skills in real situations allows us to do.7

By engaging in the hard work of tackling a problem with someone, children would practice dozens of skills relevant for the resolving of disputes. By having a chance to voice their concerns in the course of solving a problem, they would practice identifying, clarifying, and expressing them. As adults provided reassurance and listened to their concerns reflectively, children would practice calming down and regulating their emotions. By having a chance to hear the adult’s concern, children would practice empathy and the ability to consider another person’s perspective as well as to learn how their behavior impacts others. The process of collaborating to brainstorm, assess, and choose a solution would help children practice skills such as flexible thinking, solution generation, and the linking of actions to outcomes. Introduced as a regular means of problem solving, Plan B would facilitate brain development by giving those small, repetitive doses of good stress, creating new cognitive associations and new pathways in the brain.

That, at least, was our hypothesis. As we applied Plan B in our clinic, we began to see both reduced incidences of challenging behavior as well as improvement in children’s underlying skills. Subsequent research has confirmed these results. CPS and Plan B have achieved stunning results with America’s most difficult adults and kids, helping them work through daily conflicts, and in the process, practice and develop the cognitive skills they lack. CPS and Plan B help authority figures handle conflict more skillfully, too. When parents and teachers practice this approach with kids, they report improvements in their own relationships with spouses, colleagues, bosses, neighbors, and others. They become more empathic, more skilled at working toward mutually satisfactory solutions, and less inclined to dictate answers simply because they possess more power.

Since 2008, when Dr. Greene and I parted ways, my team has extended the application of CPS and Plan B beyond just working with explosive children to help both children and adults in all kinds of settings. We’ve further developed and refined the approach by collaborating with leading neurobiologists, among others, and we’ve researched how it works. We’ve also had the opportunity to train organizations and communities—including the educational and mental health staff from entire states and provinces—in the approach. Initially just an intriguing option helpful for certain populations of people, CPS and Plan B have blossomed into a proven, evidence-based approach that can help virtually anyone build skills and change their challenging behavior.

Improving any skill requires dedication, and, let’s face it, our society doesn’t provide many opportunities for us to sit down and practice hashing out solutions together with others. But imagine if it did. Imagine if more people shifted their mind-sets, like the staff at Oregon State Hospital. Imagine if instead of rushing to impose our will on disruptive individuals in our homes and workplaces, more of us did the harder work of empathizing with them, brainstorming new solutions with them, and giving them opportunities to practice their problem-solving skills. Imagine if schools and prisons started to focus on listening to offenders and working with them to resolve disputes. Imagine if police officers, judges, spouses, friends, neighbors—even entire countries—began turning first to collaborative conversations to work out conflict. What would society look like? What would our lives look like?

Changeable offers a new way of thinking about discipline, conflict, relationships, and problem solving, as well as scientifically validated tools for tackling conflict in your own life. The first chapter introduces the paradigm-shattering idea that people behave well if they are able, not simply if they want to. Chapter 2 provides scientific evidence that, in fact, skill, not will underlies behavior, and chapter 3 establishes that traditional disciplinary actions are doing more harm than good, saddling us with astronomical costs. Chapter 4 walks through the Plan B process in detail, while chapter 5 recounts how my colleagues and I have successfully applied the approach with parents and in institutional settings like schools, prisons, and psychiatric facilities. Chapters 6 and 7 show how to use Plan B and the broader CPS approach to help teams be more effective at work and to get along better with family and friends.





Smart, Not “Soft”


Traditionalists will contend that I’m too soft on bad behavior—that we must hold people accountable and apply tough love. I counter that engaging individuals to do the hard work of crafting new solutions is holding people accountable. It’s much tougher for a person to practice skills through collaboration than to just accept a punishment. Working hard to solve a problem you have caused is the most meaningful way you can accept responsibility.

It’s usually more effective, too. Incentivizing someone to do what you’d like creates extrinsic motivation for good behavior but fails to instill intrinsic motivation—the internal drive to do well. As bestselling author Daniel Pink and others have shown, compelling a person to behave in desirable ways by using punishments or rewards significantly decreases a person’s internal motivation.8 Overuse of rewards, for example, leads people to become much more interested in getting the rewards, but less interested in the very goal you want them to pursue. The way to foster internal drive in others is to give them a sense of mastery, control over their environment, and empathic connectedness. Traditional rewards and punishments don’t foster any of those elements. You’re removing a person’s sense of power, autonomy, and control by imposing your will, and you’re antagonizing the other person, thus eroding her feelings of connectedness with authority. You’re certainly not nurturing empathy, because you haven’t shown it yourself in the course of levying punishments or rewards.

CPS conforms well to recent research in psychology about how people improve their behavior and perform at their best. In her book Mindset,9 Stanford psychologist Dr. Carol Dweck distinguished between a “fixed” mind-set, in which people attribute their performance to qualities inherent in them, and a “growth” mind-set, in which people regard their performance as due to skills they can change. As Dr. Dweck suggests, adopting a growth mind-set will more likely lead people to improve over time, as it keeps them more optimistic and hopeful about what they might achieve and thus more motivated to take action. CPS’s overarching philosophy of skill, not will corresponds closely to Dr. Dweck’s growth mind-set. If you believe that proficiency in skills leads to better behavior, you’ll believe that you can improve by working on the skills—there’s nothing “inherent” about your performance. Conversely, rewards and punishments induce people to adopt a fixed mind-set. If a person tries and fails in the face of punishment and feels she just isn’t able perform the task, she and those around her are liable to lose confidence and think of her as an inherently “bad” person. What CPS does is operationalize the growth mind-set, giving people a process by which they can actually practice and build skills. It’s not enough to think of yourself as someone who can learn, grow, and change. You also need a clear framework for doing so. That’s what CPS provides.

When it comes to performance, we also hear a lot these days about how important it is to have grit if you want to change your behavior and achieve positive goals. As Dr. Angela Duckworth, professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, has argued,10 talent doesn’t drive success as much as grit, or passion and perseverance. Of course, you’re more liable to be gritty if you possess a growth mind-set—these go hand in hand. Influenced by Dr. Duckworth’s research, many schools have tried to help kids become grittier. The problem is how. As I visit schools, I encounter many teachers and administrators who love the concept of grit but struggle with nurturing it in kids. Here again, CPS has practical relevance. You can help people become more passionate and persistent in their growth efforts by focusing on their underlying skills. Persistence draws on many skills related to flexibility, frustration tolerance, and problem solving. Build the skills, and people become grittier. CPS helps people make positive changes in their lives by remedying what had quietly been holding them back—not a lack of effort, but a lack of skill.

If you want to motivate people to behave better because they want to, if you want them to believe that they are changeable, and if you want them to become tireless and persistent in pursuing change, read on to learn more about CPS. And the approach has other benefits as well. At Oregon State Hospital, CPS hasn’t cured patients of psychosis, but it has allowed staff to ease the agitation the patients feel and help them feel respected and understood. Over time, the process of collaboration has also enabled these patients to learn and practice the critical thinking skills they lack. Even with the sickest patients and in an institution as challenging as the Oregon State Hospital, we can make progress if we recognize that it’s a lack of skill that causes behavior problems, if we approach people with compassion and empathy, and if we work with them to change how they think.

Let’s shift our mind-set about conflict, problem solving, and discipline.



I have yet to meet a person who, deep down, wants to be bad. We all do the best we can to handle what life throws at us, using the skills in our repertoire. So let’s shift our mind-set about conflict, problem solving, and discipline. You can achieve healthier, more productive relationships with people in your life, reducing the stress that comes with constant conflict. You can help others build their problem-solving skills, even as you build up your own. Together, we can improve conditions in our homes, workplaces, and schools, spreading civility and compassion. All by collaborating better to arrive at creative solutions. All by understanding that we often lack the skill, not the will, to behave well. We are all changeable. But it all starts with helping one another change how we think.





