CHAPTER ONE


			 Skill, Not Will





As a clinical psychologist at Massachusetts General Hospital, I’ve treated a lot of challenging children and adults—pretty much every variety of dysfunction, disorder, and misbehavior. When it comes to children, some of my favorite to treat are what I call inflexible kids. These kids can be extremely bright and high functioning in many ways. They have an almost uncanny ability to learn and memorize new information—it just seems to burn into their brains. But information retention is also the root cause of their difficulty. Because the cognitive associations they form are so strong, they can’t be altered very easily. Once these kids experience something, that’s it: A template forms, and they have a hard time adapting to even slight deviations. The inflexible kids I see glom on to structure, routine, and predictability. They must go to their restaurant, dress the way they’re used to, sit in class where they’ve always sat. When life doesn’t happen as they expect, they can’t handle it. I call them “need to know” kids, as opposed to “go with the flow” kids. They perceive the world as black or white, good or bad, their way or no way, and nothing in between.

One inflexible kid I treated, eleven-year-old Susan, was an all-American girl who loved to play hockey and sent me pictures of her team every season. Susan’s parents described her as strong willed, capable, and very intelligent, a great kid in most respects. She’d never had serious behavioral problems before. As Susan’s mother told me, “About 85 percent of the time, she’s a rock star. She’s queen of the monkey bars, a strong swimmer and skier, a great gymnast, and a great hockey player.” During the other 15 percent, Susan fell into fits of anger. “It’s like a switch gets flicked,” her father told me. “She’ll yell at her sister or hit her. Does the same with her mom. She’ll scream, ‘I hate you; you’re not the boss of me! You can’t make me! Don’t look at me! Don’t touch me!’”

As bad as these tantrums might sound, in the world of challenging behavior, they’re pretty minor. Susan wasn’t violent. She didn’t harm herself or others. She was coping well enough at school. Frankly, she didn’t seem that hard of a case.

For the first several weeks of working together, we made progress in helping her parents understand how she was wired and how this wiring led to some of her challenging behavior. Susan seemed to enjoy coming to our sessions, and we forged a strong therapeutic relationship. It helped that her parents loved her and were bent on doing whatever it took to help their daughter.

Then on Susan’s first day of middle school, her parents called and said they needed to see me—Susan was in crisis. I was able to fit her in that day, right after lunch. But that wasn’t soon enough. I was out grabbing a bite when I received a frantic text from my office: “Your one p.m. appointment is here. They need you!”

I ran back to the office to find Susan in hysterics. Her father was physically restraining her, and her mother was holding her shoes. As her mother told me, she had taken them so that Susan wouldn’t launch herself through a plate-glass door and run away. “Susan, what happened?” I asked. She refused to speak to me. This was unlike her. We had developed such a solid relationship.

It took a good twenty minutes, but we managed to calm her using techniques I’ll describe later in this book for dealing with people in crisis. Susan still wouldn’t speak, but she would write words and phrases down on pieces of paper. Meanwhile, her parents relayed what had happened. Susan didn’t want to go to school, and her parents had been trying to force her. Even her beloved grandfather couldn’t manage to coax her into going. She had run away, and when she was brought back home, she said she wanted to kill herself. This was entirely out of character. She might have always had minor anger issues, but she never exhibited any explosive or suicidal behavior before. What could possibly be going on here?

It turned out that at overnight camp a few weeks earlier, Susan had suffered severe migraines and wasn’t able to reach her parents by phone. The experience traumatized her. Now, as Susan confirmed through the phrases she was writing, she didn’t want to go to school because she was deathly afraid she would get another migraine and not know whom to go to or what to do. She feared she would freak out as she had at camp, and the other students would stare at her and think something was wrong with her.

When I uncovered these concerns, they made perfect sense. As her parents and I had discovered, Susan struggled with cognitive skills related to flexibility. She needed more routine, planning, and predictability than other kids, and when these elements were lacking, she ran into trouble. Like other inflexible kids, Susan especially struggled with transitional situations in which existing templates didn’t apply and she was forced to adapt to new conditions. Attending middle school for the first time was such a situation, and it made sense that Susan would have trouble with it. Everything in middle school was different from what Susan was used to: the kids, the lockers, the schedule, the teachers, the building itself—everything. If she got a migraine, she wouldn’t know what to do. She had no template, no plan to follow. Susan got so upset and anxious that she didn’t know how to express her feelings to her parents. All she could do was lash out. And her parents, who would otherwise have jumped to help her, didn’t know what to do.

For many years, Susan’s parents had interpreted her temper tantrums as a technique she used to get her way. Most parents would probably have come to a similar conclusion. Like Susan’s parents, they would have dealt with Susan’s behavior by punishing her, setting boundaries, and “teaching her a lesson.” But in this instance, Susan clearly wasn’t being difficult because she wanted to be. Her anxieties about a brand-new school and the possibility of getting a migraine there tied into her cognitive makeup, and the more her family tried to force her to go to school, the more explosive she became. Her well-intentioned parents were trying to force their inflexible child to do something she wasn’t capable of doing. And that inflexible child, lacking the cognitive skills to deal with the situation and come up with a solution, did the only thing she could. She acted out.





Get Out of Line, Do the Time


Our society has an entrenched way of thinking about behavior. We almost always assume it derives from a person’s will—that people behave consciously and purposefully. When people misbehave, we likewise assume that they’re doing it intentionally. As a result, whenever individuals in almost any social setting act out or misbehave, those in charge usually respond by punishing the bad behavior. When you were a kid, did your parents take away your TV time or allowance when you misbehaved? Most did. When you continued to misbehave, they probably just stepped up the intensity of the consequences and rewards. And they probably also bestowed privileges when you did the right thing.

School discipline is similar. We assume that when kids misbehave in school, they do it on purpose either to get stuff (special attention, for instance) or get out of stuff (like doing their work or coming inside after recess). In the early school years, teachers punish kids with time-outs. They are taught that kids will use the time away from their peers to reflect on what they did wrong, and that they will feel badly enough at missing out and having been punished that they will want to behave better next time. As kids grow older, schools hand out detentions and suspensions that likewise isolate the offenders and are supposed to teach them a lesson. Statistically, these are the most common punishments in U.S. schools,1 and I should add that they are also levied disproportionately on kids with disabilities and those of color.2 All along in our educational system, we assume that people misbehave deliberately, and that reforming behavior means simply providing the right motivation.

When kids really act out and become uncontrollable, we remove them from mainstream schools and put them into therapeutic schools or treatment centers, and, eventually, juvenile detention facilities. Later, we lock them away in adult prisons (I’ll have more to say about this progression, which has been called the “school-to-prison pipeline”). These institutions also usually operate according to principles of punishment and reward. In some states, the law mandates very specific punishments for offenses by inmates at detention centers. In some facilities where I have worked, for instance, lying to staff, arguing when given instructions, or disrespecting others can result in punishments like loss of privileges, early bedtimes, time-outs, and extra work assignments. Staff can reward good behavior by bestowing extra privileges such as more TV time, more time playing sports, and later bedtimes. Serious offenses, like possessing weapons or threatening staff, can prompt more serious punishments, like placement in a restricted program or even transfer to a different facility.

The treatment patients receive at most psychiatric hospitals is similarly organized. Virtually all psychiatric hospital care in the United States takes place within structured systems of discipline called point and level systems, token economy systems, or contingency management systems.3 The institution marks progress in treatment by defining different levels that patients can attain. Behave well, and you bump up to higher levels, receiving more privileges (TV time, movies, special meals, home visits, and so on). When you sustain the highest level long enough, the institution will discharge you. But if you behave poorly, you slide down to lower levels, losing privileges. We assume that this carrot-and-stick approach will motivate people with psychiatric illnesses to behave better. Implicit in this assumption is that they’ve lacked the willpower in the past to behave well. People misbehave, we think, because they want to.

These practices, however, aren’t reserved for people with serious emotional and behavioral disorders. Companies, governments, and entire countries deploy this approach to discipline in an attempt to shape behavior. Did you land a big client or make your numbers? Your boss may give you a bonus or promote you. Did you fail to follow protocol or get another unsatisfactory performance review? Your boss may place you on probation, demote you, or even fire you. Governments try to encourage “good” behavior (like going to college or saving for retirement) by offering rewards such as tax incentives. They discourage “bad” behavior (like polluting or violating workplace regulations) by levying higher taxes, slapping on fines, or providing for civil lawsuits. In foreign policy, we place sanctions on countries that flout international law, and we reward countries for good behavior by lifting sanctions, giving them privileged trading arrangements, and offering their leaders photo-op meetings with our president.

We persist in assuming that if we institute proper consequences, teaching offenders the benefits of behaving well and the costs of misbehaving, they will make better choices and mend their ways. We can trace this thinking back to the Bible and the vengeful God in the five books of Moses who levies harsh punishments onto the Children of Israel for their misdeeds. More recently, twentieth-century behavioral science has seemed to confirm the wisdom of punishments and rewards. Experimenting with rats, researchers found that by manipulating rewards and punishments they could encourage or discourage simple behavior.4 Like rats, human behavior is an age-old matter of conscious choice and free will—nothing more. Or so it might seem.





Learning from a “Bad” Kid


But what if this thinking is wrong? What if people don’t misbehave because they want to, but because they lack the skills to behave otherwise? As we’ll see in the next chapter, a large body of neuropsychological research has disproved the notion that poor behavior is a choice, and it has affirmed the idea that skill determines good behavior. In fact, research in the neurosciences has identified dozens of specific, underlying skills that if absent or diminished result in challenging or “bad” behavior.

As compelling as this research is, you don’t need science to understand it’s the skill, not the will that matters. During my senior year in high school, when I first became interested in psychology, I got a job at a hospital psychiatric unit for kids. This locked facility admitted kids for short-term stints when they threatened to harm themselves or others. I was supposed to hang around and observe at first, but the unit was grossly understaffed. Almost immediately, staff asked me to help take care of patients in ways I never expected and, frankly, was not trained for.

During my first week, staff members and I were supervising patients on the playground when a twelve-year-old boy—I’ll call him Jason—had an explosive outburst. I ran over to lend a hand as the other staff members tried to calm him. Jason broke free and did the unthinkable: He kicked me and spit right into my face. One of the staffers, who was serving as my mentor at the facility, saw this happen. “Hold on,” he said. “Let me teach you a few things about what to do here.”

He grabbed Jason, turned him around, and showed me how to restrain him. He placed his arms around Jason’s body, forming them into a kind of straitjacket. Meanwhile, he stood between Jason’s legs so that the kid could not kick him backward.

Jason’s outburst and the violence of the restraint unnerved me. But I was in for much more. A few hours later, Jason exploded again and was restrained. Jason was really out of control, so staff members forced him into a seclusion room and placed him facedown on a cold floor. One of the staff members sat on his back to hold him down, and they motioned for me to hold his legs. I did so for several minutes, and it wasn’t pleasant. Jason was screaming, crying, writhing, spitting, and calling me and my mother all sorts of names.

Soon Jason ran out of energy and fell asleep on the floor. We, too, were drained. And I found myself struggling with competing feelings. I felt uncomfortable and ashamed to be helping—it seemed crude to me, inappropriate, wrong, as if I were inflicting still more suffering. Yet I felt empowered to be able to help with something so critical. I didn’t say anything to the other staff about my ambivalence. They were the experts, and I figured that as painful as it was, restraining Jason was probably necessary or helpful. We were just doing what needed to be done.

That evening during my forty-minute drive home, I found myself feeling worse about my day. What had we been doing? Could restraining this poor kid really have helped him? Didn’t I remember hearing in rounds about his history of physical and sexual assault at the hands of more powerful adults? Wasn’t there another way?

The next morning, I put these misgivings aside and showed up for work. I was walking down a hallway, passing the quiet room, when I saw Jason in there. When he saw me, he swore at me. I didn’t react, much as I wanted to. I just went on my way. Several hours later, I saw him yet again and braced myself, thinking he was going to spew more obscenities. To my surprise, he approached me with a forlorn look on his face. “Hey, sorry about what I said earlier. I didn’t mean it. I just get kind of crazy sometimes. I’m not sure why.”

I was stunned. Even today as I think about this story, I get goose bumps. In that moment, I understood the tragedy that Jason was living, and that all of us around him in positions of authority were enabling. Jason was saying awful things to me and others, repelling us and making us feel terrible. As a result, none of us wanted to be within ten feet of him. Yet Jason couldn’t help it. He was out of control. He didn’t know what to do about it. All he could do was apologize later. Ironically, the person who was probably most motivated not to suffer through another traumatic episode was Jason himself.

I couldn’t imagine what Jason was feeling, how awful it must have been to go through life alienating everyone around you, without wanting to or understanding your own behavior. It was my first inkling that our traditional perspectives about why people misbehave were wrong—that people change if they are able, not if they want to, and that we need to consider this when trying to help them. The staff at this facility could “correct” Jason’s behavior all they wanted with restraints, seclusions, and other punishments, but it wouldn’t help. Thanks to a lack of skills, Jason was stuck in a cycle of bad behavior, and the institution was stuck, not knowing what to do. Staff do the best they can, too—and so do institutions like this one. We’re all trying the best we can to handle what life is throwing at us with the skills and information we have at our disposal. If we have only traditional rewards and punishments at our disposal to help address challenging behavior, we usually come up short.





The Real Reason People Don’t Do What We Want


To help parents free themselves of conventional thinking and appreciate the wisdom of skill, not will, I often ask them to consider more closely the situation in which a kid refuses to do his homework. Why does the kid refuse? Parents will say, “It’s obvious—he doesn’t want to!” But that logic implies that the kids who are doing their homework do so because they want to do it. Really? Do you know any kids who are excited to do their homework when they could do something else, like play video games or text their friends? Trust me, it’s the rare kid who wants to do his homework. Most kids don’t want to do it but do it anyway, and some who don’t want to do it, don’t. The reason this second group of kids don’t do their homework is because they lack skills of one sort or another—skills that are necessary in order to sit still, tune out distractions, think through the consequences of not doing it, and actually get work done. Lack of compliance is rarely just a matter of wanting to or not, any more than compliance is (see the above exercise, Rethinking “Good” Behavior).

RETHINKING “GOOD” BEHAVIOR


During the past twenty-four hours, did you do something that you found unpleasant or uncomfortable, like get up for work early or endure an hour in heavy traffic to pick up your kids from practices or rehearsals? Why did you do it? Clearly you didn’t want to get up at 4:30 a.m. or drive at a crawl down a stretch of highway. What motivated you? Was it someone dangling a reward before your eyes or threatening to levy a punishment? Or did other, internal impulses play a role, such as wanting your kids to be happy, the satisfaction or pride you take in them, wanting to meet a deadline at work, or a desire to feel connected with others through your work? What really got you to comply? If you think it through, chances are you didn’t take action because some external force compelled you to do so. Rather, you did it because on some level you felt internal motivation, and because you had the thinking skills at your disposal—relating to self-control, for instance, or perspective taking, or the ability to think through the likely consequences of your actions—that allowed you to perform the unpleasant action.



The same reasoning applies to the world of adult behavior. Why do some employees spend hours at their boring jobs checking social media when they know they’re not supposed to? “Because they want to,” we say, as a prelude to reprimanding them. But few employees (if any) would rather work at a boring job than connect with their friends on social media. Some can and do forgo Facebook, and it’s because they’re able to, while their less compliant colleagues aren’t. To understand this latter group, we need to question what skills or aptitudes those who exhibit challenging behaviors might lack.

When we think about the many other explanations people give for challenging behavior, we find that they are specious. “Oh,” we might say, “he just wants attention.” Who doesn’t want attention? And why would someone behave poorly to get attention if he possesses the skills to do so in a more positive way? It doesn’t make sense—unless of course these individuals couldn’t just as easily behave well. Relatedly, people will look at someone’s bad behavior and say, “Negative attention is better than no attention.” That’s ridiculous. Everyone I’ve ever met would prefer to have no attention than to anger or alienate others, bringing punishment upon themselves.

People will also say, “Mike just wants his own way. He wants control.” Join the club! Show me the person who prefers other people’s ways, I think to myself as I ask what they mean. They respond, “He works really hard to try to get what he needs.” We all try to get our needs met, some more adeptly and graciously than others. Or they’ll say, “Mike is a manipulator. He’s an expert manipulator.” When people accuse someone of being an expert manipulator, I tell them that if this person really were such an expert manipulator, he’d be so good that you wouldn’t know you were being manipulated. Instead, that person is behaving poorly because he lacks the ability to get what he wants without frustrating those around him. We all want our own way! Some of us just have a harder time handling it when we don’t get it.

COMMON DEAD-END EXPLANATIONS FOR CHALLENGING BEHAVIOR


The following dead-end explanations are either inaccurate or unhelpful (in that they don’t point us to actions we can take to address the behavior). Do any look familiar? Have you thought or said these things about someone in your life?


“He just wants attention.”

“She just wants her own way.”

“He just wants control.”

“He’s manipulative.”

“He has a bad attitude.”

“She’s making bad choices.”

“He won’t cooperate.”

“She has a mental illness.”*

“She was adopted.”*


“He is the child of an alcoholic.”*

“She had an abusive husband.”*




* Possibly accurate statement that doesn’t help us.



Finally, people will look down on someone who behaves in challenging ways by saying, “She’s making bad choices.” That implies that this offender is weighing her options, projecting them into the future, and saying: “Okay, this course of action would be a good choice. That course of action would be a bad choice. What should I do? I’m going to make a bad choice.” This almost never transpires in the mind of the person making the bad choices. Instead, she is more likely having a hard time with the type of thinking required to weigh choices, generate alternatives, and think ahead about possible outcomes. She might also lack the skills necessary to perform the actual behavior that the “right choice” would entail. Thinking skill, not will shifts our focus from dead-end explanations to things we can actually change.





Paradigm Shift


You might review my argument thus far and counter, “Skill, not will sounds good for routine bad behavior, but certainly when people commit serious crimes, those people intend to do harm.” Actually, even most serious crimes are best understood not as a matter of will but in terms of skill. If you spend any time talking to criminal offenders, you realize that the vast majority commit crimes because they’re trying to address important concerns but can’t figure out a better way to do so. It is easy to say that people shouldn’t steal when you have money to buy food. Spend a day in the shoes of someone who doesn’t know where his next meal is coming from and you may think differently. These individuals often require impressive cognitive skills to handle the issues, difficulties, or dilemmas they face, and if they lack those skills, they break the law and frequently cause harm. Few people want to break the law. More than a few can’t find a better way.

Years ago, I interviewed a young adult in a correctional facility who had shot someone and was on trial for attempted murder. I made the mistake of asking what he was thinking when he pulled the trigger. The young man leaned in toward me so that our faces were just inches apart. “Dude,” he said, “that’s the stupidest fucking question anybody’s ever asked me.”

“Um, okay,” I said. “Do you mind telling me why that’s the stupidest question anybody has asked you?”

He leaned in even closer. My heart was racing. “Do you think if I was thinking I would have fucking done it?”

That one moment taught me as much as two years of graduate school classes. Of course he wasn’t thinking. If he had been thinking, he wouldn’t have pulled the trigger. This young man, like virtually all people who perpetrate criminal acts, knew the difference between right and wrong, and he knew the consequences of shooting someone. But the smart part of his brain (what is referred to as the prefrontal cortex) was closed for business in that moment and he was operating from a place much lower down in the brain, the same place that provides our fight-or-flight instincts. No amount of jail time would have deterred this man from behaving violently. For that, he would need to improve his impulse control and frustration tolerance skills, or as professionals call them, emotion and self-regulation skills.

It often seems that people are misbehaving on purpose, but that’s because we’re trained to interpret offending acts that way. It’s also because we’re upset. Whether we’re a parent, a teacher, a manager, a prison guard, or any other authority figure, challenging behavior can be immensely frustrating to experience. In many cases, the offender is causing us pain. Caught up in the moment, we can’t expect ourselves to piece together the complex reasons for his or her behavior. We feel disrespected, aggravated, and overwhelmed. Our authority has been challenged. We feel like lashing out and teaching the offender “a lesson”—and we often do. We hit back and place blame. When entire communities become upset, we see a similar kind of response, with calls for police and judges to lay down the law and get tough on crime. The irony, of course, is that we do want to teach people—not a lesson, but thinking skills.

We are entitled to feel frustration, fear, and anger. They’re entirely understandable emotions. But our emotions hamper our rationality and judgment. As you probably know from your own life, people who are upset are not in the best position to assess a situation objectively and generate practical solutions. Think of the last time you got upset. Maybe it was at that seemingly obnoxious driver who cut you off. Or at your colleague who said something unflattering about you to your boss. Were you thinking calmly in the moment? Did you come up with a practical solution that would pass the “tomorrow” test (i.e., when you wake up tomorrow and are calm once again, will the solution still seem like a good idea)? Or did you lash out? Be honest!

Lashing out at offenders by blaming them, saying they did it on purpose, and punishing them harshly may provide relief in the moment, but it never solves the problem. It’s far more constructive to assume that someone is struggling with an underlying skill and proceed from there. The vast majority of the time, a skills deficit is the issue. And if you’re wrong, you won’t have lost much. On the other hand, if you wrongly assume the worst about someone’s intentions, you will have lost much. As we’ll see later, the downsides of traditional punishment are significant, including the inescapable fact that they simply don’t work.

Skeptics might contend that some people do commit shootings and other crimes willfully, putting a great deal of rational thought into them. The horrific, premeditated mass killings that have riled so many U.S. communities would appear to have been committed in this way, as would terrorist attacks perpetrated by followers of ISIS and other groups. In truth, despite these unspeakably tragic atrocities, it is worth noting that pure proactive aggression is rare—much rarer than people think.5 The vast majority of the time, criminal acts arise out of poor responses to frustration on the part of criminals (what is called reactive aggression) or other failures in people’s basic cognitive skills. Even proactive aggression from someone with good impulse control can be the result of struggles with skills like perspective taking and empathizing. Nevertheless, our criminal justice system, like most of our institutions, contents itself with addressing motivation alone.

Years ago, when my colleague Ross Greene, PhD,6 and I began working in a correctional system in rural Maine, we presented our skill, not will approach to one of the frontline managers. This man was a big, grizzled character and a huge skeptic. Seeing us as a couple of ivory-tower, elbow-patch types from Harvard, he made it clear that he believed the proper way of handling juvenile offenders was tough love. “What you’re saying about skills could be useful for a couple of the kids here,” he said, “like maybe two or three out of a hundred. But most of the kids here are sociopaths. They’re simply not going to respond, and they will take advantage of you if you let them. You can’t change them.”

Despite his misgivings, this manager was willing to try something new, so he and his colleagues worked with us to implement our seemingly softer, skills-oriented approach to discipline. Five years later, recidivism at their facility had plummeted, and this skeptic had become a true believer. When people asked him whether focusing on skills really worked, he would say, “Every once in a while, I come across a real sociopath, but we’re talking two or three kids out of a hundred.” It was a complete turnaround. This leader became much more alert to the complexity of bad behavior, much more compassionate toward and understanding of offenders, and, best of all, much more effective at his job. He realized that virtually all challenging behavior arises from a problem with skills, not motivation. And that realization means that virtually all behavior is changeable if you can help people build the skills they lack.

If someone could change, they would change.



As this example suggests, skill, not will is not just a different approach to discipline. It’s a change in mind-set, a paradigm shift that could apply to anyone’s behavior in any context—your child’s, your colleague’s, your neighbor’s, your spouse’s. Rather than blaming offenders and “bringing down the hammer,” we challenge ourselves to reflect on the offender’s concerns and address the underlying causes of bad behavior. We also push ourselves to set aside our own emotions and become calmer and more rational in handling behavior we dislike. The logic, again, is simple: If someone could change, they would change. The question is not whether someone is willing to change. It is whether he is able to change. What’s standing in his way, if he’s not doing well, is not a lack of effort or motivation but a lack of skill that needs to be understood and addressed. Nobody who misbehaves prefers doing poorly to doing well. So rather than resort to rewards and punishments, let’s figure out which specific skill struggles are playing a role, and take steps to remedy them—to help bring about meaningful, lasting change.





Seeing Challenging Behavior as a Learning Disability


My grandfather, in his 102nd year as of this writing, has many colorful aphorisms from his childhood in Tupelo, Mississippi. One of my favorites is his astute remark that “if you give a dog a name, eventually he’ll answer to it.” If you tell misbehaving people that they’re bad—lazy, unmotivated, purposely difficult, deserving of punishment—they’ll start to believe that, and they’ll start to look, talk, and act like lazy, unmotivated people who are purposely difficult and deserving of punishment. They’ll lose any drive to change or improve. However, if you tell a misbehaving person that everyone is working on something, and that we all struggle with certain thinking skills we need to handle daily life, she won’t feel demonized or demoralized. She’ll see a path open up in front of her and feel optimistic that she is able to change her life for the better.

For decades, we used to cast judgment on people who struggled in school with subjects like reading and math. We used to tell them that they were lazy and unmotivated, and we used to punish or reward them in an effort to fire up their motivation. Likewise, when we encountered people who were hyper, impulsive, and unfocused, we dismissed them as misfits and applied conventional discipline. In both cases, we lost generations of young people who grew up feeling beaten down, convinced that they were lazy, stupid, difficult, and just plain bad.

As we now know, many of these people were suffering from dyslexia, ADHD, and other learning disabilities that originate in brain functioning. These kids were trying harder than their peers to learn or function—they wanted desperately to succeed. Yet we punished them because we perceived motivation as the issue. Because we applied traditional discipline, we took a problem—deficits in thinking skills—and made it much worse. I’m certain some readers of this book know firsthand how difficult it is to be the student in class trying harder than anyone else to succeed, and yet still being treated as not trying hard enough.

Instead of casting judgment on challenging behavior, let’s start treating it for what it truly is: a learning disability every bit as real as dyslexia. Whereas others might struggle with reading or with paying attention, people who behave in challenging ways struggle with skills like flexibility, frustration tolerance, and problem solving. Like individuals with dyslexia or ADHD, people who exhibit challenging behavior are often trying harder than others to get along and behave well, and they’re failing because they just don’t have the skills. I know because I’ve seen hundreds of people just like this in my practice. I’ve also collaborated with numerous professionals in schools, prisons, police departments, and treatment programs who work with challenging kids and adults, and we are always able to trace the challenging behavior back to underlying skills deficits. Finally, I’ve seen the science, which plainly shows that skills deficits and underlying differences in brain development give rise to challenging behavior.

In addition to regarding challenging behavior as a learning disability, we could also frame it as a developmental delay. Have you ever parented or even just spent time around a two- or three-year-old? Then you know that no child at that age behaves well. During the terrible twos, kids bite. They kick. They hit. They scream. They run. They throw themselves on the floor and howl. All this drama occurs because toddlers don’t have anything else in their repertoire. They are terrible at all of the skills I’ve been talking about: solving problems, tolerating frustration, and being flexible. Toddlers are the last people with whom you’d want to try negotiating a conflict. At the least instigation, they go ballistic. As for flexibility, forget it. Depart from their usual routine, and the drama starts up.

Most six-year-old children behave better than toddlers, most fourteen-year-olds behave better than six-year-olds, and most eighteen-year-olds behave better than fourteen-year-olds. That’s because as most children grow, their skills in the areas of problem solving, frustration tolerance, and flexibility grow as well, in lockstep with their brain development. But in some people, skills in one or more of these areas don’t develop in line with the norms. These kids might be fifteen yet have the frustration tolerance of a five-year-old. They might be twenty-two and have the problem-solving skills of an eight-year-old. Or they might be full-grown adults in their fifties and have the flexibility of a ten-year-old. People of any age can struggle with delays or weaknesses in cognitive skills, and it is never too late to build one’s skills.

Reframing challenging behavior as either a disability or a delay doesn’t just help people feel better about themselves. It transforms how authority figures think about their roles and responses when confronted with misbehavior. Rather than try to change the offender’s motivations, we can start to help people who behave in challenging ways comprehend why they are struggling and then build up their skills so they can do better in the future. We can assess which specific skills they lack and then work on an individualized basis to teach those skills. Skill, not will allows for us to become more empathic. Instead of the stern might makes right model of authority, we can embrace a new model that puts us in the role of supportive collaborators, teachers, and coaches.

I’ve argued that many of the common explanations for challenging behavior defy logic. But when we interpret challenging behavior as a learning disability, we realize that still other common explanations might have some truth to them, yet comparatively lack practical relevance. For example, bosses, parents, teachers, judges, and other authority figures might explain away bad behavior by noting that the offender was adopted, or suffered trauma, or that he had a mother who drank while pregnant. Those explanations, while possibly accurate, don’t tell us how to help. They don’t move us closer to a solution.

Let’s put those explanations to what I call the explanation litmus test. Pick any time frame and use this prompt: “In such-and-such number of months, we hope that s/he will be better at . . .” Fill in the blank with your explanation and see how it sounds. “In six months, I hope she’s better at her fetal alcohol syndrome.” That doesn’t sound terribly helpful. Likewise, someone might well have been adopted and could have struggled with attachment issues as a result, but knowing this offers no path forward to achieving progress now. Nothing we do now can change the situation. It’s not clinically useful information.

Seeing challenging behavior as a learning disability or a delay does pass the explanation litmus test. If we analyze a person and discover that, for instance, he struggles to stay calm when frustrated, we can start building up that skill, much as we build up our muscles at the gym. With practice and hard work, the offender will see improvement in six months. With continued practice, he’ll see even more progress after another six months. Interpreting the offender’s behavior as the result of a learning disability is no more or less truthful than interpreting it as a lingering result of childhood trauma or fetal alcohol syndrome, but it is far more helpful. It points us toward clear actions we can take to make a difference and reminds us that all offenders are changeable.

In the end, regarding challenging behavior as a disability or delay—as skill, not will—is a far more humane approach. It forces you to realize the truth: that people who behave poorly often are trying harder than most. They’re hurting already, and the last thing they need is to suffer the additional pain and humiliation of conventional punishment—particularly punishment that doesn’t work.

If you still find yourself believing that people can change if they simply want it badly enough, then I have something I’d like to tell you about. Eight-year-old Jennifer was the oldest sibling in a fairly affluent family living in a Boston suburb. She began experiencing problems with reading, as well as problems with organizing and planning—what we call executive function disabilities. As she worked her way through the third, fourth, and fifth grades, her schoolwork became harder and she struggled to organize her homework. Upset about that, she began acting out—fighting with her siblings, behaving disrespectfully to her teachers at school, and so on.

Jennifer’s teachers perceived that she was trying to get her way and draw attention to herself, so they responded the only way they knew how. They cracked down, putting her on a behavior intervention plan at school that applied punishments when she misbehaved and offered rewards when she behaved well. Jennifer’s behavior worsened, and now we know why: Her underlying skills didn’t improve, and on top of that, she was dealing with the burden of interventions that were supposed to help but only made her feel even worse about herself.

Jennifer’s parents brought her to see me in my office. She wasn’t eager to talk, but she would write. Here is what she scrawled in red Magic Marker: “My brain is iteotic [sic]. I make stupid mistakes. I mess everthing [sic] up. I always make a mess and get hurt and ruin everything.” This wasn’t a kid who was doing it on purpose, who was an expert manipulator, who just wanted to get her own way. This was a kid in pain, a kid who wanted to do well but couldn’t. Jennifer’s self-confidence had eroded because of her inability to adapt to the expectations of those around her, and because of the negative messages her parents and teachers were unwittingly sending by treating her behavior as willful. The danger, as so often happens, was that Jennifer would eventually give up and stop trying to change her behavior. She’d say to herself, “Geez, maybe all these adults are right. Maybe I really am not trying hard. Maybe I really am lazy. After all, why else would they be trying to motivate me?” If you give a dog a name, eventually she will answer to it. This girl was already answering to it at the age of eight.

Every time I look at the note Jennifer wrote to me, I feel galvanized all over again to spread the message of skill, not will. These poor kids think they’re “idiotic” and that they “ruin everything.” They believe it’s “all their fault.” Can you imagine how awful that must feel? It can take a lifetime to overcome self-perceptions like that, if one ever really does. People like Jennifer aren’t bad. Like all of us, they’ve got skills that need work. Unfortunately for them, their skills deficits produce behavior that pushes our buttons and leads to misunderstanding.





From Problem Child to Class President


When we shift our mind-sets and approach challenging behavior as a skills deficit, amazing things happen. Remember Susan from the beginning of this chapter? In Susan’s case, her parents stopped trying to force her to go to school using conventional discipline. Recognizing the role played by her cognitive inflexibility, we instead found ways to help her develop flexible thinking skills. I worked with the vice principal, the guidance counselor, and the school psychologist to understand what made her tick, enumerating the specific flexibility skills she lacked and describing how certain situations conspired with her inflexibility to create a blowup. The solution was twofold. First, we needed to create contingency plans for when Susan developed migraines. That way she could go to school secure in the knowledge that she would know exactly what to do if a migraine struck. If she had a template, she wouldn’t freak out. Second, we needed to figure out ways to help build her flexibility skills over time, so that we could reduce the risk of future behavioral problems as new situations in her life emerged.

We implemented both parts of this solution. We created an intricate contingency plan together with Susan, specifying that she would consult the school secretary if she had a migraine. To spare Susan embarrassment in front of her friends, the secretary wouldn’t ask Susan any questions. When Susan got migraines, she was in too much pain to speak clearly, and she wound up feeling self-conscious about what she said. The secretary would take Susan to the guidance counselor, who would let Susan use the phone to call her mother, again without asking questions. We went on to specify whom Susan would call if her mom didn’t pick up, and how long she would wait to see whether the migraine went away before the school sent her home for the day. It was all there on paper with Susan as coauthor, and it helped Susan feel much more comfortable about going to school.

As for the second part of the solution, we didn’t have to embark on a whole new process. As we’ll see, the best way to build skills that are absent or lacking when people misbehave is to give people real-life practice in solving problems. As problems arise, parents, teachers, counselors, and other authority figures can collaborate with individuals to craft solutions rather than simply imposing their will. The process of working things out builds new skills, and actually forms new connections in the brain. In Susan’s case, the beginning of skill building was to involve her in creating the contingency plan the school put in place for her. As we created the plan, parents, teachers, and administrators didn’t dictate the terms, and neither did Susan, who had to practice her flexibility skills. There was a process of give-and-take, during which Susan got just a little bit better in her ability to deviate from her ingrained perceptions of how things should be. That’s how skills are built: little by little, with authority figures serving as coaches and helpers.

We reintegrated Susan back into her school over a matter of weeks. Over several months, we got her to a point where she could fully engage with school and do well. She finished her first year in middle school without major behavioral issues. Six months later, when she was in her second year, Susan’s family moved to California. If any event would upset a kid with flexibility issues, it would be a move clear across the country. But thanks to the ongoing work Susan and her family had done to build her skills and give her coping strategies, she handled it well. A year or so later, Susan’s parents got in touch with me to let me know that she was elected president of her class.

Perceiving Susan’s challenging behavior in terms of skill, not will enabled us to find both a short-term fix and a long-term solution. All of us learned to be more empathic, collaborative, and flexible (and, in fact, research shows that teachers often become more empathic when learning about a student’s cognitive skills deficits as opposed to just his or her challenging behavior).7 We learned to build the underlying cognitive skills rather than slap on another punishment or bestow another reward. And we learned to return to the original meaning of the word discipline. In America, we so often use that word as synonymous with punishment, and yet the original definition of discipline is very different. It means “to teach.” Let’s all shift the way we think about discipline. Let’s return to the original definition of the word, whether we are talking about school, the workplace, or at home with our kids or partner. In the next chapter, I’ll review the large body of science that says we should.





