CHAPTER TWO


			 The Science Behind Challenging Behavior





Here’s a challenge to try with your friends at your next dinner party. Write down five random numbers between 0 and 9. Read the numbers slowly to your friends—for example, “8,” “6,” “9,” “4,” “2.” Challenge your friends to repeat the numbers back to you in the order you just read them. Can they do it? Chances are they can, and after a couple of drinks no less. But here’s where it gets good: Try the exercise again, reading a new set of five numbers to them, just like you did before. This time, see if they can recite the numbers backward. Can they do it? Some of them probably can. But can they do it with a set of seven random numbers? Or ten?

I perform this exercise with audiences during trainings, and it’s hysterical. I see people grimacing, their eyes shut, trying to perform this simple, little task. They point up in the air with their fingers and draw little numbers in an attempt to remember and keep everything in order.

Psychologists call this exercise the digit span test, and they use it to gauge people’s attention and working memory skills.1 Psychologists used to think most adults could absorb and hold roughly five things in their heads at once. Later they revised that, asserting that an average adult could absorb and hold seven items (words, numbers, tasks, etc.).2 Phone numbers today are ten digits long, which most people would find extremely hard to remember. Yet most of us can recall telephone numbers using a mental trick. If we familiarize ourselves with the area code, we have to remember only eight items—the seven numbers of the primary phone number plus the area code.

The digit span test might seem like a cute little parlor game, but it’s more than that. We don’t use attention and working memory just to recall phone numbers. We also use it to help us get along in our daily lives. When we aren’t good at paying attention and remembering, we run afoul of parents, bosses, and other authority figures. If you’re a kid with a very limited working memory as measured by the digit span test (i.e., you might be able to remember only three numbers at a time), you’re going to strain to hold a directive in your head such as “Go upstairs and get your backpack. Come back downstairs. Lock the door, don’t forget your jacket, and meet me outside.” If you’re an adult, you’ll have a hard time holding on to “I need that report by the end of the day. Make sure it’s on card stock, because it’s got to be on the thick stuff. I don’t want it double sided, okay? And I want it single spaced. Oh, and I need it e-mailed to me by four as well.”

The digit span test is only one of a number of tests that allow psychologists to assess what we call neurocognitive skills. These are an array of thinking skills related to the general areas of flexibility, frustration tolerance, and problem solving. Since the 1960s, researchers have used tests like the Stroop Color and Word Test (which measures how well a person can control their impulses) and the Boston Naming Test (which measures a person’s language fluency) to study neurocognitive skills in populations of children and adults.3

Researchers have found that some people are far above average in these skills, while others fall significantly below average. And they’ve found something else: People who exhibit chronically challenging behavior tend to struggle developmentally in one or more of these areas, and the most challenging people struggle across many (or all) areas of neurocognitive skill. In other words, scientists have long established what the vast majority of us overlook in our everyday lives: that skill, not will underlies most instances of bad behavior.

During the late 1980s, researchers in London gathered together a group of four-year-olds whose parents had rated them as hard to manage, and they also assembled another group of preschoolers without behavioral difficulties as a control. They administered neurocognitive tests to measure the children’s key executive functioning skills: the ability to control their impulses, the ability to shift between tasks, and the ability to retain information (working memory). The hard-to-manage kids were much worse at controlling their impulses, although they were about as good as the control group at shifting between tasks and working memory.4

In another study, researchers tested 182 children in the first and second grades to measure how skilled they were in processing their emotions. In particular, they tested how well the children could perceive emotional states, whether they tended to register some emotions more than others, and how good they were at experiencing others’ emotions (empathy). Analyzing the data, researchers found that kids who weren’t as fluent in multiple emotional processing skills were more likely to behave aggressively (as reported by their teachers).5 These are just two of countless studies that all show similar findings: Subjects who exhibit challenging behavior fare much worse on neurocognitive tasks.6





Probing the Sources of Bad Behavior


If studies such as these are so numerous and the results are so consistent in favor of skill, not will, why does conventional discipline remain pervasive? It’s incredible when you think about it: In this area of life, our practice diverges almost entirely from what science tells us—it’s as if the science doesn’t exist. Imagine if almost everyone, even people who claimed to be health conscious, continued to smoke even after decades of research from multiple angles had determined smoking to be harmful.

In part, I think we continue to treat behavior as a matter of will because authority figures don’t know how else to think about it. If you’re a parent, a teacher, or a manager, the main tools you have for addressing bad behavior are the usual, age-old rewards and punishments. If those were no longer available, how would you handle a person who isn’t doing what you expect them to do? As mentioned in the last chapter, bad behavior also arouses an emotional response in authority figures. It’s so hurtful or offensive to us that we want to lash out and punish it, and we have trouble imagining another way.

We also continue to think of misbehavior as will, not skill, because many people don’t know about the science. Although neurocognitive research has existed for decades, it’s fairly fragmented in the scientific literature, not something a popular audience can easily access and understand. Researchers in the field are often not familiar with one another’s work. Some researchers might have tested for thinking skills while studying attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), for instance, others while studying social skills, still others while studying skills related to the regulation of emotions. These are all separate bodies of literature, existing in what amount to intellectual silos. So while the evidence for skill, not will has been accumulating, few people have stepped back, noticed the bigger picture, and publicized its implications.

I first became aware of the bigger picture of skill, not will during the early 1990s, while I was preparing to apply to graduate school. To gain more real-life experience and buttress my application, I took a job at Massachusetts General Hospital as a research assistant working in the lab of Dr. Joseph Biederman, one of the world’s leading ADHD experts. At the time, the psychiatric profession was just beginning to regard ADHD as a legitimate diagnosis, in large part due to Dr. Biederman’s research. Medical science knew little about the condition, and many people still regarded people with ADHD as willfully misbehaving rather than suffering from an underlying neurological condition. Dr. Biederman and his lab were trying to determine if children with ADHD also suffered from other psychiatric disorders, like depression, anxiety, oppositional defiant disorder (a recurrent pattern of hostile or defiant behavior), developmental disorders such as those on the autism spectrum, speech and language issues, and so on. If ADHD did coincide with other disorders, it should affect how caregivers should treat the condition.

In performing the research, we compiled a sample of families with a child diagnosed with clear ADHD and a random sample of families from the community that didn’t have a child diagnosed with ADHD and matched for factors like socioeconomic differences, age, and gender.7 My job, and that of my fellow research assistants, was to hop in a rented Honda Accord and drive around Massachusetts interviewing families. We wanted to see if the kids in each sample suffered from other disorders and compare results across the two groups. When we arrived at a given house, we didn’t know if we were going to interview a family whose child had ADHD or one whose child didn’t suffer from that disorder because study staff were “blinded” so as to not let any of our biases influence the results. Yet we played a game among ourselves of trying to guess, basing our judgments on the messiness of the house (suggesting possible organizational or planning issues) or whether the parent seemed to struggle with maintaining attention (the disorder has a strong genetic component).

Every week we came in from the field, sat down with child psychiatrists on Dr. Biederman’s team, and reported the interview results to the doctors. We evaluated which emotional and behavioral symptoms each child had, if any. I was not surprised to learn that kids diagnosed with ADHD had a much greater chance of also having severe behavioral problems compared with kids in the control group. Conversely—and here’s the critical point—kids diagnosed with oppositional defiant disorder also experienced much higher rates of other kinds of disorders, such as speech or language deficits, mood disorders, and so on. In fact, it was extremely rare to find a kid who was chronically misbehaving but not suffering from other problems. In professional jargon, we call this psychiatric comorbidity, the coexistence of disorders.

Although I was just out of college and didn’t yet know about the neuroscience research being done, I found myself wondering how to interpret the clustering of these different conditions. Maybe the diverse behavior and psychological problems these kids faced derived from a variety of skills deficits they were experiencing. Take a child with behavior issues who also was experiencing language delays (our research turned up many kids like this). Speech and language skills are integral to our ability to tolerate frustration in the world and to solve problems. If you’re an eight-year-old kid who can’t communicate what’s bothering you or understand what others are communicating, you might only be as skilled as a three-year-old in your ability to enlist others to help solve the problem. Conflict situations become that much more frustrating and difficult. Whereas other eight-year-olds might behave adaptively when things don’t go their way, you react by blowing up. An adult might perceive this as a behavior issue, when really the behavioral difficulties are just the downstream effect of being weak in language and communication skills.





Tracking the Skills


Less than a decade later, I was out of graduate school and fortunate to be working with a colleague, Dr. Ross Greene, who was developing a new approach to treating children with behavioral problems. Greene sought a concise way of summarizing and operationalizing the research findings in our field. The past several decades of science—hundreds of studies performed all over the world with all kinds of people as subjects—showed that people with challenging behavior lacked skills in at least one of five primary skills categories: language and communication skills, attention and working memory skills, emotion and self-regulation skills, cognitive flexibility skills, and social thinking skills.8 Greene published a book called The Explosive Child, and in the years that followed, he and I explored the ways these skills contribute to challenging behavior in our clinical work with families and institutions.

What have we learned since then? Let’s take a look at these skill categories one at a time.





Language and Communication Skills: The Meaning of “I Don’t Give a Shit”


Language and communication skills are essential to handling life’s challenges and behaving well.9 It’s hardly surprising that the majority of children with specific language disorders also have psychiatric issues and behavioral difficulties.10 As an illustration, think of kids in the midst of their “terrible twos.” How skilled are misbehaving two-year-olds at communication? Not very. As a result, they can’t engage in negotiations (even pretty simple ones) to resolve disputes. Thankfully, most four-, six-, and eight-year-olds have better language and communication skills that enable them to solve problems. This may be the primary reason we don’t have something called the “terrible eights”!

Both children and adults with language and communication issues can become easily frustrated when unable to express their concerns. Sometimes this frustration leads to explosive behavior, but it can also lead to what adults might regard as passive-aggressive behavior. The person stares at you without speaking, seemingly obstinate and refusing to respond. In fact, she may want to respond but she either can’t find the words or is slow to process them. As I’ve seen in my practice, older kids (and some adults) will sometimes compensate for language and communication deficits by saying things like “This is stupid.” They don’t think it’s stupid, but they’re used to the world not giving them enough time to process speech. They’ve learned that it’s easier just to dismiss someone or something as stupid.

I once had a teenage patient who would respond “I don’t give a shit” whenever I tried to engage him in conversation. “Hey, I heard something happened in school yesterday,” I’d say. “Can you fill me in?”

He’d scowl at me and say, “I don’t give a shit.”

“Well, you might not care, but we sort of need to figure this out. I want to make sure I understand your perspective, so just tell me: What was happening?”

“I don’t give a shit. Fuck you.”

This was a typical conversation for this kid—one of the reasons his parents had brought him to see me. For months, I couldn’t figure out what was going on. His constant negativity frustrated me, but I tried to practice what I preached and focused on identifying his skill struggles. Eventually, I wondered if he was having language and communication issues, even though he had never been formally diagnosed with a speech or language disability. One day in my office I said to him, “Hey, when I ask you about something that has happened to you, what’s going on in your brain? Like, literally, what are you thinking about?”

He sat for a while in silence, pondering. “Well, I start to think about what you asked.”

“Okay,” I said. “So why don’t you ever say that?”

He shrugged. “I don’t know.”

“Well, you say you don’t care.”

(Pause.) “Yeah, I don’t really mean that.”

“If you don’t mean it, why do you say it?”

(Pause.) “To make the conversation stop.”

I continued this line of questioning, and we discovered that the reason he didn’t like to talk with parents, teachers, or others was because nobody gave him enough time to process the information. They weren’t rushing him out of impatience or a lack of empathy. They were assuming that he was refusing to respond. Later, when I asked him to fill me in on what happened the day before, and I waited patiently for him to speak, we sat in silence for forty-five seconds before he answered. In the context of a conversation, that’s an eternity. (Try it yourself: Remain silent for forty-five seconds after someone asks you a question.) But at the end of those forty-five seconds, he offered a clear, well-formulated thought. “I don’t give a shit” had been a compensatory strategy, or as people in a business context might say, a work-around. What he was really trying to say was: “There’s no way in hell this adult is going to give me enough time to process what he just asked me and then to formulate a response using language. So let’s just call the whole thing off.”

Other patients with slow language-processing skills whom I’ve treated might have seemed like they were flat-out ignoring what their parents and other authority figures were asking or talking to them about. A mother might ask her son, “Charlie, come to dinner!” Hearing this, Charlie thinks to himself: Okay, she wants me to come to dinner. Then he thinks: Ah, so that means you want me to turn off the TV. Then he thinks: But I’m twenty minutes into this show. I would sort of like to see how it turns out.

By the time he’s thought these things, ten seconds have passed. His mother has been watching to see if he will comply with her request, and when she sees no action, she understandably assumes he’s refusing to respond, being difficult, or not listening. She’s upset, so she storms into the family room to grab the remote. But Charlie meant no harm. He just couldn’t process words and thus his own internal thoughts as quickly as people around him expected him to.

LANGUAGE AND COMMUNICATION SKILLS


Understands spoken directions



					 Understands and follows conversations



					 Expresses concerns, needs, or thoughts in words



					 Is able to tell someone what’s bothering him/her





Attention and Working Memory Skills: Secrets of a Messy Office


A second category, attention and working memory skills, covers a range of different skills, including attention, working memory, the ability to tune out distractions, and the ability to plan and organize. Driven to Distraction, a book by Drs. Edward M. Hallowell and John J. Ratey, was among the first to describe to a lay audience the importance of being able to maintain your focus when required to do so, and the difficulty that some people have with that skill.11 Focus and related skills, often referred to as executive functions, tend to be highly correlated, so if someone is found to be struggling with one of them—say, working memory—chances are their organization skills are weak as well. Each is intertwined with the other. My old mentor, Dr. Joseph Biederman, called this the “cockroach principle”—where there is one, there are many. Not the best visual, but it’s an apt metaphor.

In any case, let’s return to working memory. We’ve seen how working memory helps us remember phone numbers, but consider what happens every time you carry on a simple conversation. You might encounter a friend at the grocery store and stop to say hello. While your friend speaks, you’re saying to yourself, Let me listen to what this person is saying. You might not be interested in what she’s saying, but you pay attention anyway (a skill). As she speaks, you’re also thinking, Okay, what do I think about what this person is saying? And you’re thinking, What could I or should I say based on what I think about what I think this person is saying? And you also might think, How do I think this person will respond to what I might say or do based on what I am thinking about what she is saying?

That’s a lot of stuff to keep in mind at once. As we go about our daily lives, our minds are working way more than we could ever fathom. So if your executive functioning skills, like working memory and attention, are weak, you might well have trouble partaking in even the most casual of conversations.12

Another set of skills that plays a critically important role in behavior is planning and organization, which rely heavily on decent working memory skills. Sometimes couples fight over messiness in the house. Typically, the neat and organized person complains about the messy tendencies of their partner. When I delve into this, I typically find that their partner lacks organization or planning skills. It’s not “just” that they leave things around. It’s often that they struggle with the skills required to clean up or stay organized. If you tell a person with strong organizational skills to clean their office, they’ll approach the task logically, starting with the big tasks and working from there. They’ll first pick up the stacks of paper from the floor, understanding that once they’ve done that, they’ll be able to clean the rest of the office much more easily. If you ask a person who struggles with organizational and planning skills to clean their office, they might step over the stacks of paper, hop on the chair, reach up to a shelf, and start dusting the pictures in the top right corner. In other words, they struggle to know how to plan, organize, and execute a relatively simple task like cleaning a room.

These everyday behavioral differences show up as brain differences when we do neuropsychological testing. The Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure task asks people to study a complex figure comprised of different geometric shapes. People with solid organizational and planning skills see the outline of the figure and memorize that first. They then fill in the details around it. Others who struggle with these skills see small details but have trouble seeing the bigger picture. When asked to recall the figure from memory, they can’t describe an overarching, organizational structure. All they can point to is random, disconnected details. Just imagine what a person like this would do if you gave him a complex academic problem or business task to tackle. He would inevitably become disoriented and frustrated. Chances are his performance would suffer.

ATTENTION AND WORKING MEMORY SKILLS


Stays with tasks requiring sustained attention



					 Does things in a logical sequence or set order



					 Keeps track of time; correctly assesses how much time a task will take



					 Reflects on multiple thoughts or ideas at the same time



					 Maintains focus during activities



					 Ignores irrelevant noises, people, or other stimuli; tunes things out when necessary



					 Considers multiple options for solutions to a problem





Emotion and Self-regulation Skills: Why Gym Class Doesn’t Work


The third category, emotion and self-regulation skills, covers abilities related to people’s management or control of themselves and their feelings.13 How well does a person deal with frustration or other intense emotions? Do their emotions go from zero to sixty in the snap of a finger? Research has shown that people with poor emotion regulation become “cognitively debilitated”—they can’t think clearly. Falling prey to a storm of uncontrollable emotions, they fall into severe temper tantrums or episodes of rage.14 Not surprisingly, they also have a hard time solving problems. Doing so, after all, requires that once you experience an unpleasant emotion (which informs you that there is a problem that requires solving), you quickly dampen that emotion in order to activate your cerebral cortex (the smart part of the brain responsible for rational thought) so you can think clearly. This second step proves difficult for people who struggle with emotion regulation skills. As psychologists say, they become dysregulated—a fancy word for “upset quickly.”

Included within the general category of self-regulation is a very important skill: impulse control, or the ability to stop and think before acting. To appreciate how important impulse control is, close your eyes and consider what happened yesterday. Imagine that as you went through the day, you thought or did the very first thing that came to mind. It’s pretty funny to imagine this, but pretty frightening, too. Even the most minor interaction between two people requires constant impulse control. If none of us had that control, our world would be a very different place, because our first impulse in any situation is thankfully often not the one we follow. Some people unfortunately go with their first impulse because they have an unusually hard time controlling themselves. One of my teenage patients once told me, “I really have no idea what I’m thinking until I say it out loud.” That’s terrible. This teen can’t prevent himself from doing or saying the first thing his impulses tell him. I don’t know about you, but I really don’t want most people knowing the first thing that goes through my mind at any given moment!

Consequences require decent impulse control to work in the first place!



One of the saddest ironies about people with poor impulse control is that they tend to get hit with more punishments than anyone else. Why is that ironic? Because consequences require decent impulse control to work in the first place! A negative consequence can remediate a person’s behavior only if she has the impulse control to make use of the consequence. The next time around, she has to be able to stop midstream, remember the negative consequence she experienced last time, and resolve to behave differently this time. People with impulse control issues frequently become trapped in spirals of bad behavior and punishment that are difficult to break and that lead to nowhere good.

Some people struggle with another self-regulation skill: the ability to adjust their levels of emotional or physiological arousal.15 Let’s say you’re sitting in a conference room during a meeting. Your colleagues expect you to sit still and pay attention. If your boss says, “Let’s take a ten-minute coffee break,” everyone will expect you to move around, talk, and engage with others—in other words, you’re expected to be more aroused than before. But what if you have trouble shifting between varying states of arousal? When it’s time to come back from break and get serious again, you’re not going to be able to calm down and sit quietly, and your colleagues will likely see you as disruptive.

The students who were deprived of recess were the ones who needed it the most.



Schools have a great deal of trouble handling children who can’t easily modify arousal levels. One gym class I observed had fifty students, and the poor gym teacher was trying to manage them all by splitting them into two groups. Half the students were to stay on the bleachers, the other half were to exercise on the gym floor. When the gym teacher blew the whistle, the groups switched. All the kids in the class who had trouble adjusting their arousal levels were supposed to sit quietly on the bleachers, having just engaged in an intense game of dodgeball. They were excited, hyped up, energized. Now they had to be calm. How well do you think that worked out? The gym teacher did the only thing he felt he could do: He sent those kids to the principal’s office. Their punishment was to miss recess—the only time they had to work out their restlessness in an appropriate way. Sadly, the students who were deprived of recess were the ones who needed it the most. Everyone in this situation lost—the teacher, the kids with poor skills, the other students—all because of an outdated understanding and the interventions that this understanding produced.

EMOTION AND SELF-REGULATION SKILLS


Thinks rationally, even when upset



					 Manages irritability in an age-appropriate way



					 Manages anxiety in an age-appropriate way



					 Manages disappointment in an age-appropriate way



					 Thinks before responding; considers the likely outcomes or consequences of his/her actions



					 Can adjust his/her arousal level to meet the demands of a situation (e.g., calming after recess or after getting upset, falling asleep/waking up, staying seated during meetings or meals)





Flexible Thinking Skills: When Learning About Pirates Isn’t So Much Fun


Sam exploded into violent tantrums when he became frustrated. On one occasion, he arrived at class to find that the teacher had arranged the desks into the shape of a pirate ship. As the other students entered, the teacher explained that they were about to start a unit on pirates. Most kids were psyched and slid right into their typical morning routine. Sam didn’t. He asked what was going on. “We’re learning about pirates,” the teacher said. “Isn’t that exciting?”

“Where’s my desk?”

“Don’t worry, Sam,” the teacher said. “I put your desk right over there in the corner, where you can get to it easily.”

Sam shook his head. “That’s not my desk.”

The teacher smiled. “Yes, it is. It’s right there.”

“No, it’s not.”

From here, the encounter degenerated. What happened? It turned out that Sam, like Susan from the last chapter, had deficits in a fourth category of skills, those related to cognitive flexibility, or the ability to adapt his thinking. Most people can easily depart from their preconceived notions. They can think in shades of gray instead of black and white. Some people are much more rigid. They are rule oriented, and they focus on details as opposed to the big picture. They thrive on predictability, routines, and rigid categories and become frustrated when life moves in unexpected or new directions. They are the “need to know” folks, as opposed to the “go with the flow” folks. Sam’s desk was no longer in its regular place. So to Sam, it was no longer his desk.

I also call these children “once is always” kids because when they see or hear something one time, they immediately create a template that says it should always go that way. As much as we think our world runs according to clear rules and routines, we live much more in the grays, the exceptions to the rules. Despite clear start and stop times for meetings and clear speed limits for driving, for example, most meetings don’t start or end on time and most people exceed the posted speed limit. These minor transgressions drive inflexible thinkers nuts.

Research has revealed links between inflexible thinking and misbehavior.16 Autism spectrum disorders and nonverbal learning disabilities are characterized by inflexible thinking, and at least two-thirds of children on the autism spectrum exhibit behavioral difficulties.17 Yet this doesn’t just apply to kids, and you don’t need a diagnosis to have a problem. You just need a problem to have a problem! And plenty of people with whom I’ve worked have struggled with inflexible thinking without receiving a specific diagnosis. It’s easy to understand how inflexible thinking can lead to frustration and challenging behavior.

Often, poor flexible thinking skills can result in what Dr. Aaron Beck, creator of cognitive therapy, helped us think of as “stinking thinking.” We get ourselves upset when we incorrectly perceive reality. We personalize words or actions, we catastrophize, we overgeneralize, and all this triggers our emotions. You might spill coffee all over yourself one morning. A healthy, productive response might be to think, Man, this sucks. It’s a bad start, but it doesn’t mean my whole day will be ruined. An inflexible thinker has a hard time generating a response like this. Because she thinks in terms of black and white, all or nothing, she gets mired in stinking thinking. Crap, this person might say to herself, my whole day is ruined. This day sucks. I hate my life. Spilling coffee is just one data point in an entire day, but an inflexible thinker who focuses on details and has a hard time seeing the big picture can’t perceive that. Unfortunately, if you perceive that your whole day is ruined right from the start, that impression will likely become a self-fulfilling prophecy.

People with poor flexibility skills get bogged down in all kinds of negative thoughts because of setbacks or challenges they’ve experienced. Saying the wrong thing to a peer at school and feeling embarrassed becomes: Oh, my God, everybody hates me, they’re all out to get me. I’m stupid. Doing a bad job on a presentation to the sales team becomes: I get so nervous. I can’t do this. Why am I so nervous? I should be able to speak in front of people like everybody else does. Some inflexible thinkers also develop “sticky thinking,” getting stuck on a thought, desire, plan, or want. Nothing can shake an idea out of their heads. They become obsessed and perseverate. Challenging behavior follows in due course.

FLEXIBLE THINKING SKILLS


Handles transitions; shifts easily from one task to another



					 Is able to see shades of gray rather than thinking only in black and white



					 Thinks hypothetically; is able to envision different possibilities



					 Handles deviations from rules, routines, and original plans



					 Handles unpredictability, ambiguity, uncertainty, and novelty



					 Can shift away from an original idea, solution, or plan



					 Takes into account situational factors that may mean a change in plans (e.g., “If it rains, we may need to cancel”)



					 Interprets information accurately/avoids overgeneralizing or personalizing (e.g., avoids saying “Everyone’s out to get me,” “Nobody likes me,” “You always blame me,” “It’s not fair,” “I’m stupid,” or “Things will never work out for me”)





Social Thinking Skills: Why Jeff in Accounting Tells Too Many Jokes


One child I worked with was obsessed with Pokémon cards. He would barge into my office and ask, “Do you want to play Pokémon?” He wouldn’t bother to take stock of what was going on around him. If he had, he would have questioned whether it was an appropriate time to play Pokémon. If I agreed to play Pokémon, he would drop to the floor and unpack all of his cards. Motioning for me to get down on the floor next to him, he would go about an obsessive exercise playing Pokémon, in essence, by himself. I could go to lunch and return forty-five minutes later, and he would still be playing, unaware of my absence.

This child had trouble with a final category of skills, called social thinking skills. While struggling with pretty much any of the skills discussed above can cause trouble in social situations (think of how working memory skills allow you to hold your own in a conversation), there are still social thinking skills that we need specifically in order to behave appropriately in interactions with others.18 Some of these are basic skills such as knowing how to start a conversation with someone, how to make eye contact, how to gauge whether someone is interested in what you’re saying, how to greet someone, and so on. People lacking in these skills can struggle to perform tasks that most of us take for granted: sharing, entering a group, starting a conversation, taking turns in a conversation, recognizing boredom when speaking with someone, and regulating pitch and volume.

The lack of these basic social thinking skills can give rise to behavior that seems disruptive, unpleasant, or hostile.19 I once worked with a correctional facility inmate named Jimmy who got along well with a particular guard. Yet every day when the guards changed shifts and this guard arrived, Jimmy greeted him by screaming, “Hey, you motherfucker! Good to see you, you fucking bastard!” The guard was perplexed. He and Jimmy seemed to have a great relationship. Jimmy always came to see him whenever he had a problem. We discovered that Jimmy struggled with the skill of saying hello to people, which is more complicated than first meets the eye. We’re all expected to greet people differently depending on the social context. Most of us have no trouble assessing the context and adjusting our speech or actions in an appropriate way. For some of us, that skill doesn’t come naturally. Jimmy didn’t understand how to greet the guard in a friendly way when he was glad to see him without causing his fellow inmates to resent him and beat the crap out of him for cozying up to a guard. This more nuanced social interaction was beyond Jimmy.

Other, more complicated social thinking skills that bedevil some people include what psychologists call perspective taking. Interacting well with others requires being able to understand how your behavior impacts others and how others perceive you, and it also requires you to appreciate someone else’s perspective, especially if it differs from yours. All of this in turn requires a capacity to read and understand other people’s emotions. Humans, in effect, largely depend on a feedback loop to get along in the world. We speak and act, and we then scan the environment to see how people view us. We also read and interpret the signals coming back to us. Based on that feedback, we might adjust our speech and conduct to align them better with our desired goals.

This feedback loop can break down in all kinds of ways. Some people lack a functioning loop and do not receive any data on what others are thinking. They come across as cold and distant because they behave in ways that make it seem like they don’t care about others. These individuals might very well be warm and empathic—if only they were receiving data about others’ perceptions and could understand it.

Remember the adolescent I worked with who said he didn’t know what he was thinking until he said it out loud? Beyond poor impulse control, this teenager had deficits in social thinking that caused his feedback loop to remain activated for only very brief periods of time. DeJaun was witty and would blurt out jokes in the middle of class. When other kids laughed, DeJaun would stand up and start delivering a monologue. The teacher found this horribly disruptive, as did the other kids after a while. They would turn their backs, make faces at DeJaun, and tell him to knock it off. But DeJaun didn’t know how to knock it off because his social feedback loop was operating for only that initial moment during which he saw the kids (and the teacher!) laughing. He shut down his feedback loop after a few seconds and stopped collecting data, so he couldn’t read how he was coming across, and he couldn’t accurately interpret incoming feedback from others as he was talking. He was convinced that others in the room were continuing to respond well to his continued jokes, even though they weren’t. The DeJauns of the world are often described as not knowing when enough is enough. How would you know when enough is enough? Because your feedback loop tells you!

SOCIAL THINKING SKILLS


Pays attention to verbal and nonverbal social cues



					 Accurately interprets nonverbal social cues (like facial expressions and tone of voice)



					 Starts conversations with peers; enters groups of peers appropriately



					 Seeks attention in appropriate ways



					 Understands how his/her behavior affects other people



					 Understands how he/she is coming across or being perceived by others



					 Empathizes with others; appreciates others’ perspectives or points of view





Charting the Deficits


Is it nature or nurture? The answer is yes.



You might wonder why some people struggle with neurocognitive skills and others don’t. What causes skills deficits? Is it nature or nurture? The answer is yes. From research, it seems clear that genetics play a role, but so do environmental factors—most notably chronic stress during childhood. When children experience trauma such as domestic abuse, sexual or physical abuse, or the chronic stress of poverty, the impact can be toxic and delay brain development.20 This in turn causes skill delays. Chronic, toxic stress can cause biological differences in brain formation that are visible in imaging scans of the brain.21 Compare a scan of a neurotypically developed toddler’s brain with one of the brain of a toddler who has been deprived, and you’ll see a striking difference. The neurotypical toddler’s brain shows activity in the prefrontal cortex, which is responsible for many of the higher-order thinking skills I’ve been discussing. The brain scan of a deprived toddler is depressingly dark in these areas.

My friend and colleague Dr. Bruce Perry, senior fellow at the Child Trauma Academy in Houston, Texas, is one of the leading experts on the impact of childhood trauma on brain development.22 As he has argued, children confronted with chronic stress adapt to their environments by activating their fight-or-flight response. They use more primitive, lower parts of their brain—the brain stem and amygdala to respond to even non-threatening events. Over time, they are primed to go directly to fight-or-flight when confronted by outside stimulation. They’re in a heightened state of arousal, ever vigilant and fearful, ready to meet a threat. Information often never reaches the part of the brain associated with higher-order cognitive functioning, the prefrontal cortex. As a result, these children can’t build and access neurocognitive skills the ways normal children do. As Perry writes, “A child with a brain adapted for an environment of chaos, unpredictability, threat, and distress is ill-suited to the modern playground or classroom.”23 Later in life, they’re often unsuited to the modern workplace or university and have difficulty maintaining stable, healthy relationships.

Don’t make the mistake of thinking that this type of trauma is rare, however. The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) study24 surveyed more than seventeen thousand HMO members about their histories of experiences like physical and emotional abuse and neglect; witnessing domestic violence, parental separation or divorce; and having a parent with mental illness, substance abuse problems, or in jail. About two-thirds of the people surveyed reported at least one such adverse childhood experience, and 87 percent of people who reported one also reported at least one additional adverse childhood experience. And indeed, the study found that the more of these adverse childhood experiences you have, the more health, social, and behavioral problems you will have throughout your life as well.

While trauma and toxic stress are pretty surefire ways to arrest brain development and cause difficulties with certain skills, delays in brain development can also arise from other causes. Anyone can struggle with certain skills, either lacking them entirely or experiencing developmental delays or weaknesses. All of us are stronger in some cognitive areas and weaker in others, although most of us may not be so weak in any one skill that we experience significant trouble functioning. People with chronic stress, however, are more likely to experience significant skills deficits that prevent them from behaving as others might expect, or from behaving “adaptively,” as psychologists say, to handle new situations as they arise.

How authority figures treat people with skills deficits can magnify the behavioral effects of these deficits. Parents, managers, and partners can have their own skills deficits that affect how they respond to skills deficits in others. Depending on one person’s own areas of weaknesses, they can behave in ways that combine with the weaknesses of another person to make behavior worse.25 For instance, when both a parent and a child struggle with flexible thinking, disputes can easily flare up and burn out of control. When both a manager and a direct report struggle with perspective taking, misunderstandings and empathic failures can make their working relationship untenable. Each party inadvertently pushes against the other’s needs. Similar dynamics can of course also occur among romantic partners and people in any other kind of relationship.





What Getting up to Go to Work Really Entails


Again, it may seem puzzling that cognitive scientists know so much about these skills, yet people and institutions still regard behavior almost exclusively as a matter of will and intention. This gap between science and everyday practice is even more striking given how intuitively correct the notion of skill, not will is. In my presentations, I ask people in the room to describe something they didn’t want to do but did anyway. Someone will invariably chime in, “Getting up at six a.m. on a cold, rainy day to go to work when I totally didn’t feel like it.”

Okay, I’ll ask, so why did you do it?

“Because I didn’t want to lose my job,” the person will say.

Although at first glance this seems like a simple attempt to avoid punishment, I’ll point out to the group that this is a prime example of impulse control—a person not wanting to go to work, but resisting the impulse to stay in bed and getting up at six a.m. anyway. The decision to go to work under these circumstances also involves the skill of projecting into the future and gauging the likely effects of your actions, being fired—an executive function skill called forecasting.

Another person might say, “So often I’m feeling nice and comfy in bed, but I just push myself through it, get up, and get myself moving.”

I observe that this person was deploying her self-regulation skills. She had to adjust her arousal level, moving from “sleeping and dead to the world” to “up and about.”

Someone else might say, “I get up by psyching myself to do it. I think to myself that once I get up, I’ll turn on a nice hot shower, which always wakes me up.” I point out that this person is not only thinking ahead, but thinking in more nuanced, flexible ways. Instead of adopting an all-or-nothing approach and catastrophizing the situation (“This day totally sucks. It’s raining. This will be the worst day ever!”), this person is acknowledging the challenge of a rainy day, but also recognizing that the next twenty-four hours are not predestined to be awful—there is a hot shower that can turn the day around.

In all of these cases, the individuals involved are also using language and communication skills to solve problems. They’re talking the problems through in their heads in order to arrive at solutions that allow them to behave adaptively and get out of bed.

Thus, choosing to get out of bed, or failing to do so, isn’t primarily a matter of will. What we think of as will actually requires the mobilization of specific abilities that fall under our five skills categories. All day long, every minute of the day, we’re deploying cognitive skills in order to function in the world, the vast majority of the time unknowingly. And if you lack skills in one or more of those areas, or if you’re weak in them, you might not get out of bed, and you’ll suffer the consequences. You’ll behave in all kinds of ways that others around you might find disruptive, distasteful, unhelpful, illegal, or just plain wrong.

The way to address bad behavior isn’t to punish it. It’s to build skills.



The way to address bad behavior isn’t to punish it. It’s to build skills. And that’s the best news of all. We can improve a person’s skills or even build them up from scratch, no matter if their weakness owes to genetics, chronic stress, or anything else. Everyone’s behavior is changeable as long as you think skill, not will. In the process, we can actualize and enhance the growth mind-set that, as Dr. Carol Dweck has argued, is so favorable for improving behavior and performance.26 Later in this book, I’ll present a simple method for addressing behavior problems via skill building that tens of thousands of people have already applied with impressive results. First, let’s understand the opportunity that reforming discipline represents. By ignoring what decades of science has shown to be true, we’re wasting billions of dollars and causing untold emotional pain. If we can fix how we handle behavior problems, we’ll improve the performance of institutions and businesses while also helping to build a safer, healthier, more compassionate society.





