CHAPTER THREE


			 Discipline Gone Awry





At a workshop I led in 2015, an audience member raised his hand and asked to speak. He was in his midfifties, a demure, professorial type. From the intensity of his gaze and his faltering tone, he seemed upset. I wondered why. I had been talking about “willpower” and the failings of traditional discipline, and the conversation until that point hadn’t been especially emotional.

“I’m the parent of a seventeen-year-old,” he said, “and while I’m glad to be here, I feel so awful. I can see now that I’ve been misunderstanding my kid all these years.”

I tried to reassure him, telling him that it was okay. None of us is a perfect parent.

“No, you don’t understand,” he said, his mouth quivering with anguish. “Now that I know what was really causing his bad behavior, I realize that I’ve been making his life miserable for years by continuing to punish him and just making him feel worse about himself. For years.” He shook his head, ashen faced, and stared at the floor.

“Well, you can always start now,” I offered.

He sighed and shook his head. “I don’t know. I think it may be too late.” He paused for a moment, holding back tears. “I may have ruined him.”

I didn’t agree that this father had “ruined” his son by disciplining him in conventional ways. But the core of what he was saying was correct. Traditional discipline does tremendous damage to kids on the receiving end. Think of the years of pain this man’s son must have endured when hit with punishment after punishment, even when he was doing his best. Millions of kids are paying a terrible price because we’ve ignored the science of challenging behavior. But it’s not just our kids. It’s our partners, our families, our institutions, and society as a whole. We wonder why American institutions are under strain, why workers in both the public and the private sectors are unhappy and stressed out, why there’s never enough money in government budgets. Such dysfunction has many causes, but one of the biggest—conventional discipline—has gone unremarked. As even a rough and extremely partial accounting suggests, traditional rewards and punishments are wasting tens of billions of dollars, maybe more. A huge opportunity exists to improve society by revamping how we respond when people behave in challenging ways. Before examining the costs to public institutions and private businesses, let’s spend a little more time understanding the human costs to kids and their families.





“I Wish We’d Never Had Him”


What would you do if your child, that little bundle of joy you brought home from the hospital, began behaving like a monster? Bob and Marlene Booker can tell you what that’s like. They noticed behavior issues in their son Jamison when he was only two and a half years old. Jealous of his baby brother, Charles, he clawed at the baby’s face until it bled, and he also acted out by throwing temper tantrums and destroying his favorite toys.

As Jamison grew older, he became more aggressive, ranting and raving when things didn’t go his way, flying into violent rages at seemingly minor requests from his parents. “He absolutely refuses to wear his glasses,” Marlene told me. “He has broken more than thirty pairs. He’ll look at me and say ‘fuck you’ and snap them in half.” Age thirteen as of this writing, he has broken everything in the family’s house, including two flat-screen TVs, countless cell phones, and a glass door on the stove. He has stolen money, kicked holes in walls, and vandalized the house with spray paint. On one occasion, his grandmother was so upset by his behavior that she called him a monster to his face.

The Bookers haven’t taken Jamison’s behavior lightly. Early on, they levied the usual punishments, sending him to time-out or rewarding him for good behavior. These techniques failed. “Whenever we tried rewards or time-outs, it was like we were speaking a foreign language,” Marlene said. “Never once did he sit still in a time-out. Never once did he willingly go to his room. And if we got him there, he would destroy his room, he was so angry. We would open the door and it would be like a war zone.”

Desperate for a solution, the Bookers brought their son to a therapist, starting at age three. It didn’t work. During the years that followed, the family tried psychiatrists, psychologists, hospitalization—every variety of expert, most of them advocating some form of conventional rewards and punishments. None of it helped. As Marlene remembered, “He was beyond any therapist’s pay grade. He never did anything any of them ever said. He just wouldn’t cooperate.” With each therapist, Jamison’s behavior got only more terrifying and out of control. He would fly into violent rages four or five times a week. He wouldn’t brush his teeth, wouldn’t eat healthy food, wouldn’t do anything his parents wanted him to. He was completely unmanageable.

The constant, chronic behavior issues traumatized the entire Booker family. Bob and Marlene blamed themselves for the situation, wondering what they had done wrong. Marlene became anxious and depressed and had to go on medication. She felt depleted from the constant struggle of dealing with Jamison’s flare-ups, so much so that she had to quit her job to keep things running at home. “I haven’t worked,” she says, “because I didn’t have the bandwidth to sit in a meeting after an episode with Jamison when he’s attacked us or he’s been in a hospital. I couldn’t be a professional mom pretending everything is fine in my life and come home and there is a war zone.” The whole experience was “exhausting, beyond anything else, the most exhausting thing in the world. And there’s no escape with a child like this. No pause button, no going away for the weekend for a mini break.”

With all the tumult at home, Marlene’s social life has become nonexistent. She’s too tired to go out for a drink or to dinner with her friends. Even going on a walk with a friend is tough, because the only thing she has to talk about is her son, and she doesn’t want “to be a Debbie Downer.”

The Bookers’ marriage has come under severe strain. Marlene had been the family’s main breadwinner, so her inability to work has left the family struggling. With every spare cent going toward Jamison’s treatment, vacations are out of the question, and they have to ask family members for help. When Bob comes home from work, he and Marlene don’t enjoy relaxed time together. There’s always conflict flaring up, or consequences of prior conflicts they must address. The two also don’t always agree on how to handle Jamison’s behavior. Since Marlene has been home with the kids, she has felt the full brunt of Jamison’s challenging behavior, and she is more inclined to crack down. Bob can let things slide, because he comes home and enjoys more quality time with the boys, who are thrilled to see him.

The couple can’t even go out for dinner by themselves without worrying about what Jamison might do. On one occasion while they were out, he became so furious at their absence that he escaped from the house without the babysitter’s knowledge and walked over to the restaurant in search of them. The babysitter was so upset that he wouldn’t work for them for a year.

All of the turbulence at home has taken a toll on Jamison’s little brother. Charles has taken years of abuse from his brother, having been hit, punched, and kicked. After all that, Marlene reports, “Charles has no interest in having anything to do with Jamison.” He has been embarrassed socially by Jamison, having to figure out how to explain to his friends that his brother was in a psychiatric hospital.

Marlene summed up the family’s life in the bleakest of terms. She said it was a “living hell,” and although she knew it was terrible to say, she found herself “wanting to kill Jamison” at times. “In the aftermath of his meltdowns, I can’t help but wish that we never had him. I think: Oh, my God, how can we live through this? I tell my husband, ‘I just fucking hate him.’ He has ruined our lives and is still ruining our lives. He’s the reason our lives are difficult.”

In so many unhappy families, conventional rewards and punishments actually increase the amount of suffering and unhappiness.



Leo Tolstoy famously observed in the first line of his novel Anna Karenina that “[a]ll happy families are alike; each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.”1 Whether or not you subscribe to that theory, one thing is true: In so many unhappy families, conventional rewards and punishments actually increase the amount of suffering and unhappiness. I’ve seen evidence of this not just in the Bookers’ story, but in hundreds of cases that have come through my clinical practice. Observing this dynamic in kids and families helps us understand how it applies in so many other settings and with people of all ages as well.

When children in these families misbehave, parents usually remove some sort of privilege or levy a punishment. They take away an allowance or Xbox privileges. They don’t let children go on playdates. Such measures don’t address the underlying skills deficits that produced the challenging behavior. Instead, they aggravate or upset a child, escalating the bad behavior. Even the threat of imposing a punishment or removing a privilege can cause children to become more aggressive or defiant. And as their behavior escalates, parents become more frustrated. They up the ante, levying even harsher consequences. This dynamic creates an environment of chronic conflict in the home, in some cases pushing parents to the breaking point. Parents become so upset that they lash out. Alternately, they give up the fight, shaking their heads at a situation they feel powerless to resolve.

The damage traditional discipline causes to the parent-child relationship is bad enough, but as the Bookers’ story suggests, this is just the beginning. Challenging behavior puts the entire family system under strain, including the siblings of kids with behavioral problems. When one child acts out and parents respond in traditional ways, they often wind up devoting many of the family’s emotional and financial resources to solving that problem. Siblings with better skills feel pressure to behave as “model” children to help keep the family functioning. They often feel ignored, as if the whole family revolves around the challenging kid and their needs are a lesser priority. When conflict arises, they let their challenging brother or sister have his or her way in the moment.

Over time, siblings become angry and resentful, but it’s hard for them to articulate these emotions. They wind up carrying the emotions around with them, often unknowingly. As I’ve seen in my clinical practice, these kids go on to experience problems with anxiety, depression, eating disorders, and the like, and these problems often persist into adulthood. Their parents feel guilty for having failed to prevent these problems. As I tell parents, it’s not their fault. They were handling the challenging behavior the best way they could, and in line with what conventional wisdom believes to be true. But, unbeknownst to them, traditional discipline was doomed to fail.

In addition to siblings, parents suffer many personal consequences thanks to the failure of conventional discipline. I’ve seen many instances where parents have had to quit their jobs or downshift their careers in order to deal with chronic misbehavior that, despite the application of rewards and punishments, never improves. Like the Bookers, these are some of the most well-meaning parents in the world, yet they are unknowing victims of traditional thinking that is misguided and ineffective. We must do better for these people and their kids. The impact of rewards and punishments on families is simply too damaging.





On Track to Fail


The costs of traditional discipline are just as serious in schools and other institutions serving children as they are in families. The vast majority of children—as many as 90 percent—adapt fairly well to school. The remainder, those so-called disruptive kids, come into regular or sustained contact with school disciplinary systems. When children misbehave at school, the problems usually start at a very early age—in kindergarten, even in preschool. Instead of addressing the underlying skills deficits at that point, teachers are taught to apply rewards and punishments. Just as in the home, the problems worsen. Soon these “problem children” are expelled from preschool, not just once, but over and over again. The number of children expelled from preschool each year is astounding.2

As these children grow older, they continue to receive the usual school punishments—detention, suspension, and expulsion. Schools create Individualized Education Programs (IEPs) for them, allocating special resources to help with their behavioral issues. They assign aides to work with these children or move them into self-contained classrooms designed specifically for kids with behavioral difficulties. IEPs contain behavior remediation plans, but these plans don’t necessarily—and usually don’t—address the underlying skills. Usually the plan just tries to improve the kid’s motivation by making use of a system of rewards and punishments, like a sticker chart or a level system. In other words, children typically experience the same basic forms of discipline they have in the past, only more stringently and with closer monitoring. Over time, these children become angry and alienated from school. This is entirely understandable. They’ve been removed from the community again and again, treated as offenders for behavior lapses that they cannot easily control. They would change if they were able. But they aren’t.

When these alternative arrangements fail, as they frequently do, schools place children in special therapeutic schools and residential treatment facilities. I wish the journey of a challenging kid ended there, but it doesn’t. As I’ve noted, children with behavioral difficulties often commit crimes, winding up in the juvenile correctional system. A big part of the problem is precisely the discipline applied. If the usual rewards and punishments worked, we would expect to see fewer of them as time went on. Yet many districts are seeing more suspensions. Between 1974 and 2006, the number of school suspensions in the United States doubled, largely because of harsh zero tolerance policies.3 That’s tragic: Academic studies have documented a connection between suspensions from school, for instance, and academic deterioration, premature dropout, and increased risk of criminal activity and incarceration, fueling the school-to-prison pipeline.4 As challenging children become adults, they commit more crimes and “graduate” into the adult correctional system.

Think of the harm this pipeline imposes. Millions of children in our country wind up going down the wrong path in life, pushed along by school disciplinary systems that don’t work. Yet the cost isn’t just borne by these kids. When kids chronically misbehave at school, they disrupt learning for their well-behaved peers, and they dramatically increase the burden on teachers. Disruptive behavior is the number-one source of teacher stress and the number-one predictor of early teacher dropout in the United States.5 Many talented teachers find themselves so frustrated and exhausted by chronic challenging behavior that they leave their jobs and find work in other fields.6

A look at one teacher’s story illustrates the point. At the age of twenty-three, Sam earned her master’s degree in teaching and went to teach social studies at a charter school in New York City’s South Bronx. “I was handed a textbook and a bunch of kids,” she recalls, “and it became very clear that I had to manage behavior in my own classroom because I couldn’t really depend on the administration.”7 From the first day, Sam encountered frequent misbehavior, including cursing, talking back to the teacher, arguing and physical altercations between the kids, and the disruptive use of cell phones. Not knowing what else to do, she started kicking disruptive kids out of her classroom, sending them to the principal’s office. The kids kept coming back, their behavioral issues even worse. “I probably cried every single day that first year,” she recalls. “I hated it, hated it, hated it.”

Over the next five years, Sam taught at other tough New York City schools. In addition to the same daily behavioral issues, she had a number of physical altercations with students. On one occasion, an angry child threw his desk and chair clear across the classroom. On another occasion, she had to break up a fight between two boys who were both much bigger than she was. On still another, she had to separate two girls who were bitterly arguing and pulling out each other’s hair. The worst were episodes when Sam felt threatened by groups of students, or when she had to walk alone after dark from the school to the subway fearing some kind of retribution.

Fortunately, Sam was never the victim of violence. With time, she got better at controlling her classroom, and she came to enjoy teaching more. Weekly therapy appointments helped her process some of what she was seeing. Still, it was never easy, and part of the stress accrued from having to pay so much attention to developing the perfect lesson plan. With so much misbehavior, she felt pressure to keep the kids constantly entertained so that they would stay calm and learn. “It felt like every single day, all day long, I needed to be on and excited and smiley,” she says. During the evenings, she came home, lit a candle, and just lay on her couch under a blanket, trying to recover. She didn’t have the strength to do anything else.

As hard as her life was, some of her colleagues fared worse. They had complete breakdowns, leaving school one day never to return. When that happened, Sam remarks, it was “just a huge loss to these kids. Then they have subs for two months, and then the school hires another teacher who is coming into a lose-lose situation.”

Eventually, the behavioral issues became too much for Sam as well. Although she had come to love the kids and sought to help them, she wanted a family of her own, and it didn’t seem possible to teach in such a difficult environment and still enjoy a normal, healthy life at home. All her colleagues felt the same way. At the last school where she taught, only one out of approximately eighty staff members had children. During the time she spent at the school, she saw some twenty-five teachers quit their jobs, either because they couldn’t handle the stress or because they saw it as precluding a healthy family life.

Challenging behavior doesn’t just impact individual teachers. It brings down entire schools. One principal at a middle and high school in Brooklyn, New York, recalled how her school struggled for years with “a small percentage of students whose behavior we could neither control nor understand.” With only traditional discipline to fall back on, the school did the best it could: “Our reaction was always to hold our breath just a little until we could tell if this was a good day or a bad day. . . . Every meltdown, every escalation, every suspension, left us feeling defeated and unsuccessful.”8 Like staff at so many schools, her faculty members felt like they were being held hostage by challenging behavior. With so much disciplining going on, much less time and energy remained for teaching and learning. Everyone lost.





Discipline and Punish—and Pay


So far, we’ve discussed only the human costs of conventional discipline. The economic costs are staggering as well. Even if only 10 percent of students experience behavioral problems, that’s still millions of kids. It costs a typical school district at least $40,000 a year to provide special out-of-district services for a single student with chronic challenging behavior. Perhaps 15 to 20 percent of “problem” students will need these services no matter what system of discipline exists (kids with severe psychiatric issues, for instance). But the vast majority of these students might be helped if we only found ways to address their underlying skills deficits. That amounts to billions of dollars spent every year on discipline that doesn’t work. Consider, too, the cost of recruiting and hiring new teachers when existing teachers leave, or the cost of keeping tens of thousands of school safety officers and police officers stationed at schools (New York City alone has more than fifty-five hundred school safety officers and agents in its schools, which, if it were to stand on its own, would comprise the third-largest police force in the United States).

The economic costs of traditional discipline run up and down the school-to-prison pipeline, at every institution that touches challenging kids during their childhoods and when they mature into adults. The behavior of some of these children result in inpatient stays in psychiatric hospitals, and psychiatric institutions spend thousands of dollars on medications and physical restraints for each unruly inpatient.9 The act of restraining patients often results in injuries to patient and staff, and on occasion it has led to death. For this reason, state governments have stepped in to try to reduce the frequency with which organizations use restraints. The potential cost savings is enormous. One midsized organization we studied had to restrain patients 1,300 times a year, at an estimated cost of $350 per incident in addition to staff time. Imagine what would happen if we could reduce that number by one thousand incidents per year by treating behavioral challenges as a lack of skill, not a lack of will. That one organization would save $350,000 per year. Actually, they did save that much. By transforming the disciplinary strategies at this organization, we reduced the number of restraints by one thousand a year. Similar reductions across our system nationwide would again result in billions of dollars in cost savings.10

One published study has considered in detail how much it cost a small (thirty-bed) inpatient facility in Westborough, Massachusetts, to apply restraints on patients, and how much it saved when it complied with a state initiative to reduce the use of restraints. The study considered the time staff spent on each episode when it restrained out-of-control patients as well as the cost of the medication used. It didn’t factor in costs from related expenses, such as injuries to staff and turnover, nor did it attempt to quantify costs related to the need to monitor patients after an incident in which restraints were used.

The study found that this organization reduced the number of episodes in which staff restrained patients from 3,991 to 373 episodes over a three-year period. That represented a total cost savings of more than $1 million on an annual basis. Recidivism among patients plummeted, while turnover among the staff decreased by 80 percent. The number of staff workdays missed due to injury declined by 98 percent, with workers’ compensation claims declining by 29 percent and medical costs due to injury declining by 98 percent.11

At detention centers and prisons, the costs of traditional discipline are no less great. Recidivism is a huge problem for our criminal justice system. According to a Pew Center study, close to 50 percent of offenders returned to prison within three years of their release. Despite dramatic increases in prison budgets (as of 2011, our country spent some $52 billion on prisons), recidivism rates have barely declined.12 A study by the Department of Justice found that 75 percent of prisoners would be back in handcuffs “within five years of their release.”13 Such recidivism represents a damning indictment of conventional discipline. Prison is supposed to rehabilitate people. That inmates keep returning suggests that the rewards and punishments used there are not addressing inmates’ underlying skills deficits.

In the confines of a prison or a juvenile detention center, it might seem perfectly fine to use rewards and punishments, and not worry about skills. When inmates misbehave, you can immediately subdue them and, in extreme situations, lock them down in their cells. You might think that you’re “teaching the inmate a lesson,” giving him a strong incentive never to behave poorly. His bad behavior is “corrected.” But what happens when that inmate gets out of prison? Nobody is following him around with handcuffs, ready to lock him down. He still has the same skills deficits that brought him into the prison in the first place, and he isn’t able to respond any more adaptively to problems that arise, no matter how much motivation he may have to remain free. The criminal justice system becomes a revolving door, to the point where some correctional system administrators I’ve talked to joke grimly about it. “Good-bye,” they say to inmates, “see you soon.” They know they probably will, unfortunately.

According to a 2012 study of forty states, the total cost of prisons was $39 billion, with an average cost of more than $31,000 per inmate per year.14 If we could reduce recidivism by just 10 percent by reforming the traditional approaches to discipline that almost all prisons use, we could save billions of dollars. And we have every reason to think that we could cut recidivism by far more than 10 percent. In one institution that I’ll discuss later, we were able to reduce recidivism by 50 percent over five years by applying an alternative to conventional discipline.





Massive Societal Ramifications


In addition to individual human costs, conventional discipline exacts broader costs to society, directly affecting us all. The workplace is an important example. Most businesses apply rewards and punishments to encourage desired behavior (for example, faster or more efficient performance) and discourage undesirable behavior (for example, conducting personal business during work hours). Seldom do organizations take steps to remedy underlying skills deficits among their employees. Challenging behavior persists or worsens, leading to chronic conflict among team members and an impoverished work environment.

A clear casualty of chronic conflict is performance. As I mentioned in this book’s introduction, I define challenging behavior broadly as either behavior we don’t like or the failure to behave in ways we do like. In the workplace, a subset of challenging behavior is “uncivil” behavior—nasty speech, body language, and other instances of rudeness. As one survey of eight hundred workers found, 48 percent “intentionally decreased their work effort” when hit by incivility, while a similar percentage spent less time at work and two-thirds reported that their performance suffered. Managers are hardly spared, as they’re the ones who must react when people behave rudely. One study found that managers and executives at large companies spent seven weeks out of the year “mending employee relationships and otherwise dealing with the aftermath of incivility.”15 As you can guess, managers seldom solve these problems through attempts at skill building.

Any attempt to calculate the economic costs of challenging behavior to businesses quickly produces some big numbers. The eight-hundred-worker survey mentioned above also found that the vast majority (78 percent) of respondents subject to rudeness at work “said their commitment to the organization declined,” almost half “intentionally decreased the time spent at work,” and over 10 percent “said they had left their job because of the uncivil treatment.”16 Extended across the economy, these numbers would suggest a potential loss of billions of dollars in the form of reduced productivity and employee attrition. In addition, we must factor in the billions of dollars lost when employees who experience bad behavior at work become unmotivated, disengaged, and stressed out, and the billions of dollars that arise from the health impact of stress due to incivility (workplace stress from all causes costs society up to $190 billion in health care costs each year).17

Even these big numbers likely understate the toll taken by challenging behavior. In their 2009 book about incivility in the workplace, Christine Pearson and Christine Porath write that


[i]ncivility’s true impact stretches far beyond that which is measurable in dollar terms. How to tally damage done by increased employee turnover, by the disruption of work teams, by the waning of helpful behavior, or by the tarnishing of corporate or individual reputations? . . . Far from a minor inconvenience to millions of American workers, workplace incivility is one of today’s most substantial economic drains on American business, a largely preventable ill that begs to be addressed.18

Remember that uncivil behavior is but a subset of the challenging behavior I’m describing. Colleagues can behave in ways that are overtly civil but still bother others and create conflict. They can become overwhelmed, forget about meetings, and struggle to meet deadlines, or they can fail to pick up on basic social cues and behave awkwardly (but not rudely or offensively). The true cost of challenging behavior is likely to surpass even that of incivility in the workplace. By failing to deal with challenging behavior and by instead helping to generate even more of it, conventional discipline makes this ill much worse than it needs to be.

Looking beyond the workplace, conventional discipline corrodes social relationships and civil discourse generally. Systems of rewards and punishments define our lives from earliest childhood through adulthood, shaping how we behave and think. We become accustomed to perceiving bad behavior as a product of willful action on the part of the offender. When a person offends, we want to punish and reassert our will. We’re not used to spending time trying to understand the offender’s point of view or the underlying causes of his behavior. Whether it’s parents with their children, teachers with students, managers with staff, society trying to deal with criminals, or governments trying to deal with rogue states, an attitude of might makes right takes hold. We possess the ability to reward and punish, and we go about blindly asserting our will. Bigger, more powerful people or groups dictate solutions, teaching less powerful ones “a lesson” so that their behavior will conform.

Might makes right is almost never the best way to resolve a conflict.



In any context, might makes right is almost never the best way to resolve a conflict. People and groups on the receiving end of rewards and punishments feel disenfranchised. With so many “lessons” being meted out, they feel unheard and powerless. While they may look like they are conforming, anger and resentment mount beneath the surface. The results play out in the roiling tensions and violence we read about every day: school shootings, disillusioned extremists committing terrorist acts, military conflict between nations that bear grievances toward one another. My point is not to deny or diminish the sympathy we should all feel toward the victims of challenging behavior. When a murderer strikes, when a country invades another country, when a bully acts out—it’s wrong, and it hurts. But by rushing to punish offending countries, groups, and individuals, we’re failing to listen to them, and to understand what led to their acting out. We’re not getting at the root causes of behavior we don’t like, which is what we will need to do in order to fix it, and we’re sowing the seeds for more bad behavior in the future. We’re eroding the social ties that underpin civil society at every level.

We’re also reinforcing for the next generation the notion that people behave badly because they want to, and that the way to resolve disputes is to impose our will. The next time your child acts out, think about your reaction. If you lash out and levy a punishment, you’re teaching your child that this is how people in positions of authority should behave when confronted with a problem. Your punishment probably won’t solve the behavior issue. What it will do is teach your children that when they grow up and get bigger and stronger they will finally have a chance to impose their will on others, unless they can find less powerful people in the meantime.





Enough of Plan A


My intention here is not to make people in positions of authority feel bad about themselves. It’s to convince them to try something different, something more effective. As my colleagues and I have found, people of any age are changeable by eschewing old, counterproductive systems of rewards and punishments and focusing instead on building their underlying skills. We’ve taken hardened seventeen-year-old kids who have been in and out of correctional facilities for years and dramatically improved their behavior by working on their skills. In entire prisons and psychiatric hospitals, we’ve dramatically reduced recidivism rates while doing away with the need for interventions like restraints or isolation rooms.

Parents, teachers, colleagues, police officers, business leaders, and political leaders have all done the best that they could with the disciplinary tools at their disposal. They’ve tried what we might call Plan A. It’s time to try something new, something radically different that has actually been shown to work. It’s time to try Plan B.





