CHAPTER FOUR


			 Plan B


Tell me and I forget, teach me and I may remember, involve me and I learn.

—BEN FRANKLIN





A student at one of the country’s toughest high schools has a run-in with a uniformed school security agent at the school. The girl has left school grounds but has returned, having realized that she left her subway pass in her locker. The security agent refuses to let her back in, because that’s against regulations (the school has this rule to make it harder for kids to bring prohibited items with them back into the school). The girl becomes enraged. “This is stupid. Let me the fuck in. I’m getting my pass.” The agent tells the girl not to speak to him that way. “Well, fuck you,” the girl says. “Who the fuck are you? You’re just a fucking fake cop.” The security agent doesn’t put up with this. He tells her she’d better stand down, because he isn’t letting her through. She tries to push past him anyway, and when he grabs hold of her, she throws an elbow at him. The officer calls for backup and arrests her for assault. She is led away in handcuffs.

Scenarios like this one unfold every day in school districts around the country. School resource officers must navigate extremely challenging situations with volatile students, and they receive little training in how to do so. As a result, students are arrested and channeled through the school-to-prison pipeline. Officers do the best they can, but let’s consider a different way we could have trained the officer to respond. First, he could have calmed the student by empathizing with her situation and reassuring her of his intention to help. Despite her harsh language, he might have said, “I get it. You just walked out and forgot your pass. Anyone could make that mistake. And now you need it to get to where you’re going. Don’t worry, I want to help. Okay? We can figure this out.” From here, the officer could have expressed his own set of concerns: “Here’s where I’m stuck. I’m not allowed to let people in. There are rules, and if I bend them for you, I could lose my job.” Perhaps the student would have gotten upset again, but the officer could have calmed her by saying something like: “I know we can figure this out. I really want to help you get your pass.” Afterward, he might have worked with the student to collaboratively investigate possible solutions. “What can we do to get you your bus pass without me breaking the rules. Any ideas?”

After a certain amount of back-and-forth, the officer and the student might have decided on a solution together. This might have been an innovative arrangement that satisfied both parties but required that neither compromise. For instance, a friend still inside the school could have retrieved the bus pass and brought it down to the girl. Or another agent could have retrieved it for her.

If the officer had responded in this way, both he and the girl would have addressed their respective concerns. The officer would have been doing his job, maintaining his authority and the integrity of the rules. The girl would have gotten her pass and would not have gotten arrested, avoiding the trauma and embarrassment that come with that and the increased chance of winding up in the correctional system. Instead, she would have built a relationship with the agent. And as we’ll see, she would have had a chance to practice skills, including frustration tolerance, flexibility, emotion regulation, and problem solving. All of these skills would have come into play in the short time she and the officer hashed out a suitable solution.

What’s the practical and more effective alternative to punishments and rewards? My colleagues and I teach an approach called Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS), which Dr. Ross Greene originated in the book The Explosive Child and which we outlined together in the book Treating Explosive Kids.1 CPS includes a philosophical component, or way of thinking, as well as a practical, problem-solving method we call Plan B.2 The latter is a structured conversation such as the one I alluded to above, a process for solving problems. It brings two people together on equal ground, allowing each to articulate his or her perspective, and allowing them to collaborate on a solution. Instead of parents, teachers, police officers, and others imposing their authority, they engage more compassionately with the people under their care, helping them to practice and develop skills by inviting them to help generate solutions. If Plan B sounds unrealistic, you should know that conversations like this are occurring across the world in all kinds of settings with the world’s most challenging people. I’ll provide a number of examples and present data about the dramatic results achieved using CPS in the chapters that follow.

THREE STRATEGIES FOR HANDLING PROBLEMS WITH OTHERS


“Plan A” = Impose your will

“Plan B” = Solve the problem collaboratively

“Plan C” = Drop your expectation for now3





Plan B Isn’t “Soft”


When they first learn about Plan B, parents, teachers, executives, police officers, and others schooled in conventional discipline routinely object that the approach is too soft. “You’re just letting people do what they want,” they’ll say. They’ll wag their fingers at me. “You can’t do that. These people will walk all over you. They’ll chew you up and spit you out!”

Plan B is not at all about relinquishing your expectations. In Plan B, you’re aggressively pursuing your expectations and concerns, but you’re doing it without imposing your solution. You’ve made a request: “Max, clean your room,” or “Alicia, I need those evaluations by the end of the day.” When a person doesn’t comply, you’re choosing to engage in a structured and collaborative dialogue. You’re sticking by your concern and asking the noncompliant person to work with you to craft a solution that addresses what both of you care about.

Many people wrongly equate firmly asking someone to do something with conventional discipline. They assume that posing a firm request is inconsistent with Plan B. I once had one of our trainers from Ottawa, Canada, down to visit my family in Boston, and we invited her and her family to come to the pool with us. My daughter was racing around the pool, and I barked at her: “Paige, stop running!” Our trainer looked at me with a smile and said, “Wow, Mr. Plan A!” I shook my head. “Actually, that’s not conventional discipline. That’s asking her to stop running around the pool. Now, if she doesn’t listen to me, then you will get to see whether I use Plan B.” You can be firm with people in initially communicating your expectations. Sometimes you need to be firm. That’s consistent with Plan B. What happens after you’ve articulated your expectations and they are not met is the decisive point. Do you attempt to impose your will, threatening a reward or punishment? Or do you air out your views and come together to collaborate on a solution?

In correctional facilities, staff will often ask me: “If I do Plan B, how will they learn to take responsibility for their actions?” I respond by noting that Plan B hardly absolves the challenging person of responsibility for their actions. On the contrary: You’re increasing their level of responsibility. There is nothing easy about working with another person to generate a mutually satisfactory solution. Plan B is hard work, and the offender is on the hook to do that work. From this perspective, conventional rewards and punishments are the softer option. By dictating a solution, you’re absolving the challenging person of helping to craft a solution. All the offender has to do with conventional discipline is passively receive a set of consequences. There’s no more powerful way to hold someone accountable than to say, “You have to participate in a process to solve a problem that you’ve caused so that it doesn’t happen again.”





Applying Plan B


As I’ve suggested, Plan B yields long-term solutions for challenging behavior—it helps people build their underlying thinking skills in the process of solving problems collaboratively in the moment. Before examining how this is true, let’s first take a closer look at Plan B and how we might best apply it. In this chapter’s opening scenario, the safety officer embraced a Plan A response, attempting to impose his solution. That’s what most individuals and institutions resort to in conflict situations. Plan A is a lesson in might makes right. It creates extrinsic motivation for good behavior but fails to instill intrinsic motivation—the drive to do well that arises when people feel independent, empowered, and passionate about what they’re doing, and connected with others. When applied to people with skill struggles, Plan A also throws emotional fuel on the fire, often escalating challenging behavior.

If the school safety officer had decided to ignore the girl’s disrespectful language and let her violate the rules, he might have been practicing Plan C. In Plan C, a person decides to withdraw a demand or expectation for the time being. Plan C is not the same as giving in. It is a strategic choice. A person choosing Plan C prioritizes which problems to address, realizing that you can’t deal with every problem all at once. By saving some problems or unmet expectations for later while addressing higher-priority problems now, we can reduce some challenging behaviors. In our real-life scenario, the security officer would remain in charge when using Plan C, because he is the one deciding what to address and what to drop for now. He might simply have decided this was not the best time to try to solve that problem, and that letting the student reenter the school was worth the risks.

The heart of Collaborative Problem Solving is Plan B, a conversation through which people in conflict work together to solve problems in mutually satisfactory and practical ways. Plan B is comprised of three basic steps:


Step 1: Empathize—clarify their concerns.



				 Step 2: Share your own concerns.



				 Step 3: Invite the other person to brainstorm solutions with you, so that you can arrive at one that is both practical and mutually satisfactory.





In the second version of our scenario, the safety officer first empathizes with the girl by affirming that he understands her point of view. He gets what she’s going through and why she’s upset. But he hardly stops there. Once he has calmed her by empathizing and reassuring her that he doesn’t want to impose his solution, he expresses what he cares about: “I’m not allowed to let people in. There are rules, and if I bend them for you, I could lose my job.” With both sets of concerns clearly expressed, he goes on to work with the student to collaboratively investigate possible solutions. “What can we do to get you your bus pass without me breaking the rules? Any ideas?” After some discussion and collaboration, the two arrive at a solution, quite possibly one neither had originally considered.

The point of Collaborative Problem Solving is not to use Plan B exclusively in moments of conflict. Rather, it’s to realize that when you have a problem with someone—when someone is not meeting an expectation of yours or is misbehaving in your eyes—you have three options from which to choose. You don’t have to go straight to imposing your authority. At times, of course, you might want or need to impose your authority. In those cases, you choose Plan A. This approach allows you to attempt to impose your solution, but it doesn’t reduce challenging behavior, build the underlying skills, or create or restore a helping relationship.

At other times, when you just want to maintain some calm, it might make sense to go with Plan C and proactively accept their solution. Plan C will reduce challenging behavior for now, but, again, you aren’t building any underlying skills or helping to forge a strong helping relationship. Also, you aren’t addressing your own concerns in the situation at hand.

If you want to arrive at durable solutions and help another person build the skills they need to meet your expectations in the future, Plan B is the only way to go. Also, if you want to build a helpful relationship with another person, then, again, go with Plan B.

You can use Plan B to de-escalate a crisis in the heat of the moment, as in the school safety example above. Dr. Greene first referred to that as “Emergency Plan B.”4 But the far more preferable approach is to deploy what he called “Proactive Plan B” strategically to prevent ongoing or predictable problems you have with someone.5 In the latter case, you’ll first want to think about which problems you want to pursue, and in what order. It helps to start modestly, addressing expectations of yours in areas that the other person cares about and where you’re able to show more flexibility. Once you’ve put the process on a firm footing, you can proceed to more difficult problems (i.e., problems that happen more frequently and where you don’t have much room to bend your expectations).

			 				 					 					 					 					 				 				 					 						 GOALS ACHIEVED BY THE THREE PLANS



				 				 					 						 GOALS

						 						 PLAN A

						 						 PLAN C

						 						 PLAN B



					 						 Try to get your expectation met

						 						 ✓

						 						 X

						 						 ✓



					 						 Reduce challenging behavior

						 						 X

						 						 ✓

						 						 ✓



					 						 Build skills, confidence

						 						 X

						 						 X

						 						 ✓



					 						 Solve problems

						 						 X

						 						 X

						 						 ✓



					 						 Build relationships

						 						 X

						 						 X

						 						 ✓



				 			 It’s important to be realistic about when you can use Plan B and when you may need to revert back to attempting to impose authority (Plan A). When immediate safety is at issue and a situation risks getting out of hand, you might need to use Plan A. One juvenile detention guard we worked with, a naysayer who became a true believer in Plan B, had a saying: “If the kid’s still talking, I’m still doing B.” He meant that a kid could pick up a metal chair, hold it over his head, and look like he’s about to smash it over your head, but if he was still talking, this guard would not radio for help and try to take him down. He would try to calm the child using words, reassuring him that he was not trying to impose his will.

I find that remarkable, but honestly, I don’t know if I would do the same. Just because a kid or an adult is still talking doesn’t mean I’m not concerned enough to go back to Plan A. In these situations, there’s no shame in using Plan A, and sometimes a person will even thank you later for doing so. You’ll need to save Plan B for another day, when cooler heads have returned.





Understand a Problem in Order to Solve It


Plan B seems simple—only three steps. But there are some important nuances. When you’re using Plan B and starting a conversation with someone, follow the steps in their exact order. Albert Einstein once remarked that “the formulation of the problem is often more essential than its solution.” That’s true in science, and it’s true when solving problems in everyday life. Don’t rush to the third step—brainstorming a solution. Take time to formulate the problem by first completing the initial two steps well. Dr. Greene reminds us to define a problem “simply as two concerns that have yet to be reconciled.”6 So to formulate a problem well you need to spend time unpacking those two sets of concerns.

If you approach someone else to try to solve a problem, the other person will often assume that what you really want is to have him comply with your wishes. Such assumptions arise most frequently when a power differential exists in a relationship and you, as the more powerful person, are initiating the conversation. If you were to start right in by expressing your concern, you would seem to be confirming this assumption. The conversation would seem to the other person like Plan A. As a result, the person would likely become defensive or, as often is the case when a power differential exists, shut down. In professional language, we call the latter dissociative compliance: checking out and saying whatever you think the person holding the power wants to hear.

Empathy means “to understand.”



By first empathizing and clarifying the other person’s concerns, you let him know that the conversation isn’t like others he might have experienced—that you’re working very hard to understand his concerns so as to solve the problem at hand. Just listening to a person and eliciting his thoughts has a calming effect, opening the way for further progress. Many people think that empathy is something you express to someone. In truth, empathy means “to understand.” To gain that understanding, you must ask questions, reflect what you hear, take educated guesses, be patient, and try to peek behind someone’s proposed solutions to glimpse their underlying concerns. Once you’ve clarified the other person’s concerns, then, and only then, should you express your concerns. As this is a collaborative process, it’s the combination of concerns that properly frames the problem or issue at hand. From there, you can both proceed to the third step, brainstorming a solution.

The order of steps in Plan B corresponds to what neuroscience has revealed about brain functioning. The brain processes information sequentially, from the bottom up. You need to address more primitive responses first before proceeding to engage the more rational parts of the brain. Otherwise, you’ll fail. The empathy step first operates at the level of the brain stem, the most primal part of the brain, which helps people regulate their emotions. The midbrain, where the limbic system is located and which helps people relate to others, is engaged when an individual experiences another person’s empathy. It’s also engaged during the second step, when an individual is hearing the other person’s perspective. The last step, collaborating to arrive at a solution, engages the prefrontal cortex, the rational part of the brain. The sequence goes like this: regulate, relate, reason. You can’t ask the human brain to perform those steps out of order—you can’t access the cortex without first going through the brain stem and the midbrain.7 If you follow Plan B as I’ve outlined, you won’t make that mistake.8



Think of Plan B as akin to the task of painting a room. You might feel impatient to jump to the end of the process and start putting paint on the wall. But if you don’t slow down and put the prep work in, the finished product won’t turn out well. It’s not fun to move out the furniture, lay down the drop cloth, tape the edges, sand the walls, and so on, but this prep work makes the actual painting go smoothly later on. With Plan B, creating solutions to problems together with another person is the easy part if you first put in the hard work of the initial two ingredients. Most of your time, in fact, will be spent in Steps 1 and 2. We may want to rush to solutions, possibly because we want to help or are pressed for time. It’s important to hold back on potential solutions until you have first expressed and understood each other’s concerns.





Step 1: Empathize


Of the three steps, empathy can prove especially difficult. Most struggle with this complicated skill, or we may simply fail to apply our skill fully in the heat of the moment because our own cortex is closed for business. It’s not so easy to empathize with a kid who shouts “fuck you” at you at the top of his lungs, or who has just gone on a rampage and kicked a hole in your wall. It’s also hard to empathize with people who are reluctant to communicate their feelings because they fear Plan A, or who are unable to do so because of their skill struggles.

Your own status as an authority figure can also handicap you. In many contexts, authority figures are trained to speak or behave in ways that affirm their importance and power. Think of how judges sit on podiums, higher up than everyone else, wearing formal black robes. Or think of the stern, authoritarian tones that many police officers are trained to adopt. If you’re trying to apply Plan A, the trappings of power help. If you’re trying to encourage someone to express her concerns so that you can understand them, they’re toxic. Power differentials are inherently dysregulating, and they are misleading. We think they will induce compliance. In truth, they induce what I described earlier as dissociative, or fake, compliance.

Over time, in the course of engaging in countless Plan B conversations and reviewing hundreds recorded by others in all kinds of settings, I’ve discovered that doing four things—and only four things—during the empathy step best enables us to learn about people’s concerns so that we can empathize with them, even if we’re in positions of power. First, ask lots of clarifying questions. Second, if your questions don’t get you anywhere, hazard some guesses at what might be bothering the other person. Third, practice reflective listening (i.e., repeat back what the person says in your own words in order to clarify it—don’t just spit it back verbatim). Fourth, reassure the other person that you’re just trying to understand her point of view and not trying to impose your will.

The first two strategies help to elicit information. The second two calm the other person and make it easier to access information that might be hard to obtain if he is upset or suspicious of your motives. To perform the empathy step well, toggle back and forth between these four tools, taking care to listen closely. We call this active listening, which means listening to understand rather than to respond.

Let’s say you’re a teacher and your class is supposed to be doing silent, independent work. One girl is talking and disrupting other students. You might ask, “What’s going on? Why aren’t you doing your work?”

“Because it’s stupid. I hate it,” she might say.

You might feel tempted to cut the conversation short or explain why the work isn’t stupid. The girl just doesn’t want to talk, and further questioning would seem fruitless. Or, in an attempt to show empathy, you might say, “Well, you might think it’s stupid. I can understand that. But here’s why it’s important.” Does that sound like empathy? It isn’t. In this case, you have stopped listening and are imposing your point of view, albeit gently. We call this “drive-by empathy.” Rather than taking time to probe and hear someone out, you take a casual turn at empathy before quickly moving on and returning to the standard authority figure–subject relationship.

Don’t shortchange the empathy step. Instead, use the four tools to slow down and unpack the other person’s concerns. When the girl says, “I hate it,” you can respond by taking her to the hallway, so that the other students aren’t distracted from their work, and saying, “All right, I hear you. You say you hate it. What do you hate about it?” That’s reflective listening, followed by a clarifying question. Stay with the girl, even if her attitude bothers you. Try to tease out her perspective. Just doing that signals that you take her seriously and that you care. It calms her, and once she’s calm, the more rational parts of her brain can engage.

Suppose she’s still intransigent or belligerent. She might say, “I’m not talking to you. I can do what I want.” What do you do then? She’s shutting down with this comment, so we’re going to have to go back to one of our calming tools: reassurance. “You know,” you might say, “you’re not in trouble. That’s not what this is about. I bet there’s a good reason why you’re not sitting down and doing your work. I just want to understand what that reason is.” Such reassurance again helps to regulate the person’s emotions at the level of the brain stem, and it may be especially necessary if you haven’t practiced Plan B with this girl before (it takes time to build trust and rapport). When the girl seems calmer, you might pose a question again, maybe even taking an educated guess: “I notice that sometimes you get your independent work done pretty quickly, and then you’re stuck sitting there waiting for everyone else to finish. Do you suppose that maybe when you’re finished you have a hard time sitting still, and so instead of starting it in the first place, you just decide not to do it?”

The empathy step is really just about being a good detective. It’s about probing, investigating, all the while calming and reassuring the other person. And it’s about starting the conversation in a neutral way that will engage the other person, so that you can obtain useful information. Of course, the worst time to solve a predictable problem is right when it is happening yet again. You’ll have more luck obtaining information when the moment of conflict has passed.

I once had a chance to train all the juvenile and family court judges in New York City. As I taught them Plan B, emphasizing the need to find a neutral way of starting the conversation, one of the tough, skeptical judges interrupted. “Wait a minute. Let me get this straight. You want me from the bench in my courtroom to say something like, ‘Hey, I’ve noticed that the last time you were here, I gave you a choice between jail and community service, and it seems like you picked community service, and yet you didn’t show up. What’s up with that?’” All the other judges laughed.

“Actually,” I said, “that’s exactly what I want you to ask, although if you can do it without the sarcasm, you might actually get some useful information.” I was, I admit, a little cranky.

As I went on to explain, it was worth trying to get the defendant in this situation to open up, because the information he might yield would prove critical. The defendant had a choice between jail and community service, and he initially picked the latter, as would anyone in his right mind. However, because the defendant didn’t show up for his service, he is headed to jail. If we don’t come to understand why, we’ll never help the defendant solve the problem in a better way. The defendant’s choice not to show up was exceedingly poor, but there were probably important concerns (like transportation issues) and skill struggles (such as poor planning) that led to it. If we can address those concerns and build skills without compromising our own expectations, we’ll arrive at solutions that are better for everyone.

The same holds true for the challenging behavior you’re seeing from your kids, partner, colleagues, bosses—anyone. Yes, the behavior is unacceptable, but the person who is misbehaving likely has important concerns and skill struggles that cause her to act the way she does. We are all doing the best we can with the skills we have. If she isn’t doing well, we need to slow down, investigate, and identify the underlying concerns. Be curious, and prepare yourself for surprises.

FOUR USEFUL EMPATHY TOOLS


1. Ask clarifying questions.

2. Take guesses about what might be bothering the other person.

3. Practice reflective listening.

4. Reassure the other person that you’re not trying to impose your will.





Step 2: Share Your Concerns


At the end of the first step of Plan B, the empathy step, the other person in the conversation should feel calmer and understood. Then, and only then, can you share your own concerns. If you’re having a Plan B conversation proactively about a recurring problem, you might take time before the conversation to think and clarify your concerns and even to plan what you’re going to say. If you’re applying Plan B on the fly or in a crisis situation, make sure you articulate your concerns and don’t just rush into announcing your proposed solution. Tell the other person what worries you. Maybe you’re concerned about the person’s health, safety, learning, or emotional well-being. Maybe it’s the impact of that person’s behavior on someone else. Whatever the case, clue in the other person. Give him the opportunity to understand your perspective. And be as specific as possible.

The wording you use matters. Don’t follow up the empathy step by saying, “I hear you, but . . .” This only reinforces the notion that the concern you’re about to state is more important than the other person’s. For Plan B to work, your perspectives have to take on equal standing. Say instead, “I understand what you’re saying. You are saying [repeat what the other person has said]. Here’s what I’m worried about. Here is what is on my mind.” It’s not “I hear you, but . . .” Rather, it’s “I hear you and . . .”

If stating your perspective causes the other person to become more emotional or, conversely, to shut down, don’t worry. This is normal, and it stems from the other person’s fear that your statement of your concern has just diminished the importance of her concern. Go back to the empathy step and reassure the other person that you haven’t forgotten her concern. Reregulate her before moving up the brain again. If it seems like the other person doesn’t share your concern, again, don’t worry—she doesn’t have to. She just has to take your concern into consideration.





Step 3: Brainstorm Solutions


When you’ve expressed your perspective and the other person is still reasonably calm, you’ve completed the second step. At this point, you have two sets of concerns. Not two sets of solutions—two sets of concerns, two points of view. Now you can move to the third and final step: working together to generate a mutually satisfactory solution. It is helpful to start the brainstorming by recapping both sets of concerns so that it’s clear what you’re trying to do. Then bite your tongue and ask the other person in the conversation to generate the first solution or set of solutions. You might say, “I bet there is something we can think of so that your concern and mine are both addressed.” The police officer in the scenario above might prompt the student by saying, “I’ll bet there’s a way that you can get your bus pass so you can get to where you want to go, and, at the same time, I don’t have to break any rules. Do you have any ideas?” Giving the other person the first chance to brainstorm is crucial, because it helps her have a sense of ownership over both the process and the eventual solution. Also, it gives her a chance to build her problem-solving skills.

It may be that the other person doesn’t offer any ideas. In that case, you can reassure her, saying, “It’s all right. Don’t worry. If you don’t have any ideas, I bet we can come up with some. Let me think for a second and see if I have an idea.” But suppose the person does offer an idea, and it’s a bad one. What then? Regardless of the quality of the other person’s idea, take it seriously. Respond by saying something like “That’s one idea. Let’s think about it together.” Then perform an analysis of it together, evaluating whether it works for each party, and also whether it’s realistic and feasible. If you went with the proposed solution, would you create new problems?

If the girl seeking the bus pass says, “Let me go in there and get my stupid bus pass! This whole thing is stupid,” you can say, “That’s one idea, you getting the pass. Let’s think about that. If you get the pass, that works for you. Then I’m letting you back in, and whether you think that’s a stupid rule or not, you’ve broken the rule. It’s my job to obey the rules, so that doesn’t work so well for me. Stick with me, I think we can figure this out so that it works for both of us. There must be something we can come up with that lets you get your bus pass and we aren’t breaking any rules. Any ideas?” By taking time to spell out the logic, you’re modeling the use of all kinds of skills, such as empathizing, perspective taking, flexible thinking, impulse control, and emotion regulation.

Proceeding like this, you and the other person can suggest constructive solutions and analyze them together. In the case of the girl seeking the bus pass, either the police officer or the girl might suggest ideas like “I wonder if we can get a friend of yours to go get it,” or “I wonder if one of the other officers could go get it,” or “I wonder if we can have an officer accompany you.” The point is to arrive at a workable solution that addresses both concerns. More than that, it’s to engage in a process of collaborative problem solving. The process is how the underlying skills get built—executive functioning skills such as generating multiple solutions to a problem and forecasting (testing out ideas before acting upon them), communication skills, emotion regulation skills, and the list goes on. The process itself is where the magic is.

The process itself is where the magic is.



Throughout the brainstorming step, stay positive and evoke your belief that together you will come up with a great solution acceptable to both parties. Affirm that you’re as invested in ensuring that the other person’s concerns get addressed as you are in seeing your own concerns addressed. Also, work with whatever ideas the other person puts forward. Look for ways to combine, expand, modify, and build on ideas. When you’ve arrived at a mutually satisfactory and practical solution, as well as a follow-up plan for enacting it, then you’re done—you’ve completed Plan B.





Skill Building with Plan B


You might wonder: Does CPS really build underlying problem-solving skills? In fact, it does. Our research team at Massachusetts General Hospital and our collaborators have amassed empirical, quantitative evidence showing that CPS helps kids build underlying skills. In one study, we assessed the skills development of hundreds of kids who received CPS as part of their day treatment at Crossroads Children’s Center in Ottawa, Canada. We compared these kids to thousands of other kids in the Canadian province of Ontario who received similar services but not CPS. The kids who had engaged in CPS with adults showed greater improvements in their symptoms and functioning. Further analysis showed that improvement in underlying self-regulation (impulse control) and cognitive flexibility skills were associated with these clinical improvements.9 In addition, we found that CPS changed the way adults thought about the kids, which affected how they interacted with them. This, too, helped account for the clinical improvements the kids experienced.

It may seem strange to think that having a Plan B conversation is better for skill building than performing tasks in a therapist’s office, in a skills group, or on a smartphone app. Yet it absolutely is. Removing people from everyday life to train them in skills they have to use in everyday life doesn’t work. A prime example is anger management classes. These classes convene people with emotional regulation issues, teaching them what they should do when they are angry—as if they don’t already know these things. The challenge isn’t knowing what to do. It’s accessing the rational part of the brain in the heat of the moment so that you can apply what you know. The way to overcome anger management problems is to help a person practice controlling his emotions in the moment. It’s hanging in there with that person, tamping down his emotional response enough so that he can start to think rationally. And it’s doing that repetitively, day after day, so that new pathways in the brain can form.

Neuroscientists explain the way skills get built by referring to the specificity principle of neuroplasticity. To change a neural network, you have to activate that actual neural network.10 But artificial circumstances don’t recruit the actual neural networks involved in applying specific skills. You need real life for that. Plan B allows people to practice skills in the very environments in which they will need to apply them. And, critically, it does so in those small and necessary doses of what neurobiologists call good stress. You can’t change a person’s stress response without activating their stress response. The dilemma is how to stress the brain safely, without causing new trauma. Healthy stress is moderate, predictable, and controlled—exactly what Plan B affords. Applying Plan B repetitively over the course of the day to address specific conflict situations, authority figures or caregivers can deliver small doses of stress, gradually carving new pathways in people’s brains.

Plan B conveys other skill-building benefits as well. When engaged in a Plan B conversation, people don’t build just one skill at a time. As we saw in the above scenario, they build many skills at once. It is rare that we need to deploy a single skill in isolation. Rather, we have to apply a bunch of skills together simultaneously in real life. Further, Plan B automatically builds precisely the skills that need the most work. If a person possesses strong language and communication skills, she’ll have no problem articulating her own concerns. That part of the Plan B conversation will proceed smoothly. When you get to the second part of the conversation and it’s time for this person to listen to and appreciate your concerns, she might have more trouble, perhaps because perspective taking and empathizing isn’t her strength. The conversation will naturally get bogged down here, leading both of you to slow down and work harder to practice this skill. Plan B, in other words, provides a natural and indirect assessment of a person’s skills. Instead of the usual one-size-fits-all training, working through problems collaboratively offers an approach tailored to the specific needs of each participant.

When I present Plan B to people, they often wonder what happens if the authority figures (parents, teachers, managers, therapists, police officers, and so on) engaging in the Plan B conversation lack skills themselves. Does that mess everything up? The bad news is that many of us authority figures do indeed have our own skill struggles. The good news is that authority figures also practice their skills during Plan B. If you tend to get angry quickly, your emotional regulation skills might need some work. Or perhaps you’re less adept at social thinking than you think—you’re not understanding how you are coming across or impacting others as well as you might. Plan B is collaborative in the deepest sense. Not only are the participants collaborating on coming up with solutions to specific problems; they’re also collaborating to improve the thinking skills they need to resolve conflicts.

The latest research is turning up empirical evidence that parents using Plan B with their kids develop empathy skills over time. Researchers followed forty-two families of small children (age three to twelve) who had undergone a twelve-week CPS program in their homes. Each week, a caseworker trained in CPS went to each family’s home two to three times, observing interactions between family members, teaching Plan B, and offering advice about how to apply the approach. Before and after the treatment window, caseworkers assessed how well the children behaved, how well the children used executive functioning skills, and how stressed parents were. Parents also filled out questionnaires before and after treatment that allowed researchers to assess their empathy levels as well as other variables related to CPS. Results suggested that behavioral difficulties among children declined significantly, in part because children developed better executive functioning skills. But there was also a significant improvement in how competent parents were at understanding other people’s perspectives. Plan B had built their skills, not merely their children’s.11

People tend to learn better in the context of relationships.



Plan B affords still another benefit: It teaches skills in a relational context. You can’t change a relational pattern unless you are engaged in a relational interaction. In addition, as neuroscience teaches us, people tend to learn better in the context of relationships. In fact, all healthy human development occurs in the relational context of interactions with others. Remove that context (through parental neglect, for instance) and you arrest brain development. To take a less severe example, if you ask school-age kids which classes they like, you usually find that the answer has more to do with the teacher and his teaching style than with the class’s actual content. Really good teachers forge relationships with students while engaging with them in hands-on activities, and those relationships help the content establish itself in the brain. With Plan B, people are practicing skills experientially via a conversation that serves as a vehicle for relationship building. Plan A, as we’ve seen, causes relationships to break down. As people solve problems together via Plan B, they build trust and understanding. The skills become even more quickly and firmly embedded.

If you want to learn how to play a Bach invention on the piano, the way to learn the complex skills required isn’t to sit in a classroom and have someone lecture to you. Nor is it to do exercises that simulate a Bach invention. The way to learn is to actually try to play the piece in the presence of a piano teacher. You stumble over weak areas, and the teacher gives you the feedback you need in the moment. You practice again and again, receiving more correction. Over time, you develop a relationship with the teacher. New pathways form in your brain. You develop the skills you need. And you get better at playing the piece.

“Tell me and I forget,” Ben Franklin once said, “teach me and I may remember, involve me and I learn.” Such involvement is precisely what conventional discipline precludes, and what Plan B provides. This is not to say that Plan B builds skills or repairs relationships instantaneously. It takes time and practice. Some skills develop more easily than others, depending on how complex the skill is and how much of a deficit existed in the first place. When we work with people who have a hard time articulating their concerns, we can teach them basic language skills over the course of a few weeks of repetitive practice. Afterward, a person who used to act out will be able to say something like “I need a break,” or “I can’t talk about that right now.” A much more difficult skill to build is empathy—the ability to consider someone else’s perspective. That takes months, sometimes years, of hard work, with lots and lots of repetition. But if you put in the work, you will see results.

As I’ve seen in my clinical practice, we can even build skills among patients who struggle so much that they can’t engage productively in Plan B conversations in the beginning. I’ve worked with countless patients on the autism spectrum, for instance, who struggle with extreme inflexibility. When you conduct the brainstorming step of Plan B with them, they fail to generate any ideas for solving the problem at hand, no matter how or how often you ask them. In these cases, we scaffold the process to help build the skill. Almost always, we see progress eventually.

Sometimes, for instance, we help inflexible patients build skills by giving them an easy framework they can use to solve problems. We tell them that there are three basic approaches to solving problems—compromising, asking for help, and trying something in a different way.12 We help them to deploy this framework in real-life situations as they arise to spur creative thinking about more specific solutions.

A girl I worked with who is on the autism spectrum—I’ll call her Shawna—represented these three approaches as images. When we needed to solve a problem together and had no ideas, she used these images as a visual prompt. She represented asking for help as a pail because that approach worked in so many situations—it was a big container into which she could throw many problems. Compromise was an Easter egg basket because “when people compromise, everybody ends up happy. That’s nice. That’s why there’s nice flowery things in it.” She represented trying something in a different way as a trash can because she “hated that one.” Because she had trouble with flexible thinking, this option was especially difficult for her.

In therapy sessions, I’d walk Shawna through these three options as we tried to solve problems together using Plan B. When she couldn’t come up with ideas, I’d point to the picture and say, “Let’s walk through these options. Could we ask for help? If we did, whom would we ask? How would we go about doing that?” Then we’d explore the compromise option. “What would a compromise look like? Would it work?” If a compromise didn’t seem feasible, we’d explore how she might go about solving the problem in a different way. We practiced this framework together so much that she came to internalize it, using it on her own to solve problems in her life. Plan B conversations with her have become easier, allowing for even more skill building going forward.

Other techniques exist to help remediate other varieties of inflexible thinking in individuals with severe deficiencies. When performing Plan B with someone who possesses a deeply entrenched, black-and-white view of the world, I often teach flexibility by purposely challenging, or “graying up,” her conceptual categories. I’ll do it by borrowing a technique from Aaron Beck, the father of cognitive therapy, and challenging her to look at the data objectively together.

Let’s say a child tells me that she hates everyone at school. “You hate everyone?” I’ll respond.

“Yes, I do.”

“Wow, so you hate everyone. What do you mean by ‘hate’?”

“They’re stupid and they’re useless. They’re so annoying.”

“Well,” I’ll suggest, “I wonder whether maybe it’s possible that even one person might occasionally sometimes be somewhat tolerable. I don’t know. What do you think?”

After I gently push an inflexible child in this way, I ask her to think about how we could determine where the truth lies, remaining open-minded to the possibility that her version of the truth might be substantiated. In most cases, however, she will eventually concede that, yes, there is at least one person who might be somewhat tolerable, or even more than one. Little by little, through conversations like this, even extremely inflexible thinkers become a bit more flexible. They learn to see the world in shades of gray rather than in black and white. Plan B conversations become easier, leading to even more skill building in the future.

For anybody struggling with challenging behavior, one of the best things about Plan B as a form of skills training is that you don’t have to point out that the person lacks a skill in order to help him develop it. The person doesn’t have to agree or admit that he’s weak in a certain area, nor does he have to be willing to work on it. All he has to be willing to do is solve a problem collaboratively in a way that works out for him, too. The skills training is smuggled in through the back door—for all parties involved.





Remember the Good Inside


Back in the early 2000s, when we were still in the early stages of developing CPS, I treated a young man I’ll call Brendon. A smart guy from a middle-class, highly educated family, Brendon suffered from a rare skin disease that caused him to bruise easily. If he tripped and fell, he would bruise and start to bleed, requiring skin grafts and other treatments. All of this was hard on him, damaging his self-esteem. He started hanging out with the wrong crowd at school, smoking pot, and slacking on his homework. His parents responded with Plan A, removing all of his privileges, grounding him, and threatening to send him to a wilderness program, by force if need be.

I worked hard to help his parents try to maintain an empathic stance and believe that Brendon was doing the best he could and lacked skill, not will. During our sessions, I taught Brendon and his family how to do Plan B. Meanwhile, I lobbied his parents to back away from Plan A and give Plan B a chance to work. I feared that forcing Brendon into a therapeutic wilderness program to scare him straight would traumatize him, without benefiting him very much. Brendon also assured me that he wasn’t smoking marijuana anymore. He claimed that his parents didn’t understand him and were wrongly accusing him.

At one point in the midst of all this tension and drama, I brought Brendon into my office for a private conversation. I told him that I believed in him. “If you’re telling me the truth,” I said, “I want to help you. I want to advocate for you.”

“I promise, man,” he said. “I’m telling you the truth. I’m not smoking anymore.” At this very moment, he shifted around in his chair, and what should fall out of his pocket but a big bag of marijuana. I couldn’t believe it. And, I will admit, I was pissed. Brendon had been lying to my face for weeks. I had been trying to help him, taking his side, and all along he had been disrespecting me.

Not long afterward, his mother came into my office by herself, utterly bereft and not knowing what to do about her son. “I don’t want to send him away,” she said, weeping, “but I have no other options. When I look back at what a sweet kid he used to be, I can’t believe he turned out so bad.” She showed me a picture she found of her son when he was just three or four. It was a grainy photograph of him lying across the backseat of a car, sound asleep. He looked angelic there, the sweetest little kid. “See,” she said, “he didn’t used to be such an awful kid. He’s just different now. He’s not the same person. There’s no sweetness there anymore. And it’s our fault. We’re good people, with good values, but we must have done something wrong.”

I took a long look at the picture and became overwhelmed with emotion. My own kids were small at the time, my oldest boy about the same age as her son was in the picture. Brendon had once been like my son—full of hope, full of possibility, loving, caring, sweet, adorable. How awful and tragic that he no longer was like this. I told myself that we just had to find the good in Brendon. Because inside that tough, scary young man, there still was this wonderful little kid. I knew it. And so I kept working with Brendon, reenergized to help. We figured out that Brendon had a lot of difficulty managing anxiety and disappointment and predicting the consequences of his actions, and we worked on building those skills.

I think of this moment often when I’m teaching Plan B and working with challenging kids. It’s hard engaging with people whose behavior upsets, frustrates, or even repulses us. It’s hard to draw close to them, to hear them out, and to partner with them in solving a problem when really what we want to do is punish them. Often, they are telling us that they don’t want to partner with us—in fact, they are screaming this at us, with a few expletives thrown in. Still, if we can remember the innocent child inside, engaging with them becomes a little easier. On so many occasions when I’ve become frustrated with Plan B, I think of Brendon and that picture. I remember the guiding philosophy of skill, not will, and I feel inspired to stay strong and keep working at it.

I can’t say for sure whether Plan B made a difference for Brendon. I do know that he graduated from high school, went on to college, and did well. Although life was not always smooth for him, he managed to pull himself together. Plan B must have played a role, because for many years, long after I had stopped seeing Brendon, his mother dropped by my office around Thanksgiving and presented me with a chocolate pecan pie she had baked. I hadn’t given her a magic bullet with CPS, but I had given her a viable alternative to the conventional way we try to handle challenging behavior. I had shown her how to build up her son’s skills and her own at the same time, not by punishing him or sending him away, but by drawing closer and inviting him in on an equal footing to solve problems. I showed her something to do other than Plan A, which hadn’t solved the problems and threatened to ruin their relationship as well. I had given her an approach that really does get meaningful results—one situation, one skill, one kid at a time. In the next chapter we’ll examine those results, exploring what happens when parents of even the toughest kids apply CPS in their homes.





