CHAPTER FIVE


			 Parenting 2.0





It was week two of summer vacation, and Vicki felt guilty—she was already looking forward to the end of the month, when her ten-year-old daughter, Becca, would go off to camp. Becca wasn’t having such a great time, either. For the past several days, she had moped around the house complaining that she was bored and had run out of things to do. She didn’t have many friends around, and she’d already blown through several books from the library.

On this day, Becca had made her way onto the computer, even though her parents had revoked this privilege as punishment for a spat of misbehavior. As Becca reasoned, her punishment wasn’t much of a problem. Her parents had said she was forbidden from playing games on the computer—her typical online pastime. Today she had something different in mind. Having tired of an online game in which kids could create and care for virtual pets, she’d found a site for more advanced (and presumably much older) users that practically seemed to require users to be computer programmers. This wasn’t play, Becca thought. This was something serious. She was designing a game.

When Vicki came upstairs after doing the laundry, this subtlety was lost on her. She barked at Becca and sent her to her room for not complying with the punishment. “But this isn’t a game!” Becca said, shrieking. “I’m creating something!”

“Save the lawyer routine, Becca,” Vicki said, beyond frustrated with her daughter’s attempts to litigate her way around every rule she set.

Becca stomped to her room and threw herself on her bed. “You’re the meanest person ever. How am I going to finish the game I’m designing?”

After an hour of seething, Becca left her room, went to the den, and idly flipped on the TV. Her mom hadn’t said anything about television. She accidentally hit a menu button and, continuing down this path she’d stumbled on, came to a screen called “Parental Controls.” That’s exactly what I need, she thought. How would they like to be the ones controlled all the time? She followed the prompts until she was asked to enter a code to block access to the TV. She went ahead and entered one. Now her parents would need her permission to do something for a change.

Later that night, Vicki discovered that the TV was locked. “Becca!” she wailed. “What have you done this time? Did you do something to lock the TV?”

After ten minutes of fighting, Vicki finally got her daughter to unlock the TV. “God, help me,” she said to herself. “I wonder how some parents manage to enjoy their kids during the summer.”

Challenging behavior is a tremendous issue for parents and kids—it’s the number-one reason pediatricians refer children for mental health services. Fortunately, CPS has proven effective at reducing challenging behavior. As many parents tell us, it’s the only thing that works after traditional approaches have failed. Yet CPS isn’t just for challenging kids. The mentality of skill, not will helps all parents understand their kids in a new way, easing conflict and paving the way for stronger relationships. As parents apply CPS to everyday situations, they avoid the one-size-fits-all thinking of most parenting wisdom, engaging with their children in customized ways to build skills. If their kids have good enough skills to be compliant when needed, they help them build more sophisticated problem-solving skills such as empathy, perspective taking, flexibility, and creativity, preparing them for success as adults. The process also ignites deeper forms of motivation, so that their kids feel driven to find and follow their own passions. Ultimately, CPS can help us raise a generation of kids who disavow the might makes right perspective embedded in traditional parenting models, and who instead try to resolve disputes more compassionately and collaboratively with others.





A Proven Method


As I related at the beginning of this book, CPS was first developed as an intervention that parents could use by themselves outside of therapy. The parents to whom we first taught it were very enthusiastic about CPS and how it was working with their challenging kids. Wishing to verify these results, we conducted and helped to facilitate several published scientific studies testing the efficacy of CPS in homes. The results were incredible. In one study published in the Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,1 our team convened a group of fifty elementary school-age children diagnosed with oppositional defiant disorder, a set of symptoms involving willful disobedience of authority. These kids also all had signs of depression or bipolar disorder as well.

We randomly assigned each child and his or her family to one of two types of treatment. One type of treatment was a standard ten-week course of behavior management therapy. As part of this therapy, the families learned about conventional explanations of defiance, and they also learned about traditional discipline, including how to use time-outs as well as stickers, tokens, and so on to track a child’s behavior and determine rewards and punishments. The other type of treatment was training in CPS for an average of eleven weeks. Families learned about the concept of skill, not will and about the three basic plans for handling problems, and they also had a chance to practice applying Plan B in conflict situations.

My colleagues and I were the therapists providing the CPS treatment, and independent overseers also reviewed recordings of the sessions to verify that we were offering the proper treatment. As part of the experiment, we administered a series of standard tests to parents before and after the therapies to measure how positive their interactions with their children were and how much stress parents felt. We also had therapists and parents complete a standard survey that rated how much they felt the child’s behavior had changed since the family had begun therapy sessions. The therapists completed the survey upon completion of treatment, the parents four months later.

The kids of parents trained in CPS exhibited significantly more improvement in their behavior, as rated by both parents and the consulting therapists. Four months after treatment, 80 percent of the children whose families had been trained in CPS saw excellent improvements in behavior, as opposed to only 44 percent whose families had received the standard training. Other published studies of CPS have reported similar results. Researchers in Sweden delivered between six and ten sessions of CPS training to parents of seventeen Swedish elementary school students with oppositional defiant disorder. Both after this intervention and six months later, all children in the group saw reductions in behaviors associated with the disorder. Children also exhibited fewer behaviors associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.2 When taught to parents in group settings, CPS has proven equally effective.3

Over the years, we’ve documented similar results in a number of other settings where authority figures deal with kids, and, to some extent, act as surrogate parents. In schools, we’ve helped dramatically reduce the use of traditional disciplinary measures like detentions, suspensions, and expulsions. We’ve also seen dramatic improvements in the environment for staff—reductions in stress and in injuries sustained on the job. For instance, my colleagues and I taught the basics of CPS to all fifty-three hundred NYPD school safety agents, performing this work during the last week before the new school year started. At the time, CPS was one of a number of initiatives and regulatory changes embraced by the New York City schools. During the next school year, the number of arrests made in schools decreased by 58 percent over the previous year, the number of summonses issued by 67 percent, reports of major crimes by 20 percent, and reports of violent crimes by 39 percent.4

We have seen similar results in a number of schools across the country. At one Colorado school, a pilot study found that the stress on teachers fell significantly after they received training in CPS, and that the most significant reductions were for those teachers whose fidelity to the approach was highest. A number of schools designed for challenging kids saw reductions in the need for restraints, a reduction in suspensions and seclusions, and, in some cases, a near elimination of the need for these kinds of disciplinary practices. A school in New York State not only experienced a dramatic decline in the number of suspensions; there was a 48 percent increase in school attendance. Still other schools have reported greater confidence on the part of teachers in their general ability to work with students as well as improved relationships with students.5

In psychiatric facilities and juvenile prisons we’ve used CPS to dramatically reduce self-injurious behaviors and to reduce or eliminate the use of physical restraints or seclusion rooms to control behavior. After implementing CPS at Yale’s child inpatient psychiatric unit, seclusions were reduced from 432 to 133 a year, and restraints were reduced from 263 to 7 a year.6 In the year after it implemented CPS, the Ohio Hospital for Psychiatry cut its use of restraints by 95 percent and eliminated use of its seclusion room. Staff turnover, usually very high at psychiatric facilities, declined to under 3 percent per year. In Nova Scotia, Canada, one twelve-bed juvenile residential treatment program saw a 69 percent drop in seclusions during the six-month period after implementing CPS, and a 78 percent drop after forty months.7 In a five-year study of one New York State hospital’s adolescent inpatient psychiatric unit, researchers found that violent incidences (i.e., those requiring the use of restraints, those where patients harmed themselves, and those where staff had to call in security) fell from 182 in 2008 (prior to the implementation of CPS) to 86 in 2012.8

In recent years, entire systems of care have embraced CPS. The state of Oregon began introducing CPS through its Addictions and Mental Health division. Now virtually every agency in the state serving challenging kids uses some form of our approach, and more than fifty programs have implemented it comprehensively, including the juvenile correctional system and just about every therapeutic inpatient and residential program. As further evidence of the sustainability of systemic changes across Oregon, an administrative statute in the state now requires that all child-focused mental health agencies utilize approaches that involve “a collaborative process to solving problems with youth.”

Finally, CPS has proven successful at juvenile detention facilities housing some of the toughest kids imaginable. A number of juvenile justice facilities in North America have implemented CPS. In one unpublished report from the Mountain View Youth Development Center in Maine, rates of assault and the use of force decreased by more than 50 percent, and time spent in seclusion decreased by more than 89 percent after staff had received training in CPS. Recidivism fell precipitously. In 2003, 60 percent of inmates had reoffended within one year of being released from the facility, whereas in 2008, after CPS had been introduced, only 15 percent of inmates reoffended. Fewer staff submitted claims for compensation due to injury as well.9





Overcoming the Myth of Consistency


CPS works well for parents and other authority figures dealing with challenging kids for a number of reasons. First, CPS affords parents a customized approach to handling their children’s behavior problems. Most parents think that they have to parent each of their kids in the same way (if they have more than one), or that they should apply the same discipline to their child that their friends, neighbors, or family members might apply to theirs. They think that siblings will exploit any inconsistency in discipline, taking advantage or becoming resentful if both parents don’t treat each kid exactly the same—that the individualized approach will be seen as unfair. Furthermore, moms and dads often come to me claiming that they and their spouse need to be aligned so that together they can parent consistently.

If you parent each child in the same way, you ensure that no child gets what he or she needs.



This myth of consistency, as I call it, is fruitless. If you parent each child in the same way, you ensure that no child gets what he or she needs. Research shows that children exhibit significant differences in personality and temperament, even if they share the same genes and grow up in the same basic environment.10 As we’ve seen, the cognitive skills of children vary, reflecting underlying differences in their brain development. Some children might struggle with flexibility skills, while others are weak in communication skills, still others in social skills, and still others in multiple skill areas. Parenting decisions and tactics that might work for one child might not work well for another, even if the other one happens to be a sibling.

For parents raising multiple children, the goal shouldn’t be consistency or fairness. It should be matching your strategies and decisions to the needs of each individual child. CPS prompts parents to identify each child’s specific strengths and weaknesses from among the five basic skill areas we identified in chapter 2, and to note areas in which a child struggles. Due to deficits in the underlying skills, a more challenging child might struggle with a number of common, everyday situations, whereas her sibling doesn’t. When a difficult situation arises, a parent might decide to handle the conflict by taking the time to problem solve with the child exhibiting challenging behavior and build skills. In that case, the parent would engage in Plan B with the child. With a sibling, the parent might go with Plan A despite its downsides, because the child already has the skills required to meet the parent’s expectations. In other conflict situations involving the challenging kid, the parent might decide that skill building isn’t a priority. In that case, the parent would strategically choose Plan A (asserting authority in the moment) or Plan C (handling the situation the way their kid wants for now). A parent who is in a hurry to make soccer practice might use Plan A in the moment to get her child to turn off the TV and get ready to leave. If that parent is asked by the same child for permission to eat leftover Valentine’s Day chocolates a half hour before dinner, she might agree to it, employing Plan C. Whatever course of action parents choose, they can make a decision for each child based on his or her own unique needs.

As we’ve seen, Plan B discussions address the uniqueness of individual children by naturally homing in on the specific areas of weakness that a child exhibits. If a child struggles with regulating emotions, that second step of Plan B—in which the parent expresses his concern—might pose the greatest difficulty. The parent would naturally need to return to the first step to calm the child with empathy and reassurance, building the underlying emotional regulation skills. As that skill improves, other parts of the Plan B conversation might become sticking points, leading the parent to work on different skills. In this way, Plan B conversations give kids practice with the specific skills that require the most work at any given point in time. In our clinical work, we find that Plan B conversations vary widely among children, even though the focus of the conflict at issue—not doing homework, for instance, or refusing to go to bed on time—might be identical.





More Compassion for Challenging Kids— and Their Parents


Beyond the usefulness of the CPS process, the mind-set shift underlying this approach affords a number of benefits to parents who confront challenging behavior. In many cases, so-called difficult kids happen to be extremely gifted in other ways. Like Becca, the precocious and cognitively inflexible girl we met at the beginning of the chapter, they may be sensitive kids with impressive strengths in things like art, music, literature, math, or sports. They may have a strong sense of right and wrong and be easily moved by injustice. They may be animal lovers, chefs, debate masters, or theater buffs. Maybe the word gifted gets invoked. Maybe artistic or quirky. Or, simply, intense.

Despite their strengths, their challenging behavior still poses a problem. These kids may lose it around minor matters. Life may not go according to their plan, or they might fail to meet their own perfectionistic standards of achievement at school or elsewhere. They may resist trying anything at which they can’t quickly excel because their world is so “all or nothing.” Some may have trouble finding and keeping friends. In many cases, they may simply seem to feel too intensely, and struggle to manage their emotions effectively.

Areas of great strength in kids can and often coexist with relative weaknesses.



Parents dealing with challenging kids often find their noncompliant behavior puzzling. How can this kid be good at so many things, these adults wonder, and yet have so much trouble? The theory of skill, not will offers a compelling answer. When it comes to skills development, areas of great strength in kids can and often coexist with relative weaknesses, and these cognitive disparities can fuel behavior problems. We tend to think of kids by categorizing them as “smart,” “talented,” or “athletic,” even though uneven, or asynchronous, cognitive development is the norm. When some areas of ability and brain development are indeed off the charts, even average or above-average functioning in other domains can amount to significant differences, or unevennesses, that make the world difficult for these kids to negotiate. Also, for most of us our greatest strength is also our greatest weakness. We might applaud kids for their perseverance, while frowning on their perseveration. Parents who understand the subtleties of cognitive development as well as how to address them gain a new sense of calm, comfort, and reassurance and a more precise way of helping their kids to succeed.

The notion of skill, not will also helps parents of challenging kids by alleviating the crushing guilt that many of them feel. When people encounter children who misbehave, and when they assume that children are doing it on purpose, they often blame the parents for not providing enough discipline. Kids act out, we think, because they’re spoiled, or because they think they can get away with it due to lax parenting. Parents of challenging kids internalize this thinking, blaming themselves for being too passive, permissive, or inconsistent.

In truth, these explanations are inaccurate and unfair. Challenging kids are hard to raise—that’s just a reality. Parents of such kids might appear more passive and permissive, but that doesn’t cause bad behavior. That same parent would seem quite competent if he or she were raising an easier kid. I can’t tell you how many parents I see in my clinic who have multiple children, one of whom is really challenging while the others are quite well behaved. The challenging behavior of the tough kids makes the parent appear clueless, even though he or she is not.

The solution isn’t to cast judgment on parents, kids, or anyone else. Psychology and psychiatry have done much harm by blaming parents for problems we later learn weren’t their fault. Believe it or not, as late as the 1980s we had a term for cold mothers whom we blamed for autism. We called them “refrigerator mothers.” Likewise, during the early twentieth century, we blamed schizophrenia on “a mixture of maternal overprotection and maternal rejection” of kids, speaking of “schizophrenogenic mothers.” Subsequent research debunked that theory, which one commentator has termed “hopelessly mistaken, and more than a little embarrassing.”11 No, the solution isn’t to pass along more blame for something else that isn’t their fault. It’s to provide parents the knowledge and tools they need to help their kids practice their thinking skills. CPS does that, helping parents to feel good about their child-rearing talents once again.

Finally, the notion of skill, not will helps parents by making it easier for them to empathize with children and build healthier, more positive relationships. By understanding that their challenging kids can’t help their behavior—that these kids lack the skills to comply with our requests—parents can come to see their bad behavior not as insubordination but as a manifestation of their inner struggles. One father told a colleague of mine that after learning about CPS, he realized that his “autocratic, Plan A” way of responding wasn’t working. His two boys not only weren’t developing the skills they needed to manage their behavior, they also weren’t “feeling heard or connecting to [him] as a parent.” As this father noted, “I came to appreciate how much of what I saw as strong and decisive and structured [about my parenting] was . . . modeling a lack of empathy or interest in their needs.” He resolved to feel more empathy for his kids and their needs going forward.

Even with kids who severely misbehave or act out, a shift in mind-set can transform parents’ attitudes. You’ll recall from chapter 3 that Jamison Booker behaved so poorly that he made family life “a living hell,” as his mother, Marlene, put it. After six months spent learning and practicing CPS, Jamison’s behavior had improved, but he still had a long way to go. Still, as his father, Bob, told my colleagues and me, just coming to understand that Jamison wasn’t misbehaving willfully—that he struggled with a skills deficit—made a difference. Bob used to feel “anger and frustration,” thinking to himself, “Goddamn it, why can’t this freaking kid abide by the rules of society and follow directions?” Now that anger had largely dissipated. Bob and his wife felt “sad for Jamison in that it’s not his fault. The poor guy just doesn’t know how to function and deal with life in many ways.” Bob estimated that the level of stress he experienced thanks to Jamison was probably about three-quarters of what it had been before the family had learned about CPS. That wasn’t earthshakingly different, but given how desperate the family had been, it marked important progress. Bob allowed that it would take time for Jamison to “rewire those neurons.” In the meantime, Bob and Marlene had learned to be more patient, to “not take [Jamison’s behavior] personally” and not “[interpret] his actions as a direct affront to us.” We often see parents’ stress levels decrease even before challenging behavior improves, simply because parents have come to see their children in a more compassionate light.





Helping “Regular” Kids to Thrive


CPS may benefit parents confronted with extremely challenging behavior, but what if you’re a parent and your kids are typically developing or well adjusted? Can you benefit from using CPS as well? The answer is a resounding yes. Like their more challenging peers, well-adjusted kids have their own unique set of strengths and weaknesses when it comes to skills. But whereas a challenging kid might struggle mightily in a number of everyday life situations, a more typically developing kid might struggle in only one or two areas—and in a modest way, at that. Your son might not be flunking out of school, but you might wonder if he could be applying himself a bit more. Or your daughter might be doing well in school, but you wish you didn’t have to work so hard to get her out of bed in the morning. Or with either of your children, you might be satisfied overall with their development, yet still feel a bit worried about the food choices they are making.

Whatever your area of concern, CPS tells you that you have three choices: try to make your child do it your way (Plan A), do it their way for now (Plan C), or work collaboratively to arrive at a solution (Plan B). If a conflict arises that relates to what you deem a problem area, you might choose to work on it using Plan B so that you can solve it in a durable way, while also helping to strengthen your relationship with your child and build your child’s skills. Or you might decide in this instance that your child isn’t struggling that much and you don’t need to pay special attention to the underlying skills. If you just need your child to comply with your wishes, and she has the skills to do so, you might decide to assert your will. Alternately, you might decide to drop your desires and work on the problem another time.

You might wonder if parents of well-adjusted kids really need CPS. After all, these kids are already skilled in relative terms, and any disciplinary problems they experience aren’t especially severe. Can’t parents get away with simply asserting their will when conflict arises? They can, but as I tell parents, they’re missing a huge skill-building opportunity. When children already comply well with authority, they have a much easier time jumping into a Plan B conversation and participating. Through listening to the concerns of their parents, articulating their own concerns, and brainstorming solutions, they can develop a number of more refined problem-solving skills that they’ll need in order to thrive in the adult world.

We adults are expected to comply with authority figures, too. We have to be able to stay calm when conflict arises with bosses, colleagues, or customers, regulating our emotions, showing a certain amount of flexibility, and, in many cases, doing what we’re asked. But today’s postindustrial workplaces require much more than this. On a daily basis, employees and managers in most settings must collaborate with others to solve pressing business problems. Whether it’s crafting an advertising campaign, designing a legal defense for a client, negotiating a real estate deal, or coming up with a smart IT solution for a difficult client, most adults find themselves working on teams with others and handling conflict as it arises.

Excelling in this environment requires an ability to listen deeply and intently to what other people are saying and to understand their concerns. You have to be able to communicate your point of view and to negotiate mutually agreeable solutions. You have to be able to look at a problem in flexible ways, so as to generate new, creative solutions. Most of us don’t master such skills in school. In many cases, we barely achieve passing competency, because schools are not set up to teach advanced problem solving. And most parents don’t explicitly practice these skills with their children, either. By engaging in regular Plan B conversations, kids do get a chance to practice these skills, and, with time, master them. By using Plan B with generally well-adjusted kids, we’re helping to take their skills to a whole new level, setting them up for success as adults.

Parents who harbor doubts about CPS will often say to me, “Plan B sounds great, but, let’s face it, it’s a Plan A world out there. You have to be tough. You have to know how to lay down the law. By teaching your kid Plan B, you’re setting them up for a rude awakening.” On the face of it, that seems right. The police officer who pulls your kid over for speeding won’t be trying to understand his perspective and empathizing. Nor will his boss when he shows up late for work . . . again. I agree with skeptical parents that it is a Plan A world—sometimes. There are moments in our lives when we do have to have the skills to comply with others’ wishes, and to make others comply with ours. But these moments represent only 1 percent of our lives. For the other 99 percent, it’s a Plan B world. You have to be a good collaborator, empathizer, and problem solver in order to navigate it successfully. Plan B builds those skills in kids (and parents, too).





Driven to Succeed


Skill building is hardly the only reason to try CPS with well-adjusted kids. The most successful adults out there—people with thriving careers and personal lives—don’t just have superior problem-solving skills; they are also highly driven to succeed. They don’t need rewards and punishments to prod them to work hard. They have an internal motivation spurring them on. Wouldn’t we all want our children to develop that internal, or intrinsic, motivation?

Research has shown that compelling a person to behave in desirable ways by using punishments or rewards significantly decreases a person’s internal motivation to keep behaving that way.12 Overuse of rewards, for example, leads people to become much more interested in getting the rewards, but less interested in the very goal you want them to pursue. Research has also shown that the most effective way of fostering internal drive in others, including children, is to give them a sense of mastery, a sense of control over their environment, and a sense of connectedness to those around them. Plan A—traditional rewards and punishments—doesn’t foster any of those elements. You’re taking away your child’s sense of power, autonomy, and control by attempting to manipulate their behavior, and you’re not building an empathetic connection with your child in the process. You’re certainly not nurturing empathy, because you haven’t shown it yourself in the course of levying punishments or rewards.

Plan B, by contrast, fosters a strong empathic bond between parents and children. And by inviting kids to participate in forging a solution, it imbues them with a sense of power and autonomy. As kids become better problem solvers, they feel more competent and want to do more of it. They feel increasingly effective, masters of their own domain, and are driven to engage with others and the external world. Built on the notion of skill, not will, Plan B winds up fostering both skill and a strong inner drive to learn and grow.

COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT PARENTING


“I need to control my children so they respect me and know who’s boss.”

“Kids are easily spoiled, and if I give them an inch, they will take a foot.”

“The world isn’t easy. I need to prepare my children for hardship by not giving in.”

“If I give up my anger, I give up my expectations for my kids.”

“If the child wins, the parent loses.”





Relating Better with “Typical” Kids


Parents of typical kids can build much closer parent-child relationships by using CPS and Plan B. Brooke and her husband, Matt, have two kids, including a well-adjusted thirteen-year-old named Thomas. When Thomas was twelve, he asked Brooke and Matt to let him come home from school and spend afternoons without adult supervision instead of having him attend an after-school program. Brooke and Matt consented, as long as Thomas agreed to spend his time responsibly, taking care of certain tasks around the house. They didn’t want him to come home and play video games all afternoon. What they did want him to do was to walk the dog, a job that Thomas disliked.

One hot September day, Matt came home to find that the dog’s leash was not in its usual place, but in exactly the same place that he had dropped it that morning when he’d left for work. He inferred from this that Thomas hadn’t walked the dog. Matt grew angry and confronted Thomas. “You didn’t walk the dog today. I know you didn’t!”

“Yes, I did!” Thomas screamed.

After a few slammed doors, the encounter was over. A little while later, Brooke went to talk to Thomas. Her first inclination was to lecture him about lying, telling him that he would have been better off admitting to his dad that he hadn’t walked the dog and accepting the consequences. Instead, she took a deep breath and resolved not to focus on his lying. She would use Plan B and try to come to a collaborative solution to the dog-walking problem.

“So, Thomas,” she said, “it seems like something happened earlier about walking the dog. What’s up?”

“It was too hot,” Thomas replied.

“I see. There’s something you don’t like about walking the dog when it’s hot. Can you tell me more?”

“No, Mom, it’s not that I don’t like it. The vet said that if the blacktop is too hot on my hand, it’s too hot on her paws. When I felt the road, it was too hot for her.”

Brooke’s eyes widened. “Oh, wait, so you didn’t walk the dog because it was too hot for her paws?”

“I did walk her, sort of. I brought her into the backyard and ran around the yard a bunch of times on the grass so she didn’t have to go on the blacktop.”

“Ah. Without the leash.”

“Right, because I closed the gate. Why would I have put her on the leash?”

If Brooke had applied conventional discipline, she might never have discovered the real reason Thomas hadn’t used the leash. She and Matt would have levied a punishment, causing resentment and perhaps leading to future disciplinary issues. By suspending her inclination to assert her authority, Brooke was able to learn valuable information about her son. As she told me, “It turns out that I didn’t have a son who was a lying sociopath. In fact, I had a child who was very responsible and who had flexibly solved a problem on his own.”

In this case, Brooke didn’t have to complete the three steps of the Plan B conversation. All she did was enter the conversation in a neutral way. “That was the day,” she concluded, “when I realized that the most important thing Collaborative Problem Solving had done for me as a parent was to change the discourse between my son and me. By entering into conversations with him assuming (or being willing to consider) the best, I regularly avoided the frequent conflict that is common between adolescents and their parents.”

As time passed and Brooke continued to apply Plan B with Thomas, she found that their problem-solving conversations were not merely yielding new insights into his behavior but allowing her to broach topics that many parents can’t discuss with adolescents. On one occasion, she and Matt grew concerned about Thomas’s frequent texting during the evening. Over a period of a few weeks, he got in the habit of burying his head in his phone during dinner and for hours afterward. A Plan B conversation revealed that he was trying to help out a girl at school who had broken up with her boyfriend and was feeling lonely and friendless. This, in turn, led to what Brooke termed “an incredibly rewarding conversation” in which she and Thomas discussed a number of sensitive topics, such as suicide and eating disorders. “Two weeks later,” Brooke related, “he reported that his friend was doing better, and that the trouble seemed to have passed for her, something he probably never would have even mentioned to me otherwise.”

The Plan B conversation had allowed Brooke a window into the “inner world” of her son’s concerns. And what was especially wonderful, Brooke reported, was the increasing ease with which this window was now opening. In some cases, Brooke didn’t even have to start a Plan B conversation, because Thomas was beginning to apply CPS on his own. On one occasion, Brooke had agreed to let him use money he’d saved to buy an Xbox video game system. On the day of the purchase, Thomas asked her what games he would be allowed to buy. His friends liked to play certain games, and he wanted to be sure that he would be allowed to play with them over the Internet. The family owned other video game systems, and it had long been established that Thomas and his younger sister couldn’t play violent shooting games. Brooke reminded her son of the rule, and thought that this was the end of the matter. An hour later, he approached her, wanting to talk. “Okay,” he said, “what are your concerns about me playing shooting games?”

Brooke had to laugh that he was turning CPS back at her. She had no idea that he had picked up the concepts so well. She revealed her concerns: She didn’t want him to become desensitized to violence and gore, and she didn’t want his younger sister to see or hear the games. Having anticipated her first concern, Thomas had looked up his game of choice on the Internet, and had learned that it contained a setting that would let him play with his friends while blurring out much of the gore. As Brooke recalled, “He made a compelling argument that this particular game was a strategy and war game, which was different from getting desensitized to senseless interpersonal violence.”

Brooke admitted that he had addressed her first concern. As for the second, Thomas asked whether he could get the game if he promised to play only when his sister wasn’t home or in the same part of the house, and if he wore headphones. Brooke agreed that this seemed reasonable. “Since his concern was that without that game he would be limited in his ability to connect with the friends whom he especially wanted to connect with, it seemed he had led us through finding a solution that worked for everyone. My job was done.”

Brooke’s experience with Thomas suggests the tremendous progress that typical kids can make in developing problem-solving skills through regular Plan B conversations. Brooke brought Thomas onto her level, and he rose to the occasion. The problem-solving process became a kind of common ground, an opportunity to talk about difficult problems and to establish a strong working relationship based on mutual respect and understanding. Rather than regarding his mother’s wishes as baseless or “stupid,” Thomas made an effort to understand them, just as his mother had done for him. Home life was hardly kumbaya—conflict still arose, and resolving it took time and effort. But the process of resolving it brought Thomas and Brooke together. As any parent of an adolescent can tell you, that’s quite an accomplishment. And for parents who worry that their kids will use Plan B on them, remember: You can’t use Plan B “on” someone, only with them. As long as your concerns are clearly stated and you make sure the solution addresses them, your child can’t take advantage of you.

Healthy relationships of any kind rest on mutual understanding. While you might be able to “get away with” traditional Plan A parenting with well-adjusted children, these children probably don’t feel well understood. In many cases, their concerns, thoughts, and feelings go underground—they learn to swallow them so as to bend to your will. Worse yet, they often try to address their concerns or get their needs met in sneaky, unethical, dangerous, or illegal ways. In the course of practicing Plan B, you’re letting your kids know that their points of view matter to you. You’re also assisting and guiding them to learn new skills. The natural result is a solid, helping relationship, one that leaves your children feeling both empowered and understood.





Plan B for Parents: A Brief Primer


If you’re struggling with a challenging child or eager to do your best with a neurotypical child, I invite you to experiment with Plan B. You apply it just as described in chapter 4, both proactively for recurring behavior issues and in emergency situations when you need to help people calm down and resolve a problem in the moment. It’s important not to feel overly rule bound as you apply Plan B. It’s a structured process, but you shouldn’t treat it like a simple script that you mindlessly use. Know the steps and the techniques as well as the theory behind them, but feel free to adapt them to fit the environment of the home. In particular, correct for the reality that you’re dealing with a child here, not an adult. Use language that your child can understand, and organize the Plan B conversation in ways that will help you engage your child productively.

For instance, before you initiate Proactive Plan B with your child, you might want to think and plan ahead to catch her at an opportune moment when she is calm and available—and when you are, too. Many times it’s best to hold a Plan B conversation when our children are captive, when we don’t have to make eye contact, and when there is some distraction and motion available that don’t absorb too much attention so they can still engage in the discussion. For one child that may be the bathtub. For another it might be nighttime when being tucked in, and for a third perhaps in the morning while driving to school or while shooting hoops.

When beginning Proactive Plan B, be especially careful not to put your child on the defensive. It’s a sad reality, but unfortunately when we approach our children to talk to them about something, most kids immediately sense they’ve done something wrong. And experience has taught our kids to expect at least a lecture if not Plan A to follow. So you’ll probably need to go overboard, especially in the beginning, to show your child that you are just hoping to understand his concerns or perspective, not to lecture or punish him.

In an effort to get Plan B off on a solid footing, start with a neutral observation, like “It seems like trying new stuff has been a little hard”; or “I’ve noticed that you’ve been having a hard time going to bed lately and that you like having some electronics with you at bedtime”; or “It looks like wearing shoes that aren’t comfortable really bothers you a lot.” Notice how those observations aren’t about the behavior we want to stop (e.g., “I’ve noticed you have been hiding your electronics and not being truthful with us”) and don’t make assumptions, either (e.g., “It seems like you don’t think we should be allowed to tell you what to do”).

Once you bring up the issue in a neutral way, ask your child to tell you about her concerns. Say something like “What’s up?” or “Tell me about that,” or “I’m just wondering what’s going on.” As we’ve seen, it is very important not to rush this first step, and to use the four empathy tools described in chapter 4: ask clarifying questions, take educated guesses about the other person’s concerns, practice reflective listening, and offer reassurance. In my clinical work, I’m constantly impressed by how surprised parents often are by a child’s concerns or perspective. Some examples: a high schooler insisting he should not be in honors classes—not because he thought he couldn’t handle the curriculum, but because he wanted to be with the “normal kids” so people wouldn’t think he was “a nerd.” Or the child whose body odor was driving away his friends—it turned out he was in fact taking showers, using deodorant, and wearing clean clothes, but he wasn’t using soap in the shower because he didn’t want soap that other people had used touching his body.

How would a parent know those concerns? You wouldn’t unless you asked and did a lot of probing using the tools. That’s not to say that all concerns are hard to identify. Sometimes the concern will be right there on the surface (for instance, your child wants something to eat before it’s dinnertime, and you know he hasn’t eaten in three hours). Your child’s skills at articulating her concerns, needs, and thoughts help determine how easy or hard the drilling down process will be. Keep in mind with very young children that there are many different ways to communicate concerns and needs. It can be done through play, using characters, drawing, making up stories, or any other creative method you can think of that resonates with the child.

Let’s take an example of a child who can communicate fairly well. Eight-year-old Michaela has been “borrowing” one of her parents’ smartphones before going to bed, denying she took it, and then hiding it under her pillow. Michaela’s mother finds this behavior both mysterious and inconvenient. She has decided to address it using Plan B. Notice how Michaela’s mother sticks to the four tools and eventually identifies her daughter’s concern:


Mother: We’ve noticed that this isn’t the first time you’ve hidden one of our phones. Don’t worry—you’re not in trouble. We know there must be a good reason why. Can you fill us in? (neutral observation followed by some reassurance and a question)

Michaela: I don’t know.

Mother: Well, think about it for a bit. I’m sure there must be an important reason why. (more reassurance)

Michaela: I don’t know.

Mother: You’re really not in trouble. I just want to understand. (even more reassurance)

Michaela: I’m sorry. I’ll stop doing it, okay?

Mother: Well, I don’t want you to just stop without us knowing why you were doing it. Is it because you are bored and can’t find anything to do? (reassurance followed by a guess)

Michaela: I don’t know.

Mother: Or do you just really like the games you can play on our phones better than what you have on your iPod? (guess)

Michaela: Sort of but not really.

Mother: Sort of what—you like our games better? (reflective listening)

Michaela: Not really.

Mother: Huh. Okay. Well, that’s interesting. So you might like our games better, but you’re not sure that’s the reason you’ve been hiding our phones. I wonder why. (more reflective listening and another question)

Michaela: I said I don’t know!

Mother: Remember, you’re not in trouble. Really. Is it something about just having our phones with you under your pillow? (reassurance and question)

Michaela: I guess so.

Mother: How come? (question)

Michaela: It helps me get to sleep.

Mother: Huh. So having our phones with you helps you sleep. Why is that? (reflective listening and question)

Michaela: In case I can’t get to sleep.

Mother: So you mean you would have something to do if you couldn’t get to sleep? (reflective listening and question)

Michaela: No, because that way my brain knows it has something fun to think about if there are scary thoughts in my head.

It may not have come easily, but with a little perseverance, Michaela’s mother used the four tools to identify her daughter’s concerns. At this point, many parents would start offering suggestions for how to solve the problem. Don’t do this just yet. You are ready to move on to the second step in Plan B when your child is calm, you have a good sense of her specific concerns, and when you can imagine some possible solutions (although don’t voice them just yet, either!). It’s sometimes good to move on when you know that you’ve learned something new through the discussion, like Michaela’s mother did. If you do move on prematurely, don’t worry. Your solution probably won’t work, and you can always start again and see if you were on the right track with your child’s concern. In the example above, once Michaela’s mother understands that her daughter is hiding their phones under her pillow in order to have something to distract her from scary thoughts about bedtime, she is ready to move on to the second ingredient of Plan B, the sharing of her concerns.

So how do you communicate what’s on your mind? My advice: Do so simply and succinctly. Before embarking on a Plan B conversation about a recurring problem, ask yourself: What is my true concern about? Why do I want my son (or daughter) to act differently? Most concerns that parents have revolve around one or more of four things: health, safety, learning, or how their child’s behavior affects others. If you’re struggling to clarify your concerns, try running through these four categories. If you find that you’re able to identify the type of concern you have, it’s time to ask yourself to articulate the concern in more concrete language. As we’ve found, the heightened detail tends to open up more potential solutions for parents as they think through a problem.

In the example above, Michaela’s mother would want to ask herself before initiating Plan B: Why don’t I want Michaela having my phone at bedtime? The obvious answer is that she doesn’t want her daughter to be taking things without asking or lying to her. But it might help for Michaela’s mother to spend a little time exploring her own concerns: If Michaela asked me for the phone, would I be okay with her having it at bedtime then? Probably not. Because Michaela’s mom might want to use the phone then herself. And she might worry that playing games would keep her daughter up too late. So her concern extends beyond a desire for Michaela to be truthful with her. (And, in fact, I would argue that working hard to understand Michaela’s concerns and resolving a problem like this in a mutually satisfactory way would quite likely result in Michaela being more forthcoming in the future.)

Don’t expect your child to wholeheartedly embrace your concern the minute you enter it into the discussion. In fact, she may tell you she doesn’t care about what is important to you at all. That’s no problem: It’s your concern, not hers! You each just need to take each other’s concern into consideration. So if your child says, “I don’t care about staying up too late. I’m not even tired!” your response might be: “You may not care about staying up too late, but as your mom I do. That’s part of my job. What you care about is having something fun to do if you are having scary thoughts at night, right? And it is really important that whatever solution we come up with helps you with that.”

Notice how Michaela’s mother reacts to Michaela’s discounting of her concern by reiterating the importance of her daughter’s concern. In my experience, most kids like Michaela get defensive and dig their heels in because the second their parent shares a concern, the kids suspect that their own concern just diminished in importance. Parental concerns usually trump kids’ concerns—something kids learn the hard way. So the mere mention of a parent’s concern usually alarms kids. But with CPS, both parties’ concerns are important and worthy of being addressed. So if your child reacts emotionally upon hearing your concern, you need to make it clear that you haven’t forgotten about hers by going back to the empathy step.

Once you’ve made it through Plan B’s second step, it’s time for the brainstorming stage. Ask your child to try her hand at coming up with a solution first. Of course, if your child doesn’t have any solutions, then by all means jump in and make a tentative suggestion if you have any good ideas. Just be sure to give your child a chance. Too often kids respond to the invitation to come up with ideas with an “I don’t know” after less than one second of thinking. Remind your child to take his time trying to come up with some ideas. And if he can’t, think out loud with him. As a good teacher would remind us, share your work! That way, your child will be able to hear how you arrive at certain solutions, and to learn from it.

When you’re evaluating ideas and deciding together which to embrace, slow down and encourage your child to think them through with you. Remember the criteria we discussed in chapter 4: Does a proposed solution work for your child? Does it work for you? Is it practical? And does it raise other concerns or cause any other problems? Believe it or not, the actual solution is less important than its ability to satisfy this litmus test. And if your child came up with the solution, all the better.

In the scenario we’ve been following, the brainstorming step might look like this:


Mother: I bet there is something we can do so that you don’t get scared at night, don’t stay up too late, we aren’t missing our stuff, and you can be truthful with us. Do you have any ideas?

Michaela: I don’t know.

Mother: Well, think about it a little bit. It’s not an easy problem to solve. It might take some thinking, but I’m sure we can come up with something together. (giving Michaela a chance, biting her tongue, and offering some optimism and reassurance)

Michaela: I really don’t know.

Mother: Okay. Well, let’s think together. Can you think of anything else that you could have that would be fun for you but that we might not need?

Michaela: Yup.

Mother: What’s that?

Michaela: Dad’s iPad!

Mother: Well, that’s one idea. Let’s think about it together. (patiently remembering to help Michaela practice rather than just ruling out the idea right away) Would that work for you? (walking her through the litmus test)

Michaela: Yes!

Mother: And would that work for us?

Michaela: Yes!

Mother: Well, let’s see. I suppose we’d have to check with Dad to see if he needs his iPad then. But what about the issue of you staying up too late? (still helping Michaela test out the solution)

Michaela: I won’t! I promise!

Mother: Well, I know you would try hard not to, but sometimes the games are so much fun that they are hard for you to stop playing. (helping Michaela test the feasibility of the solution to protect against wishful thinking)

Michaela: I have an idea! What if you just came up to check on me after a little bit to see if I was using the iPad or not?

Mother: I suppose I could do that. But what if you were using it—what we would do then?

Michaela: You could remind me to put it away, and I could try to get to sleep again.

Mother: And the telling-the-truth part? Do you think you could be honest about things and not try to hide using it from us?

Michaela: Yes.

Mother: I suppose we could try that if you really think it might work.

Michaela: It will!

Mother: I guess I’m hoping that if we can solve problems together like this so it works well for both of us that you won’t feel like you need to hide the truth from us. But if this solution doesn’t work, I promise you won’t be in trouble. We will just have to keep thinking of other ideas together. Okay?

Michaela: Okay. So can we try it?

Mother: As long as Dad is okay with it. And then let’s see what happens and we can talk again.

Michaela’s mom knows that she’s done with Plan B for now because she and her daughter have arrived at a solution that addresses both of their concerns, is possible, and won’t cause other problems. They also have a follow-up plan. Notice how Michaela’s mom finishes Plan B with an invitation to revisit the problem if the solution doesn’t work. A failed solution is a great opportunity for learning. After all, few complicated problems are solved at the first attempt.

If Michaela and her mother’s solution ends up working, who wins in that scenario? They both do. Who loses? No one. Michaela’s mom accomplishes a number of goals at once. She maintains her expectations for her daughter, reduces challenging behavior, strengthens the helping relationship she has with her daughter, solves a chronic problem so that it doesn’t keep arising, and helps Michaela build her problem-solving skills. Pretty cool, right?

You don’t problem solve everything.



When I present Plan B to parents and illustrate it with scenarios like this one, parents sometimes claim that life is hectic and they can’t afford to stop and perform the three steps all the time. “Will I have to negotiate over every little thing now?” they ask, as if Plan B will turn their kids into little lawyers. I have to explain that the approach is called Collaborative Problem Solving, not Collaborative Negotiating. You don’t problem solve everything. You only problem solve issues that are already problems. Also, you can do Plan B just about anywhere, often in just a few minutes. The car is a wonderful place to do Plan B. Because you’re not looking each other in the eye, your child will be less inclined to feel as if you were putting him on the defensive. Remember, too, that Plan B will free up your time. Stealing five minutes in the car or over breakfast in the morning to work through a recurring problem that gobbles up fifteen minutes each time it emerges is time well spent.

Some parents have trouble learning Plan B. Having been raised and schooled in strict, authoritarian, Plan A thinking (as most of us have), it’s difficult to break away and embrace a process that stresses empathy, listening, and problem solving. I wish I had a dollar for everybody who sat in my office and said, “Hey, my parents were Plan A and I turned out okay.” But when parents learn more about Plan B, they usually warm up to it. Undergoing that shift in mind-set, they regard Plan B as far more than a soft approach. And in the vast majority of cases, they find that it produces much more impressive results.





Raising the Next Generation


Plan B brings an array of benefits to parents. In the short term, parents and kids learn a healthier, more productive, more compassionate way of solving problems. Strife eases, and family members get along better. Over the long term, children improve their skills. They feel better about themselves, become more intrinsically motivated, and develop closer relationships with their parents. But there’s an even more profound benefit, one that follows from Brooke’s observation that her son Thomas had come to deploy Plan B on his own.

By practicing Plan B with kids, we teach them a radically different way of viewing authority and of solving problems, a method that they can one day pass on to their own kids. And we teach them an underlying mind-set of compassion and collaboration. When parents practice CPS with kids, the kids learn that their concerns, desires, hopes, and worries are just as important as their parents’, despite their own relative lack of power. They learn that people can solve problems together in ways that consider everyone’s concerns and that don’t produce “winners” and “losers.” They learn that authority figures can be strong and compassionate at the same time. And they learn that each of us has our own skill struggles, and it’s okay to be a work in progress.

Our society does a poor job of raising people to become strong, collaborative problem solvers. As a result, we have become less empathic in recent decades, not more. Adults are feeling less connected with one another, and extremism, divisiveness, and might makes right thinking rule the day. Rare is the individual who invites another party to a conflict to sit down and explore their mutual concerns, so that they might arrive together at a mutually satisfactory solution. As parents, we have the opportunity to change this. We can raise a generation of kids who look at authority and the resolution of conflict in a more productive, more compassionate way. Our kids are watching us. They’re paying attention to how we behave when conflicts arise. As parents, what do we wish to teach?





