CHAPTER SIX


			 Transforming Workplaces





Mental health professionals are supposed to help people manage conflict and relate better with others. But sometimes professionals don’t get along with one another. At one mental health agency, the office administrator, a woman I’ll call Cynthia, was clashing with Tammy, the case coordinator whose job it was to organize care for patients. Over a period of months, tensions between the two employees mounted. It got so bad that the two were passing in the hallway without saying hello, withholding information from each other, making sarcastic comments to each other in meetings, and slamming doors to express their displeasure. The office was small—only seven people—so everyone’s work was affected.

Typically, a boss in this situation would assess the problem, determine fault, and levy punishments, such as issuing verbal or written warnings. If after a certain amount of time employees still couldn’t get along, the boss might terminate or reassign the employees. But that’s not what happened here. The office manager—a woman I’ll call Debbie—had been trained in CPS and Plan B. Although she had learned Plan B to help deal with the challenging kids whom the organization served, she had also used it for several years with her team to manage conflict as it arose. Now, as conflict between Cynthia and Tammy veered out of control, she invited them into her office and facilitated a Plan B conversation.

Debbie began by prompting each employee to express her respective concern to the other. Cynthia stated that she found Tammy to have an abrasive personality—when asking Cynthia for things, she was often grouchy and frequently rude—and Cynthia deemed her hard to work with and unapproachable. Tammy didn’t deny that she could be abrasive, but she pointed out that she had a tough job, and she felt that Cynthia expected her to always be “happy” and “chipper.” Tammy was upset that Cynthia hadn’t respected her enough to communicate her displeasure to her directly and felt Cynthia should be able to respond to her requests without being so concerned with her tone. For weeks Cynthia had said nothing before eventually complaining to Debbie, their boss.

When all the concerns were expressed, Debbie prompted Cynthia and Tammy to brainstorm solutions. How would the two navigate their relationship moving forward? Tammy was adamant that Cynthia communicate directly to her any problems she might have. That was a nonstarter. Cynthia didn’t like confrontation, and she felt uncomfortable complaining to anyone, especially Tammy. Debbie chimed in with a possible solution: What if the two corresponded about requests and issues via e-mail? That way, Cynthia could communicate directly with Tammy, as Tammy wanted, but the technology itself would serve as a buffer, allowing Cynthia to feel more comfortable and lessening the impact of Tammy’s brusque tone. Because communication would take written form, both employees would have more time to think through what they wanted to say. Their raw emotions would no longer come through as much in their communication.

Tammy and Cynthia liked the idea, each perceiving that the arrangement addressed her own concerns. They both agreed to try it. Debbie added a clear expectation: There would be no more slamming of doors. No more silent treatment. No more snarky language. No more incivility of any kind. The two didn’t have to like each other, but they did have to interact in a professional manner. Is that Plan A, you might ask? No, that’s Debbie firmly stating an expectation. If the behavior recurred, Debbie would then have three options for how to handle it.

The Plan B conversation worked. Tammy and Cynthia had come to understand each other’s point of view—maybe not perfectly, but better than before. They began communicating more frequently via e-mail, and their uncivil behavior diminished. Because Cynthia had long struggled to express her concerns, the conversation itself gave her more confidence, and she began to speak up more with her colleagues. The e-mail arrangement also allowed her to communicate her concerns and, further, to document them. Meanwhile, Tammy felt more understood and respected. Within a few weeks, the office became more hospitable—everyone noticed it. With less drama to distract them, colleagues were better able to concentrate on their work.





Trouble at Work


Despite more open, collaborative cultures and more attention paid to soft skills, such as relationship building and empathy, organizations still struggle with many of the problems we touched on in chapter 2: rampant workplace conflict, disengaged employees, high attrition, and subpar productivity. According to one study, 70 percent of employees surveyed saw “managing conflict as a ‘very’ or ‘critically’ important leadership skill,” while 43 percent of employees thought that their bosses didn’t “deal with conflict as well as they should.”1 As a result of poorly managed conflict, far too many employees hate going to work, complain about their bosses, and feel little loyalty to their organizations.2 A conflict-ridden workplace also makes it harder for bosses and colleagues to deliver frank, productive feedback to one another. One 2015 Harris Poll found that more than two- thirds of managers disliked providing feedback to their employees, while more than one-third expressed discomfort about communicating anything that might trigger a negative response from employees.3

Why are workplaces so troubled? One reason might be inadequate conflict resolution training. Business schools and corporate training programs offer some exposure to conflict resolution methods, but typically in relation to specific tasks, such as the solving of labor disputes or the negotiation of deals. Most bosses and employees don’t study how to handle day-to-day conflict situations with colleagues, customers, and others as they arise. Although countless books and training manuals have addressed conflict resolution in the workplace, they haven’t presented a simple, evidence-based approach proven to work in the most challenging of settings that colleagues can apply consistently to solve problems and prevent them from worsening.4 It’s all too easy for bosses, employees, and organizations facing conflict to resort to the traditional discipline they grew up with and have seen practiced in every organization they’ve encountered.

CPS provides managers and employees with a common process for addressing concerns.



CPS didn’t originate as a workplace solution, but I believe it offers a promising alternative. As Debbie’s story suggests, it’s applicable to workplaces, and also effective. Simple and easy to learn, CPS provides managers and employees with a common process for addressing concerns, one that much of the time will allow them to come together as equals to design workable solutions. Employees feel empowered and listened to, and managers no longer have to wield their authority at every turn in order to get the results they need. Discussing her ongoing use of CPS with employees, Debbie observes that Plan B “makes everything clearer, including your own expectations,” and it is “particularly helpful in getting folks to talk about their concerns. Typically, people [in conflict] hold steadfast to their positions and then bring their own respective solutions to the table, which usually amount to ‘I want you to do this differently.’” CPS allows people to talk about their concerns and arrive at solutions that reflect everyone’s points of view.

Debbie cites other benefits, such as the predictability of the conversation when a manager uses CPS consistently over time. “Everyone knows exactly what these conversations with me are going to look like, and there is safety in that. They know that any solution [arrived at through Plan B] will meet everyone’s needs. It gives them confidence in the process.” Meanwhile, Debbie has come to better understand the skills deficits that give rise to challenging behavior. This is “a huge benefit” that lets her understand what is happening day to day, steer her employees to solve problems better, and, over time, seize opportunities to develop their skills. “I know their lagging skills so well,” she says, “that I can often anticipate their concerns before they even need to voice them.” It’s no surprise that in thirteen years only one employee has left her team for reasons unrelated to health or maternity.

My colleagues and I have amassed considerable anecdotal evidence suggesting that CPS gets results in workplace settings like Debbie’s. In dozens of schools, hospitals, and prisons with which we’ve worked, administrators and staff members have applied CPS with one another to handle interpersonal conflicts. The organizations that have done best with CPS all reported an epiphany or turning point in which they realized the value of implementing Plan B as a management strategy to improve teamwork and transform the entire organization. I often tell staff in child mental health agencies that the most important collaborative problem solving they will do will not involve a child. CPS usually takes hold in organizations only once staff have encountered problems in implementing the approach and used CPS itself to work through them.

If you wish to help your team to become more productive, adaptive, cohesive, and collegial, consider departing from conventional discipline. You can empower your team to address problems that previously might have festered, while helping your organization to create a culture in which people are more understanding of others, more inclined to listen rather than to talk, and more skilled at handling conflict. Much about CPS in the workplace remains unknown, but chances are we can achieve tremendous results there from rethinking how we address conflict. Challenging kids can teach us how to handle conflict in many environments. I’m eternally grateful to them for that. We just have to open our minds and listen.





Employees Change If They Are Able


Michael runs a children’s mental health center in Ontario, Canada, with about fifty staff members. When my team checked in with him during the summer of 2016, his organization had been using CPS with kids for nine years and internally as a management model for three years. As Michael told us, his organization hadn’t originally intended to use CPS internally, but as time passed it seemed like something they should embrace so that they “practiced what they preached.” Staff members had seen dramatic improvements in patient outcomes since implementing CPS. Why wouldn’t it work with employees?

Previously, Michael and his fellow managers had handled behavior or performance issues the usual way, by deploying rewards and punishments. Since implementing CPS, the management team addresses conflict by assuming from the outset that skill, not will is causing the problem, and by holding individual Plan B conversations with employees. On one occasion, Michael facilitated Plan B with an employee who wasn’t submitting required paperwork on time. According to regulations, the organization has to submit a treatment plan for each patient within thirty days of an admission. Failure to submit this paperwork could have serious consequences for the organization, as its accreditation depends on it.

This employee was consistently late with the paperwork, although her performance otherwise was stellar. Michael approached her and started Plan B by observing, “We notice that you haven’t been getting the paperwork in on time. Why is that?” It turned out that this employee had been slow to turn in her paperwork because she thought it had to be “perfect,” and she found it hard to make time to check and recheck her work. Michael and the employee arrived at a solution whereby she would do her best to commit a treatment plan to paper and then have a colleague review her work. If the colleague’s review was favorable (it usually was), the treatment plan would be turned in as is. This way, she could hand in the paperwork on time, and her concerns about its quality could be allayed.

As Michael made clear, he and his team don’t use Plan B exclusively. Sometimes traditional discipline (Plan A) is necessary, and it is there if they need it. However, “we shy away from the traditional route. Our first attempt to resolve a problem is through skill, not will, and a collaborative conversation.” Michael estimates that his organization uses Plan B as a problem-solving process about once a month, or more frequently if a staff member is facing significant challenges. Like parents practicing Plan B with kids in the home, Michael and his managers often find that Plan B uncovers and addresses employee concerns they didn’t know about, such as employee confusion about the level of quality required on paperwork. Much of the time, he finds that managers can solve problems by working on them collaboratively with staff, in many cases preventing the organization from having to censure or terminate an employee. Although Plan B conversations take time, he is confident that they save the organization money, given the high costs that accrue when an organization terminates an employee and must rehire, as well as the costs that pile up when problems go unsolved and recur.

Analyzing Michael’s story, we find once again that CPS is essentially a two-part management tool: the mind-set shift and the specific problem-solving method of Plan B. As Michael related, his team’s most basic move was to shift their mind-set, discarding the notion that bad behavior at work stemmed from problems with attitude or motivation. “The traditional way of looking at employees is [to believe] that some are great and others aren’t motivated to work hard,” Michael said. “After using CPS, I think that this is completely flawed. Our staff who do well with our patients have the skills required to pull it off without much effort. Those that struggle are equally motivated. If they could do better, they would.”

Remind yourself that, just like kids, your employees or colleagues all want to do well.



Instead of jumping to the assumption that an employee is careless, disrespectful, thoughtless, entitled, lazy, or just plain mean, try assuming the best. Feel empathy for the person, even if you find his behavior objectionable, intolerable, and unacceptable. Remind yourself that, just like kids, your employees or colleagues all want to do well. “I bet Bob would prefer to be on time for his two p.m. meeting,” you might tell yourself. “I’ll bet he’d love to say things that ingratiated himself with the team instead of alienating them. There must be something that is getting in his way, maybe a challenging situation in his personal life, or maybe an underlying skills deficit.”

In recent years, researchers have confirmed the usefulness of empathy and compassion in business contexts. Ernest J. Wilson III and his colleagues at the Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism at the University of Southern California found that across the world’s industries, empathy was the “emotional foundation” and “attribute-prime” of successful businesses executives.5 Research by Gabrielle S. Adams of the London Business School has found that empathizing with a perceived wrongdoer in the workplace can help colleagues avoid misunderstandings and help resolve conflicts before they have a chance to escalate. Managers who foster empathy can “improve workplace conditions.”6

The specific notion of skill, not will is not entirely foreign to workplaces, either. Human resources departments consider skills and “competencies” in the course of hiring and promotion. When employees fail to perform on the job, bosses frequently acknowledge a lack of skill as the culprit, saying, “He just wasn’t ready for the promotion,” or, “He didn’t have the right background or experience.” Of course, the skills in question are usually intellectual or technical skills—a facility with certain software programs, say, or knowledge of accounting, or basic math literacy—rather than problem-solving skills. We need to broaden our understanding of the skills that affect employee behavior and performance. At the same time, we must augment the empathy we feel for employees who struggle with such skills and the sense of responsibility we feel to participate in problem solving.

Some precedent exists for acknowledging the relevance of problem-solving skills in the workplace. Many managers know about “emotional intelligence,” and, specifically, author Daniel Goleman’s theory that people possess skills and traits that affect their success in relationships at work, which he articulated in his influential book entitled Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ.7 This theory doesn’t account for the full range of problem-solving skills, though. Goleman discusses social awareness and emotional regulation skills, but he doesn’t focus on many other abilities related to communication and executive functioning. Further, the impact of Goleman’s theory on conflict resolution in the workplace has been limited. Although many bosses and employees accept that people’s social skills influence their performance at work, they still regard behavior and performance as fundamentally a matter of will, not skill. Emotional intelligence may have become part of corporate parlance, and companies may be starting to incorporate emotional intelligence assessments into their hiring and promotion,8 but they haven’t deviated much from rewarding and punishing employees in an attempt to motivate better behavior. It is the rare organization that looks at emotional skills with a growth mind-set, seeing them as capabilities that can be nurtured and developed.9

If you take nothing else away from this chapter, remember this: In the vast majority of cases, people don’t misbehave at work on purpose, but rather because of underlying skills deficits. Whether or not you regularly use Plan B, as Michael and his team do, shifting your mind-set will transform your workplace experience. You won’t take it so personally the next time a colleague disappoints or disrespects you. You’ll also behave more humanely toward employees who report to you. You’ll show more compassion for yourself, recognizing that your awkwardness around communicating with your boss, say, or your difficulty staying calm with another employee, may just be your own skills deficits peeking through. You won’t excuse yourself for disappointing performance, but you’ll be in a position to address the root causes—without castigating yourself for “screwing up.” You’ll remember that you would do well if you could.

As time passes, you’ll also start to appreciate the diversity of skills that exists on any team—the presence of people, for instance, who lack organization skills but are amazingly flexible, creative thinkers, or who are inflexible thinkers but keenly attuned to others’ emotions. And you’ll begin to see how one person’s strengths can help balance out another colleague’s weaknesses (e.g., your colleague who is a rigid but organized thinker can help you, a more creative and flexible but disorganized person, stay on track and deliver an assignment on time and as promised). We’re all different, and we can all help one another perform better, for the greater good of the team. The more conscious and accepting we are of our respective weaknesses, the more we are able to fill in the gaps for one another when someone is struggling.





You’re Not Too Busy to Solve Problems Collaboratively


As essential as the general mind-set shift is, getting the most out of CPS in the workplace also requires applying the approach well as a problem-solving method. Many managers and teams would object that they are time pressed as it is—how could they possibly devote time and energy to resolving disputes collaboratively? I’ve heard that in every organization with which we’ve worked. Nobody has time. Why not? Because they’re constantly dealing with the Groundhog Day Effect—waking up to the same chronic problems day after day.

Imagine if, thanks to constant practice, others on your team were as well versed in Plan B as you are, able to solve problems with their colleagues as they arise. Imagine, too, if any skills deficits they had were improved, thanks as well to all the on-the-job practice. All of a sudden, you’d have a lot more time as a manager. Your team would become more productive, more adaptive, more cohesive, and more collegial. Problems that once festered would now be addressed. People would be more understanding of others, more inclined to listen rather than to talk, and more skilled at handling conflict situations. The whole environment of your workplace would change, as would your business performance.

How exactly should bosses apply CPS? Some urgent situations demand Plan A. When it’s the day before the big presentation and team members disagree about how to frame a particular point, there may not be time for a lengthy conversation. You as the boss need to make an executive decision and dictate a solution. But these situations are truly the exception. Most of the time, bosses have more flexibility in how they respond, and their imposition of will primarily serves to alienate and disempower employees. Employees might go along with the boss’s decision because they feel they have no choice, but inside they feel angry, resigned, and unmotivated.10 Because the underlying cause of the problem hasn’t been addressed, the problem will likely continue to arise. And when it does, employees won’t know how to resolve the problem themselves, as they’ve been relying on their boss to do it for them.

As for Plan C, managers do need to pick their battles—they can’t resolve every problem or address every strategic decision immediately. But if they resort to Plan C too often, staff might see them as weak or as unwilling to address the underlying issues. And the problem will linger. Plan C, remember, is a strategic choice to handle a problem at a different, more opportune time or to prioritize. You can’t work on everything at once. Managers should use Plan C tactically, remaining mindful of their priorities and of their limited time.

Plan B gives bosses and subordinates a structured and predictable way of working out conflict together, despite the power disparity, and of addressing strategic questions collaboratively. Colleagues can use Plan B conversations preventatively—Proactive Plan B—to handle recurring problems, or spontaneously to respond to a crisis situation—Emergency Plan B. Like Debbie in our opening story, managers who become skilled at CPS won’t need Emergency Plan B very often. They can fall back on solutions generated from previous proactive conversations.11

THE THREE PLANS: WHICH TO USE?


YOU MIGHT USE PLAN A WHEN . . .


You have a tight deadline and a decision simply needs to be made.



					 You need to make a statement about your authority and/or the team or organization’s vision.



					 An employee is taking action inconsistent with the organization’s business interests.



					 An employee is taking action that is blatantly unethical or illegal.





YOU MIGHT USE PLAN C WHEN . . .


You face a deadline situation, there just isn’t time to apply Plan B, and you can let the employee choose the solution without grave consequences.



					 An employee has a concern that is important to her, your countervailing concern isn’t nearly as significant in your mind, and you feel comfortable dropping your concern.



					 You’re trying to build up your employees’ confidence and want to prevent the appearance that you’re nitpicking or micromanaging.



					 You’re managing an employee who is also a manager, and you don’t want to subvert her authority in public.





YOU MIGHT USE PLAN B WHEN . . .

				 					 You face a recurring issue with an employee, you have significant concerns of your own that you don’t feel comfortable dropping, and you don’t think Plan A is going to solve the issue.





Holding Better Meetings


In introducing CPS as a problem-solving process for workplaces, I’ve so far considered the situation in which two professionals are solving problems together individually or with the help of a supervisor. In many cases, members of an entire team have issues with one another or are called together in a meeting to solve a problem that they collectively face. In this situation, managers can use a variant of Plan B—what my colleagues and I call Group Plan B—to make meetings far more productive and satisfying.

Group Plan B is a more structured version of the brainstorming sessions that you often see in companies and other organizations. There are two basic steps. You first go around the room and offer each member of the group a chance to articulate her concerns about the topic at hand. Everyone agrees to voice only concerns, not solutions to the problem. Only when everyone has had a chance to express her perspective does the leader invite the group to engage in collective brainstorming.

I have often taught Group Plan B to teachers and caretakers in schools, group homes, and other facilities, and we’ve used Plan B to structure group meetings in high-acuity cell blocks in correctional facilitates. We so often assume that bosses are responsible for coming up with the solution. Isn’t that what they’re getting paid to do? Actually, no: The boss in most cases can make much more headway by serving as a facilitator (much as Debbie did in this chapter’s opening story) rather than as the decider.12

By using Group Plan B, the boss can create a space for problem-solving conversations to occur, while also offering a clear, simple, and predictable format for the conversation that ensures that everyone’s perspective is heard and valued and that team members can replicate on their own. Let’s say you run a sales team, and your quarterly results are running 5 percent below your goal. Economic conditions are good, and other sales teams in your organization are exceeding their goals. Your team has a strong product to sell. So the problem somehow has to do with your team, its processes, or its strategy. But what is it exactly? You might have your own opinions—perhaps you think the strategy and processes are fine, but certain members of your team are unfocused. Rather than simply making an executive decision to bear down on those individuals or take other action, try initiating a Group Plan B discussion. Raise the issue of the subpar results and ask your team members what they think is going on. Have everyone articulate his concerns about the group’s performance and what might be weighing it down. Facilitate the discussion, but don’t dominate it with your own ideas. Do any of the concerns raised by your team members surprise you? When everyone has had a say, brainstorm solutions that take everyone’s concerns into account, including your own. Most of the time, the solution arrived at using this method will be more complete, thoughtful, and creative than any you might have thought of on your own. And perhaps even more important, the whole team will be much more invested in enacting the solution and making sure it succeeds now that they have helped to coauthor it.

GROUP PLAN B


THE BASIC PLAN B STRUCTURE APPLIED TO CONVERSATIONS WITH GROUPS OF PEOPLE INSTEAD OF INDIVIDUALS . . .


Is useful for problem solving as well as general brainstorming.



					 Allows everyone to feel heard.



					 Prevents the leader from dominating.





Some bosses might doubt that team members can generate valuable solutions largely on their own. When I lead kids through Group Plan B, I’m constantly surprised at the ingenious solutions they present. In one case, I sat with a group of about twenty elementary school students to talk about the challenge they had making a calm, orderly transition between two class periods. The teacher had the kids line up before leaving the classroom, but the kids had a hard time doing that—they would shout and laugh loudly, pushing and shoving one another. During our Plan B conversation, the kids related that they didn’t like lining up and standing there for a few moments while waiting for their classmates. Because their bodies were so close together and they were fidgety from having sat in class for the past hour, it was hard to avoid pushing and shoving.

I put it to the students this way: How could they accomplish what the teacher wanted (to get the students from one spot to another quickly, quietly, and safely) while also accounting for their own concerns (having enough room and not getting pushed and shoved)? During the brainstorming phase of Plan B, one child raised his hand. Pointing to the linoleum floor, which had big squares of black and white, he said, “Well, why do we have to be in a line, anyways? Why can’t everybody just get a square? We can even put little signs in masking tape on each square saying which one belongs to which student. When it’s time to line up, we can each go to our square and we have to stay in our square so that our bodies don’t have to touch while we’re waiting to leave.”

Brilliant, right? The teacher hadn’t come up with it. A student had—and it worked. If a group of eight-year-olds can generate innovative solutions, so can a group of twenty-six-year-olds—or forty-six-year-olds.

In many workplaces, brainstorming fails to live up to its potential. As one scholar summarized, “Decades of research have consistently shown that brainstorming groups think of far fewer ideas than the same number of people who work alone and later pool their ideas.”13 One reason may be because participants jump right into proposing solutions before the group has had a chance to define and explore the problem. As Albert Einstein famously knew, problem solving is almost entirely about defining a problem and the different ways of looking at it. If you do that well—if you fully understand the perspectives people have and are committed to honoring all of them—the solution will usually follow naturally. As Einstein put it, “If I had an hour to solve a problem, I would spend fifty-five minutes thinking about the problem, and five minutes thinking about solutions.”

In the case of the sales team struggling with subpar results, one or more team members might raise concerns about a new trend appearing in the marketplace that is affecting demand for your product. Exploring this concern, you might discover that customers are interested in different features from what they were interested in just months ago. Someone else on your team might pipe up, observing that your product actually has the new features customers want, but that your sales team hasn’t been emphasizing it. As a result, customers don’t know about your product’s full capabilities in this area. If they did, they would love the product every bit as much as they have in the past. Pretty useful information, right?

Following the structure of Group Plan B invites everyone into the process, and ensures that the problem is defined fully. The team is more likely to walk away with a solution and feel the satisfaction of having done so together.

Group Plan B seems especially helpful given the struggles that workplaces have around diversity. Many managers want people from different backgrounds on their teams because they realize the value of bringing multiple perspectives to bear. And yet women, people of color, and other traditionally underrepresented groups may not always feel comfortable contributing due to the persistence of unconscious bias. Research has shown, for instance, that men interrupt women at a staggeringly high rate. In one 2014 study, men interrupted their female conversation partners at a rate of 2.1 times every three minutes.14 By ensuring that everyone’s perspective is heard, Group Plan B fosters a strong climate of mutual acceptance and respect, allowing teams to make the most of the diversity that they’ve worked so hard to achieve through hiring and career development. It’s easy to say that you value diversity and inclusiveness, but think of how it might feel to a young person or a woman or a person of color when the boss takes the time to ask everyone for her perspective—not just once or twice, but in every meeting as a matter of course—and to ensure that any solution somehow addresses everyone’s concerns. The boss is sending a message: “We care about everyone’s opinion, no exceptions. We’ll make a concerted effort to make sure that everyone has a say, and that we act on what people say.”

TIPS FOR HOLDING SUPERIOR TEAM PROBLEM-SOLVING MEETINGS

☐ Prior to the meeting, make your expectations clear: You want to understand the problem, so people should come prepared with as much data as possible to support their positions. Also, participants will be expected to generate constructive solutions, but not until they have heard everyone else’s perspective, so that they understand the problem fully.

☐ At the outset of the meeting, remind people of the ground rules (e.g., “First we’re going to share perspectives. Only then will we suggest solutions”).

☐ Don’t deviate from the Plan B structure!

☐ Be open-minded and curious when participants express their ideas. Use the tools of the empathy step of Plan B: Ask questions and reflect what you’ve heard to clarify. Remember, understanding someone’s perspective doesn’t mean you agree or disagree. You are just gathering information. Encourage others to do the same.

☐ Resist the urge to dominate the conversation or to interject solutions of your own before everyone has expressed their concerns.

☐ If some participants are dominating the conversation, let them know that you’ve heard them and invite participation from others.

☐ Don’t rush the conversation. Make sure you devote enough time to understanding the problem before you try to solve it, realizing that the more people you have in the room and the more complex the problem is, the more time you’ll likely need.

☐ Beware of solutions in concerns’ clothing! “It’s important that our new brochure has a picture of every department” is a solution, whereas “it’s important that our new brochure represents all our departments” is a concern that could be addressed by many possible solutions.

☐ Don’t feel that every meeting has to be structured in this way. Try reserving Group Plan B at first for stubborn problems that haven’t been solved by the usual kinds of conversations you’ve had.





Rethinking How We Do Business


You’re an employee at a call center for a major financial institution. You receive a call from a customer who is livid that he has been charged a twenty-dollar fee for not making a monthly payment on his credit card on time. The customer insists that he sent in the payment before the due date, but your computer screen shows that it came in two days late. Do you

			 				 rescind the fee and apologize to the caller?



				 refuse to rescind the fee, explaining that it’s company policy to assess these fees and the payment came in two days late?



				 do neither of the above?





Many employees might be tempted to rescind the fee, reasoning that the payment came in only two days late, and it’s not worth it for the bank to lose a customer for the sake of twenty dollars. Better to live by the old saying “The customer is always right.”

Ah, but is the customer really always right? Not from the point of view of CPS. As we’ve seen, CPS brings parties in a dispute together on equal ground, even if one party wields authority over the other. Parents and kids, police officers and offenders, psychiatric nurses and patients—all have valid points of view that deserve attention. Likewise, CPS teaches us that customers do have valid concerns, but so do the businesses with which they’re dealing. One set of concerns doesn’t automatically override the other. The most effective solution is usually one that satisfies both sets of concerns, and that customer and company arrive at together, through dialogue.

If asked, the customer might explain that he makes his payment as soon as he receives his paycheck every month. The paycheck comes just a few days before his payment is due, so he cuts it close. In that scenario, a creative solution could be to rescind the fee this time, but also to change the customer’s monthly due date, so that it comes two weeks after the customer’s paycheck arrives. This would help ensure that the customer’s payment comes in on time from now on. This solution would address both the customer’s concern that he has been wrongly charged and the company’s concern for timely payments.

When you take time to pursue problem solving with a customer rather than assume that he or she is right, great things can happen. I have experienced this firsthand. In addition to offering clinical care to patients and their families, my organization provides training in CPS to organizations around the world. We used to require that all clients come to us in Boston for our highest level of training. A group of our clients in Canada asked if they could have certified CPS experts near them conduct these trainings, so that they didn’t have to travel to Boston. We didn’t like this idea. We valued the camaraderie created when our trainees gathered together in Boston, and we wanted our trainers in Boston to retain control over what was taught so as to ensure quality.

We could have disregarded our own concerns and given in to our clients’ requests, on the grounds that the customer is always right. Or we could have imposed our desired solution, even if we lost clients. Instead, we tried to practice what we preach. We entered into a Plan B dialogue. When we asked our clients about their specific concerns, they responded that it was too expensive to travel to Boston, and so they weren’t able to train as many people as they wanted to. We expressed our concerns about relationship building and maintaining the integrity of the training. And then we opened up the conversation to problem solving. Was there a way we could address both sets of concerns? We arrived at an innovative solution: We would create a new category of “master trainers” whom we would authorize to perform these specific trainings in Canada. They would receive extra instruction and stay in constant contact with us, which would allow us to ensure the quality of the trainings. Meanwhile, cutting out travel costs would allow our customers to train more people. We never would have arrived at this solution if we had assumed that the client’s point of view automatically wins out.

“The customer is always right” is just one of many pieces of conventional wisdom about organizations—and specifically businesses—that CPS challenges. We’ve focused so far on the potential of CPS as a problem-solving approach inside organizations, but CPS has a much broader array of implications for how we might better do business together. Space constraints forbid me from exploring all of these implications, but following are a few common beliefs that CPS shatters, or at least brings into question.





Myth: Hire the Best and the Brightest


Maybe, but make sure you also hire people who are strong problem solvers. The best hires are people who make your job as a manager easier. And those are people who can operate independently, who won’t always be running to you for direction when there is a problem. But you should go further and also try to find people who are strong in the specific areas of problem solving suitable for your business. If you’re hiring for a high-energy sales position, you’ll want someone strong in the areas of social skills and perspective taking (empathy). But look a little closer: If the job is relatively unstructured and you expect that person to be a self-starter, you’ll also want to hire someone with strong organizational skills. And if the job has new hires reading off a sales script, flexible thinking may not be as much of a priority.

How do you find employees with the desired skills? Companies often apply sophisticated and costly proprietary methods to test new hires’ suitability, including personality tests rooted in scientific research. As helpful as these tests may be, they’re not enough. Companies should also evaluate job applicants for their underlying problem-solving skills during the interview process. In effect, they’re missing out on applying the latest neuroscience, which shows that people do differ in their problem-solving abilities and that these differences correspond to underlying differences in their brains.

Neuropsychologists have developed computer- and tablet-based ways of testing neurocognitive skills, such as flexibility, organization, working memory, and other problem-solving skills. But you can test for them in simpler ways that don’t rely on technology or cost anything. One of my staff members likes to give prospective hires a task to complete when they interview for a job with us. She asks interviewees to look at a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet on a laptop and organize the rows in just a few minutes. She’s not trying to evaluate their knowledge of Excel. Rather, she wants to understand how they approach solving a problem under some pressure. If they don’t know how to complete this task quickly using Excel, what do they do? Are they able to control their anxiety and think about the problem calmly? Can they delay their impulses enough to stop and think rather than just charging in with a half-baked solution? Can they generate resourceful, flexible solutions to the problem? If not, can they communicate their concerns in a socially acceptable way? In other words, can they employ all the skills we’ve been talking about that make for good frustration tolerance, flexibility, and problem solving?

Hiring good problem solvers pays off!



To illustrate how much more important problem solving is than simply knowing all the answers, here is a recent story from our own organization. One new hire of ours passed this Excel test by calmly thinking about the problem for a moment and then Googling for an answer, demonstrating emotion regulation, flexible thinking, and problem-solving skills. She has gone on to become an incredible asset to our program, in large part due to those skills. In one instance, her administrative manager asked her to analyze whether we should invest in a new learning management system for our certification program. Having been to business school, this employee vaguely recalled how to perform a Net Present Value analysis to determine the potential profitability of the projected investment. Instead of asking for help right away (always an option!), she went home that night and refreshed her memory using books from her old business school class. She was still slightly confused about how to conduct a proper analysis, so she e-mailed her former professor with questions. He responded with exactly the clarification she needed. She performed the analysis, concluding that purchasing the new system would save us large amounts of money while improving the experience of our trainers. Her manager and I were thrilled with her performance. We could focus on other priorities while she completed the task herself. Hiring good problem solvers pays off!





Myth: Work Is About Getting Stuff Done


Of course it is. But organizations can benefit from taking a broader view and also looking at the workplace as a venue for skills development.

Okay, you might say, but aren’t companies already doing that? Amazon created the Career Choice Program, which provides 95 percent tuition remission for employees who choose to continue to develop their skills, whether they choose Amazon as their ultimate career location or go elsewhere. Companies like AT&T have decided to undertake the “wholesale reskilling” of their existing workforces.15

The problem is that companies take an overly narrow view in delivering skills training. They pay attention to conventional job skills that seem directly applicable to productivity on the job—communication skills, leadership skills, and so on. They should also pay attention to neurocognitive, problem-solving skills. Just because professionals have made it to adulthood doesn’t mean they’re finished with learning how to solve problems. We all have strengths and weaknesses in certain areas of problem solving, and the way to make progress is to practice with others, both at work and in our personal lives.

Most companies probably wouldn’t think of helping employees develop problem-solving skills. They assume that difficulties with those skill deficiencies are personal and that employees should remedy them on their own. Work isn’t a therapy session, they think. It’s work! But CPS isn’t therapy. It’s problem-solving training. Training managers and employees in CPS helps individuals and teams get more work done by offering them a powerful way to solve chronic problems. And as we’ve seen, CPS also helps individuals build their skills in a customized way, which makes them more resilient and better able to handle future conflict. As a result, they’re likely more productive, happier, and engaged. By addressing skills development openly, organizations hasten employees’ progress. They pave the way for colleagues to respect and accept one another’s imperfections, and to help one another grow.

You might be surprised at what happens if you start implementing these ideas at work. That employee who drops the ball on long-term projects might learn better planning skills. That employee who comes in late to work frequently might learn to organize his life better—and be at his desk by eight-thirty. That supersmart employee who stays silent during meetings and doesn’t contribute might learn to communicate better—and come through with a dazzling innovation that no one in the meeting would have otherwise suggested. That colleague who tends to rub people the wrong way might learn to consider other people’s perspectives better—and behave more empathically toward others.

I’ve seen the benefits of emphasizing neurocognitive skills development firsthand. One of our new team members was an extremely bright and caring person, but also a rigid thinker. She had her own ways of working, and she found it difficult to try new or different approaches. During a three-year period in which she practiced CPS, she became more flexible and better able to entertain new ideas that contradicted or questioned her existing beliefs. On one occasion, she demonstrated the impressive range of her flexibility when she met with me to discuss her frustrations with her job. As her boss, I had noticed that she wasn’t happy, and during our Plan B conversation she told me that she felt isolated in the particular area in which she was working. During the brainstorming phase, this employee came up with all sorts of creative solutions that I hadn’t considered. In addition to how it might have impacted her work, this employee’s skill building on the job helped us adapt her job to her needs, so that we could retain her as a happy, productive employee.

Work isn’t just about getting stuff done. It’s also about bettering ourselves and others. It’s about learning how to engage better in relationships. It’s about practicing how to resolve our differences. Paying attention to these softer elements will make work feel more enriching—and, yes, it will also indirectly enhance our productivity.





Myth: Difficult Employees Have Limited Potential in an Organization


Maybe they do, but maybe they don’t. You might have an employee who is clearly talented, but who has difficulty interacting with colleagues. Perhaps she flies off the handle too easily. Perhaps she doesn’t pay enough attention when others are speaking or jumps down people’s throats. Perhaps she’s disorganized and thoughtless when it comes to project deadlines. Ordinarily, you might write off such an employee and characterize her ability to move up in the organization as limited. Yes, you might think, this employee is talented, but it would take too much for the organization and for you personally to help her move up. Better to place a ceiling on this employee’s future in the organization, or even to usher her out the door.

If you keep CPS in mind, you might analyze this employee differently. As we saw in chapter 5, skills development occurs unevenly. Some of the most challenging kids are exceptionally bright and talented in other ways. As a parent, you wouldn’t want to give up on your kid just because she struggles in her interactions with others. You’d want to help build her skills. Likewise, wouldn’t it be a shame for you to give up on an exceptionally bright and talented employee simply because she’s difficult? Using CPS, you don’t have to. During coaching conversations, you might discern that her behavior problems at work stem from struggles with just one or a couple of discrete problem-solving skills. You can retain higher ambitions for this employee, but still deploy Plan B to help her build her skills.

Recognizing that work serves as a venue for honing problem-solving skills leads us to rethink how we develop young employees. A number of management experts and companies have advocated that bosses serve more as mentors, coaches, and facilitators, and less as stern authority figures.16 But what does this mean exactly? Like organizations in general, bosses who wish to become better mentors should broaden the set of skills they try to develop in their mentees. They should supplement traditional developmental goals, such as learning to manage a business unit in a foreign country, with goals framed around problem-solving skills (i.e., becoming better at perspective taking or reading social cues better).

When you start working with an employee, assess her neurocognitive skills in addition to more traditional workplace skills. Where is the employee strong, and where is she weak? What specific behaviors do these strengths and weaknesses produce? What specific situations or interactions trigger problematic behavior as a result of skills deficits? You can perform this analysis formally once you know a new employee reasonably well by completing our Thinking Skills Inventory (see chapter 7) and asking the employee to fill it out, too.17 Asking these kinds of questions, you can use Plan B to help individual employees progress in a customized way, thus making the most of the talent at your disposal.

You might feel nervous about broaching neurocognitive skill struggles with employees. Some skill struggles, like an employee’s difficulty organizing information, might be easier to bring up than others, such as an employee’s difficulty with body language or his difficulty knowing how he comes across to his colleagues. Fortunately, you don’t need to talk openly about skill struggles with a person in order to help him develop those skills. As we saw earlier, Plan B builds skills without overt acknowledgment that skill building is occurring. People think they’re solving a problem (which they are). Skill building gets “sneaked in” through the back door.

You might also deploy the structure of Plan B when holding coaching conversations with your mentees about their development. Have them first express their concerns (i.e., what opportunities they would like to develop in their jobs or careers), and then articulate your concerns (i.e., the needs of the team or organization). Then collaborate to determine developmental goals that meet all of the concerns. Remember Michael who runs the children’s mental health center in Ontario? He holds these kinds of conversations. He has even created an individualized coaching sheet to capture the conversations, documenting both the concerns and the agreed-upon solutions or strategies. To conclude the conversation, supervisors and employees sign the form, signaling their mutual agreement.

COLLABORATIVE PROBLEM-SOLVING WORKSHEET


Employee name:_____________

Manager name:_____________

Date:_____________

Where and when Plan B will take place:__________________________

Description of organization’s expectations:__________________________

Description of employee’s concerns/perspective:__________________________

Description of manager’s concerns/perspective:__________________________

Potential agreed-upon solutions: (agreed upon by manager and employee, practical, mutually satisfactory):_____________

1.__________________________

2.__________________________

3.__________________________





I once hired a very senior clinician who had incredible passion for the work, but struggled to understand how he came across to his colleagues when they challenged him. After facilitating Plan B with this clinician, I learned that he often felt on the defensive when it seemed as if the other team members were discounting his experience when he first joined our team. In turn, the other team members felt that he wasn’t as open to feedback from them when it came to mastering our CPS approach. After understanding and sharing everyone’s concerns, we brainstormed solutions whereby our new clinician’s experience was valued while the other team members still felt able to provide feedback when it came to learning CPS. I was also able to share with our new clinician my concern about how he was coming across, and he was able to hear the difficult feedback. He even asked that I continue to give him feedback so he could work on this skill moving forward—he really wanted to be a part of the program. Framing this issue as a skill to be developed and listening carefully to everyone’s concerns led to a solution, and it made this discussion possible in the first place.

Difficult people can change, even when they’re fully grown adults.



Some of your employees may well be difficult. And their potential in your organization might truly be limited. But difficult people can change, even when they’re fully grown adults. As my friend and colleague Dr. Bruce Perry has said, “One of the great things about the human brain is that it is elastic, malleable”—as long, of course, as you provide moderate, patterned, repetitive doses of good stress as described in chapter 4.18 Use this elasticity to your advantage, making the most of the talent at your disposal. And provide that good stress using Plan B.





Myth: When Dealing with Complaints, Scripted Empathy Helps


With an angry customer on the line, it’s essential that customer service representatives empathize. But not all empathy is created equal. In chapter 4, I described the dangers of drive-by empathy, when a person makes the gesture of empathizing but is interested simply in acknowledging the concerns before moving on to a solution that primarily addresses her own concerns. In many call centers, scripted empathy is a problem: In response to a customer complaint, the rep will launch into an extended monologue in which she expresses gratitude for the customer’s business and an apology that the customer is having difficulty. It’s a syrupy, manifestly artificial expression of empathy, and its effect on customers is usually the opposite of what is intended. According to one survey, almost 70 percent of respondents agreed that “their customer service experience improves when agents don’t sound like they’re reading from a script.”19

The solution isn’t to discard the scripts and give reps more autonomy, as some have suggested. Rather, it’s to take a middle path: Throw away the script, but teach reps basic techniques and guideposts for listening and expressing empathy, as well as a general structure for how to solve problems collaboratively with customers. Train reps to think of empathy not as an expression of compassion but as a process of teasing out information so that they can truly understand and acknowledge the customer’s perspective. And train reps to know that empathy is not the same as Plan C, just addressing the customer’s concerns. Once they solicit the customer’s concerns and can truly empathize, they should then articulate their own concerns before proceeding to trying to solve the problem collaboratively.

When an irate customer calls a wireless provider’s customer service line complaining that her son had been put on a different, much more expensive plan than the rest of the family, the rep should know how to use the four empathy tools I outlined in chapter 4—asking questions, taking educated guesses, listening reflectively, and offering reassurance. “If I hear you correctly,” the rep might say, “you had your son on a totally different plan from the rest of the family. So you had no idea you were overpaying all these months.” Reflecting back the customer’s concerns has a calming effect. But the rep doesn’t stop there and just accede to the customer’s wishes. “Here’s the thing,” she might say. “I’m not sure that I can make a change retroactively to your contract. But I want to help and I understand your frustration. I wonder how we can make this right for you. Let’s see if we can come up with some other ideas.” And like that, the service rep might launch into the third step—collaborating on a solution.

Plan B as a way of handling customer complaints? Absolutely.





Myth: The Best Salespeople Are People Who Can Talk a Starving Dog off a Meat Truck


Talking a good game is part of it. But listening is a more important and often undervalued dimension of sales. At their best, salespeople solve problems for customers. As CPS teaches, you usually can’t solve a problem until you first understand it. Take time to listen to the other person’s perspective, probing deeply into his thinking, asking questions, reflecting his ideas back to him, reassuring him that you understand and value his concerns. In a sales context, listening helps in several ways. It allows you to gather more information, including concerns that might prompt important innovations or alterations in the solution (the products or services) you’re trying to sell. You can have all the market research in the world, but to convince a customer to buy, you have to understand why what you’re selling matters to him. The act of showing empathy also helps customers feel understood, so that they’re more emotionally connected with you and, indeed, more inclined to enter into a relationship with you. Finally, empathy calms customers, allowing them to think with the rational parts of their brains and respond better to the logical arguments that you set forth.

Like managers with their team members, salespeople sometimes enter interactions with customers thinking that they must be authority figures who have all the answers. No. Customers have answers, too. Those of us in sales must be good listeners who are genuinely interested in understanding the customer’s point of view. And these days, as companies call upon salespeople to build relationships with customers, not merely seal the deal, listening and empathy become even more important. As the authors of one academic research study have concluded, “It is not just the product or service that is being sold that customers value but salespeople’s ability to listen carefully to their explicit and implicit needs so that problems can be solved and priorities established between both parties. In essence, effective listening and communication skills are requisite if the salesperson is to create value beyond the product or service.”20





Solving Problems When You’re Not the Boss


Just like people who work with challenging kids, organizations can use Plan B as part of a dedicated effort to resolve conflicts and improve problem-solving skills. They can do this with both individuals and among entire teams. Internalizing CPS principles, they can also begin to rethink many other dimensions of how they operate, including sales, hiring, development, and beyond. If you manage other people, try Plan B with your reports the next time conflict arises. If you run an organization, sit down with your senior team and review the list of skills that help people perform better with others. Think about the skills that members of the team (including yourself!) have and areas where they might be a bit weak—both as individuals and collectively. When conflict situations arise, begin using what we call Group Plan B. Instead of falling back on your authority and imposing a solution on the group, work with the group collaboratively to brainstorm solutions and achieve consensus around a plan of action.

I’ve focused in this chapter on how managers and leaders might use CPS, but you can also employ CPS principles with colleagues at work over whom you don’t possess formal authority. Imagine that a partner at a law firm—I’ll call him Mark—has an issue with computer software that the IT department installed on his new Mac laptop. Mark only recently switched to a Mac and doesn’t understand how the software works, so he asks the IT technician for help. The technician offers some cursory instruction, and then, frustrated with Mark’s questions, tells him that Macs are self-explanatory. Mark is angry. Although tempted to assert his will by complaining to the technician’s boss, he instead tries to empathize with the technician. Taking a step back, he reminds himself that he and the technician are both doing the best they can with the skills they have. They have to work together, and they both have the same goal—for Mark to be able to use this computer program.

Mark calls the technician and asks to speak with him. Although he might not follow the Plan B steps exactly, he calmly explains that he is new to using Macs, and he invites the technician to share his knowledge. The technician explains that he has fifteen more installations to get through before the end of the day so he is feeling strapped for time. The two of them behave respectfully toward each other, and they work it out. The technician offers more support as soon as he is done with the other installations, and Mark salvages a cordial, professional relationship with the technician. He might not be perfectly happy with how the technician treated him initially, but his problem will be solved, and he no longer feels as angry, having understood the technician’s predicament. Going forward, the two say hello to each other when they pass in the hall.

Work isn’t the only place where we experience what we might call power-neutral relationships with one another. If you look around your everyday life, you’ll find these relationships everywhere. We possess no authority over our neighbors, best friends, spouses, or family members. We’re not in charge of strangers we meet on the street, or the customer service representatives we deal with in stores or on the phone. Yet we do have to resolve conflicts with these people, big and small. As we’ll see in the next chapter, CPS can help us handle all kinds of conflict situations we encounter in our everyday lives. It also allows us to have a better understanding of and relationship with the most important person of all: ourselves.





