CHAPTER SEVEN


			 Getting Along Better in Daily Life





It’s not every day that we have the chance to peer into our own brains and see them working. During the summer of 2016, I had such a chance. A couple of colleagues and I flew to Atlanta to visit a quantitative EEG laboratory run by Youth Villages, a nationwide provider of youth services. Quantitative EEG, or qEEG, is a computer-based technology that measures electrical activity in a number of distinct parts of the brain. We can capture that electrical activity in the form of simple, squiggly lines on a chart, but we can also analyze it using computers, identifying patterns in the electrical activity and portraying them using colorful brain maps. Electrical activity thus gives us a window into the functioning of parts of the brain, as well as their interrelationships with one another.

Psychologists often deploy qEEG to help kids, utilizing it as part of a treatment called neurofeedback training. Kids with conditions like ADHD play video games while hooked up to a qEEG monitor (wearing a skullcap carefully positioned and loaded with sensors). The game lets kids see how their brains are working in real time on the screen. By learning to control their brain activity through specific breathing and relaxation techniques, they can do better in the games and succeed at the tasks assigned them. Over time, some psychologists think, they can train their brains to work better by doing something they love—playing video games.

We were in Atlanta because my organization, Think:Kids, was exploring whether we could use qEEG technology to measure progress in changing the brains of kids who exhibit challenging behavior using CPS. Stepping inside the lab, my colleagues and I found ourselves in a relaxing, spalike environment. The lights were dim, soft music played over the speakers, and pleasing aromatics infused the air. Small exam rooms lined the perimeter of the building. I could have sworn I was about to receive a massage (and I could have used one after our hectic travels down from Boston). Instead, I watched as four or five kids who lived at the residential treatment center filed in to receive their neurofeedback training. They were all excited to be there. One of them, a seven-year-old girl, let us watch as she sat down in a chair and got hooked up to the qEEG machine. They affixed to her head a skullcap studded with electrodes. Using a massive syringe, they squeezed translucent goo through tiny holes in the skullcap. This goo was a conducting agent that allowed the electrodes to pick up her brain’s electrical activity.

The girl underwent the training. For five minutes, she sat comfortably with her eyes open as the technician got a resting EEG. Then the scanning continued as the girl was asked to close her eyes for the next five minutes. While she was occupied, the technician turned to me and showed me scans of children taken before and after they had undergone neurofeedback training sessions. He pointed to a mass of black lines on one of the scans and informed me that the child in question had a significant trauma history and now had severe symptoms of ADHD. The black lines indicated areas of his brain that were overactive, the electrical impulses flying around uncontrollably.

I was impressed. “Wow, this is pretty cool,” I said.

“Hey, maybe you’d like to try getting scanned yourself.”

I glanced at the little girl, who was just finishing up her training, and then at my colleagues and our hosts. “Absolutely. I’m in!”

The girl got up, and I sat down in the chair. The technician affixed the skullcap to my head and injected the goo. I was comfortable in the chair, but as the technician got ready to start the test, I must admit that I felt a bit vulnerable. My colleagues and our hosts were standing there watching. What were we all going to discover about my brain?

For the next ten minutes, the technician took a resting EEG, first with my eyes open and then with them closed. Afterward, he showed me a printout of my brain scans. Glancing at these images, the technician said, “Overall, you look pretty well regulated emotionally. You’ve got good impulse control, and your thinking looks organized.” Good, I thought, nodding smugly at my colleagues. Pointing to the image in the far-right column, second from the bottom—the one with the darkened, filled-in pattern—the technician said, “Wow, now, there you go. Looks like you have a pretty overactive brain. I’ve never seen one like this!”

“Overactive brain?”

He gazed at the readout. “Yeah. Look at all that activity. Normally, I would suspect that you had really severe ADHD based on this reading, but the rest of this scan isn’t consistent with ADHD. Basically, your brain is being bombarded with tons of information all at once.” He glanced at my colleagues. “Do people ever say to you that they wish you could just sort of slow down?”

One of my colleagues cracked a smile. I did hear that a lot. Friends and family members told me all the time to slow down, relax, turn my brain off, stay rooted in the present moment. At work, colleagues complained about a seemingly related concept—my distractibility. During meetings, they observed, I couldn’t pay attention for more than a few minutes before I began to fidget, text, or check e-mail. As I’ve tried to explain, I wasn’t trying to be rude. I actually was paying attention to what they were saying, but I was also paying attention to five or six other things at the same time. I was generally capable of doing that, even if on occasion I did forget a point a colleague had made. I just find it extremely hard to do one thing at a time, and only one, for very long. I can’t bear to sit still for more than a few minutes. I get antsy.

The scan confirmed that what I was experiencing wasn’t distractibility per se. I was paying attention. But because of the speed with which my brain was moving, I was simultaneously paying attention to other stimuli, too. I might have wanted to focus only on what someone was saying because I found it interesting, but I was forced to contend with a number of other thoughts bouncing around my head at the same time. In more technical terms, the scan had turned up a shortcoming in my information-processing skills—how my ability to attend to a single input could be overwhelmed by all the information coming at me. On the other hand, my overactive brain helped me. Because it led me to multitask, I tended to get more done than if I was performing only one task at a time.

It was illuminating and not too nerve-wracking to compare notes on my brain with my colleagues. I left the lab thinking that for the most part I didn’t want to change my brain’s makeup, although I did wish I could correct for it in situations where I was expected to focus uniquely on what others were saying. I also wished that I could slow my brain down at times when I didn’t need to get stuff done when it would be nice to just relax. There were skills, in other words, that I needed to build.

Weeks later, when I was back in Boston, I found myself thinking more deeply about the scan and what it meant. Although I’ve devoted my career to talking about neurocognitive skills with people, I hadn’t quite come to grips with my own neurocognitive strengths and weaknesses. For years, I had chastised myself for my forgetfulness, for not always listening, and for my habit of multitasking. I knew that these tendencies bothered people, and I felt bad about that. I tried hard to slow myself down and stay in the present moment, but it was tough, and all too often, I had failed. After the brain scan, I felt better about myself. I had known intellectually that my behavior wasn’t something I intended. But I hadn’t internalized that it reflected my skill struggles and the underlying working of my brain. Now, thanks to the scan, I had.

I showed the scan to my friends, family, and colleagues. Looking at the images and hearing how the technician interpreted them, they, too, understood my behavior better. In their eyes, I was no longer someone who didn’t care enough to pay full attention. They understood now that I wanted to sit still and pay attention to a single stream of conversation, but that because of the way I was wired, I had a much harder time doing that than most people. Those around me didn’t like my behavior any better than before, but they could at least empathize with me better. That change of perspective made a difference. In a small but significant way, it improved my relationships.

Let’s not forget to be compassionate with ourselves, too.



Prior chapters have examined the usefulness of CPS in situations where authority figures are confronted with challenging behavior. We’ve described how parents, teachers, psychiatric facility staff, school safety officers, and bosses do better when they listen, empathize, and collaborate rather than impose their will on the less powerful person. Yet the potential applications of CPS are actually much broader than this, extending into every corner of our lives. I’ve argued for more compassionate treatment of those who wound us with their behavior, but let’s not forget to be compassionate with ourselves, too. Embracing the skill, not will mind-set, we can stop blaming ourselves for our own behaviors that we might not like, as well as life experiences that we might find hard to accept. Further, Plan B allows us to manage conflict with people over whom we don’t wield formal authority, including romantic partners, friends, neighbors, and even perfect strangers. More than just an approach to use in our professional and parental roles, CPS can help us get along better day to day—and even minute to minute. Ultimately, it’s a way of interacting with the world, a disciplined approach to addressing every kind of challenging behavior in every context.





Seeing Yourself Differently


Although the qEEG map of my brain activity helped me gain a healthier perspective on my own behavior, you don’t need access to technology to apply the skill, not will mind-set to yourself. There are much simpler ways to become more aware of your neurocognitive skills—where you’re strong and where you’re weaker. Let’s try a quick assessment of your skills that you can perform yourself.

The following list brings together the primary neurocognitive skills described in chapter 2—the ones we use at Massachusetts General Hospital in our assessments when using CPS. This measure has been empirically validated by our research and evaluation team; we know that it accurately and reliably measures these skills. As such, it provides a simple and cost-free way to quickly evaluate a person’s problem-solving skills.1 Take some time to run through this list and rate yourself on each item. Be as honest and thoughtful as you can.





Thinking Skills Inventory (TSI)


How did you do? Did you find some skills that were extremely strong or weak, or did you find only marginal differences? Were you stronger or weaker in certain skill areas? To supplement your own evaluation, run this list by a couple of people in your life whom you trust and who know you well. You want to choose people who you believe will give you useful feedback in an empathic, caring way. Do these individuals spot weaknesses that you have missed? Can they cite examples of situations in which these weaknesses turn up and lead to problems? Make sure that you also ask these individuals to help you identify areas where you’re strong.

			 				 					 					 					 					 					 					 				 				 					 						 LANGUAGE AND

COMMUNICATION SKILLS

						 						 CONSISTENT STRENGTH

						 						 SOMETIMES A STRENGTH

						 						 DEPENDS

						 						 SOMETIMES DIFFICULT

						 						 CONSISTENTLY DIFFICULT



					 						 Understands spoken directions



					 						 Understands and follows conversations



					 						 Expresses concerns, needs, or thoughts in words



					 						 Is able to tell someone what’s bothering him or her



				 			 			 				 					 					 					 					 					 					 				 				 					 						 ATTENTION AND WORKING MEMORY SKILLS

						 						 CONSISTENT STRENGTH

						 						 SOMETIMES A STRENGTH

						 						 DEPENDS

						 						 SOMETIMES DIFFICULT

						 						 CONSISTENTLY DIFFICULT



					 						 Sticks with tasks requiring sustained attention



					 						 Does things in a logical sequence or set order



					 						 Keeps track of time; correctly assesses how much time a task will take



					 						 Reflects on multiple thoughts or ideas at the same time



					 						 Maintains focus during activities



					 						 Ignores irrelevant noises, people, or other stimuli; tunes things out when necessary



					 						 Considers a range of solutions to a problem



				 			 			 				 					 					 					 					 					 					 				 				 					 						 EMOTION AND SELF-REGULATION SKILLS

						 						 CONSISTENT STRENGTH

						 						 SOMETIMES A STRENGTH

						 						 DEPENDS

						 						 SOMETIMES DIFFICULT

						 						 CONSISTENTLY DIFFICULT



					 						 Thinks rationally, even when frustrated



					 						 Manages irritability in an age-appropriate way



					 						 Manages anxiety in an age-appropriate way



					 						 Manages disappointment in an age-appropriate way



					 						 Thinks before responding; considers the likely outcomes or consequences of his/her actions



					 						 Can adjust his/her arousal level to meet the demands of a situation (e.g., calming after recess or after getting upset, falling asleep/waking up, staying seated during class or meals)



				 			 			 				 					 					 					 					 					 					 				 				 					 						 COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY SKILLS

						 						 CONSISTENT STRENGTH

						 						 SOMETIMES A STRENGTH

						 						 DEPENDS

						 						 SOMETIMES DIFFICULT

						 						 CONSISTENTLY DIFFICULT



					 						 Handles transitions; shifts easily from one task to another



					 						 Is able to see shades of gray rather than thinking only in black-and-white



					 						 Thinks hypothetically; is able to envision different possibilities



					 						 Handles deviations from rules, routines, and original plans



					 						 Handles unpredictability, ambiguity, uncertainty, and novelty



					 						 Can shift away from an original idea, solution, or plan



					 						 Takes into account situational factors that may mean a change in plans (Example: “If it rains, we may need to cancel the trip.”)



					 						 Interprets information accurately/avoids overgeneralizing or personalizing (Example: Avoids saying “Everyone’s out to get me,” “Nobody likes me,” “You always blame me,” “It’s not fair,” “I’m stupid,” “Things will never work out for me.”)



				 			 			 				 					 					 					 					 					 					 				 				 					 						 SOCIAL THINKING SKILLS

						 						 CONSISTENT STRENGTH

						 						 SOMETIMES A STRENGTH

						 						 DEPENDS

						 						 SOMETIMES DIFFICULT

						 						 CONSISTENTLY DIFFICULT



					 						 Pays attention to verbal and nonverbal social cues



					 						 Accurately interprets nonverbal social cues (e.g., facial expressions and tone of voice)



					 						 Starts conversations with peers; enters groups of peers appropriately



					 						 Seeks attention in appropriate ways



					 						 Understands how his or her behavior affects other people



					 						 Understands how he or she is coming across or being perceived by others



					 						 Empathizes with others; appreciates others’ perspectives or points of view



				 			 Now look at your list of skills. Taking into account the feedback you received from others in your life, circle all the skills where you struggle. These are your skill struggles. Just knowing that can help you think differently about your life, like it did for me. Ask yourself, to what extent and under what circumstances do these skill struggles prevent you from achieving the goals you set for yourself or from living up to others’ expectations? And are there ways in which your skill struggles are also advantageous for you? Again, my skill struggles related to my “overactive brain” cause friction with others, but they also help me in my work. You will likely find a similarly mixed picture as well.

You’re not a bad person. You’re simply a person with skills to work on. Like all of us.



Of course, you might also find that some of your skill struggles are more clearly unhelpful to you. They might have caused you all kinds of difficulty in the past. They might have even cost you relationships and career opportunities. You might have been disparaging yourself for years for behaviors related to these skills. Isn’t it refreshing to realize that these unhelpful behaviors of yours actually reflect brain differences in the form of skills deficits? You’re not a bad person. You’re simply a person with skills to work on. Like all of us.

Try sharing your newfound insight about your behavior with others in your life. Let them know that you’re aware of your skill struggles, and that they shouldn’t think you are purposely trying to disrespect, hurt, or annoy them with your behavior. But don’t stop there. Pick a few skills on which to work. If these skills seem helpful in some circumstances and harmful in others, work on developing the skills in the circumstances where the skills deficit is causing you problems.

I find my tendency to multitask especially bothersome when I’m out for dinner with friends and everyone expects me to focus on a single stream of conversation. So in that context, I can practice putting away my phone and focusing, recognizing that it might be a bit uncomfortable for me. The key to skill building, as we’ve seen, is practicing the skill in real life. Each time I do this, I try to go a little bit longer without pulling out my phone or fidgeting: a tolerable dose of good stress. I might also let my dinner companions know that I’m working on this skill so that they don’t feel quite so offended when I reach my limits, become antsy, and revert back to multitasking. Even better, I might let my companions know that I simply need to move around a little to ease my overactive brain. If I keep exposing myself in this way to situations that I find challenging (i.e., situations in which others have expectations for my behavior that my skills don’t fully support), then I’ll improve little by little.

With any skill struggle, pay close attention to the situations in which your weakness causes difficulty. Are there ways you can practice your skills in advance? For instance, if you know that you have difficulty with time management, and you know that you’ve got a series of big job interviews coming up for which you absolutely have to arrive on time, you might try consciously practicing this skill at home, when you’re surrounded by family members or good friends. Look for situations at home where you are called upon to keep track of time, and where sometimes your difficulty doing so causes friction, and practice there. That way, by the time your job interviews come up, you’ll be better able to handle them.

Likewise, if you know you’re weak in a skill, you can prepare in advance by problem solving for it. In other words, you can do Plan B with yourself! If you have a hard time managing your time, then make a plan for how you’ll handle that during your month packed with job interviews. Maybe you’ll schedule fewer commitments of other kinds that month, and fewer on the same days as your job interviews. Maybe you’ll set more alarms on your phone to help remind you when to finish up other tasks so that you have time to get ready for and travel to your interviews. If you’re like one friend of mine, maybe you’ll set yourself the goal of arriving at the interviews an hour early. That way if you’re running a half hour late due to subpar time management, you’ll still be early. And you’ll have an extra half hour to clear your mind, relax, and focus.

A combination of awareness, practice, accommodation, and problem solving can help you address skill struggles over time. But most fundamentally, it can help you think differently about your own challenging behavior. If you see your challenging behavior as a character flaw, something you can’t fix, you’ll feel bad about yourself and you won’t take any action to fix it. You’ll simply give up, plodding along in the same way as you always have been. But if you see your challenging behavior for what it really is—skills to be developed—you’ll put yourself in a position to mend relationships with others and to develop as a person.





Changing How We See Others


Ted, met his wife, Michelle, when they both were in their midtwenties.2 They had a daughter, Angie, together. Ted wanted to have more kids, but although Michelle loved being a mom, she decided that she was done—she didn’t want a large family. As Angie got older, Ted’s relationship with Michelle began to sour. He grew more religious, and Michelle, who had always been an atheist, became more rooted in her beliefs. As Ted observed, he also became more “traditional, more conservative,” while his wife became more liberal. As the years ticked by, conflict between the two flared up more frequently. “I think we both got entrenched in our egos,” Ted says. We got stuck. Relations between us sort of got ground down.” After fourteen years, when Michelle was thirty-nine, the two split up. Their divorce agreement provided for shared custody of Angie.

In many cases, divorce can prove to be not the end of conflict but the beginning of a new, even more contentious phase of it. Couples fight bitter, protracted battles, spending fortunes on attorneys. Both parties come away angry and wounded, their families destroyed as well as their bank accounts. Ted’s experience has been different. Although he and Michelle were not exactly friends when they separated, they were both committed to raising their daughter in as peaceful and civil an environment as possible. That was smart thinking: Mental health professionals have long recognized that the biggest predictor of how children fare growing up is not whether their parents get divorced or stay together but how they handle conflict in either eventuality.3 Ted and Michelle worked out their divorce settlement relatively quickly and cheaply through mediation. Afterward, they focused on moving on with their lives and raising their daughter. It wasn’t easy, but two years later, Ted had in fact moved on. He’d met a new girlfriend and felt a sense of peace about the failure of his marriage. His relationship with Angie was strong. She was also happy and healthy and doing well at school.

Ted’s ability to accept his divorce and adjust to it in a healthy way required a great deal of hard work. When he and his wife first split up, he began experiencing panic attacks. For the first time in his life, he went into therapy and took medication. While these measures helped a great deal, Ted cites another factor that helped as well: CPS. Ted had learned about the approach as part of his work with challenging kids at a residential treatment center. But as he remembers, he hadn’t thought to apply it in his personal life, and he certainly hadn’t applied it as conflict with his wife intensified. After his divorce, however, he found that the skill, not will concept and the structure of the three plans helped him a great deal. It enabled him to understand the failure of his marriage in more helpful ways. He could have a more compassionate view of his wife’s failings as well as his own.

Ted remembers struggling with a number of skills during the last years of his marriage, most notably flexibility, emotional regulation, and perspective taking. As he told me, he became rigidly entrenched in his beliefs, and he fell prey to the temptation of dictating solutions to problems. All too often, he had to have things his way. Meanwhile, he had trouble controlling his temper. He was constantly irritable at home, and reacted unpleasantly when his wife didn’t meet his expectations. For years, he had a hard time understanding his wife’s point of view. Looking back on his own skill struggles and how they had contributed to tension with his wife, Ted was able to wean himself from feeling angry at Michelle. Their conflict hadn’t been all her fault. He had contributed to it—not because he was a bad person, but because, like everyone, he was weak in certain skill areas. “We all want to do well,” Ted says. “Kids and forty-five-year-old guys, too.”

Spouses change if they are able.



But Ted’s skill, not will perspective also helped ease his anger and resentment by prompting him to see his ex-wife’s behavior differently. When she’d behaved in hurtful ways during their marriage, she hadn’t been doing it “on purpose,” any more than he had. Looking back on it, Ted realizes that his wife had been suffering from chronic depression, and that she probably had been struggling with empathy and perspective taking just as he had. Confronted with his rigidity, she grew frustrated at times and acted out. Quite understandably, she came to distrust him and see him as someone who wasn’t a team player. As Ted now recognizes, spouses change if they are able: “Michelle wanted to do well, but sometimes things got in the way for her.” Further, when Michelle acted in hurtful ways during their marriage, she had been pursuing legitimate concerns, even if her actions weren’t so helpful. As Ted reflects, “I get now that she had a reason for the decisions she made. She simply had different perspectives on raising kids.” With that understanding, Ted sees no reason to remain angry and resentful toward Michelle for what transpired between them. They had both been struggling to do well in life, using the skills available to them.

Ted’s ability to feel compassion for his wife instead of anger has led to a smoother, more productive relationship between them in the present. Although they’re no longer together, they still have to work together week in and week out to raise Angie. Conflict arises. Instead of rushing immediately into Plan A, Ted finds himself approaching his ex-wife in a more empathic and collaborative spirit. He doesn’t always use Plan B in a structured way, but he doesn’t need to in order to experience less conflict with his ex-wife. It’s enough to simply think skill, not will and engage with an eye toward crafting a solution together that addresses all of their concerns. If Ted has any regrets, it is primarily that he didn’t interact with Michelle more collaboratively when they were married. He wonders whether the two of them might not have drifted apart quite so far or so quickly as they had. He feels he’s now much more self-aware than he had been, and also much more accepting of limitations in people, adults as well as children. As he says, “We all have light and we all have shadow inside us. We have to accept that we’re human instead of fighting it.” This attitude has helped him in establishing a healthier, smoother, happier relationship with his new girlfriend.

As Ted’s story suggests, CPS can help us by transforming not merely how we see ourselves but also how we interpret others’ actions. If you’re currently experiencing conflict with others, or if you harbor long-standing resentments toward others, reflect more deeply on the concept of skill, not will. Think about a person in your life who has hurt you, even someone who has caused great suffering. Try to occupy his point of view. Are there skills on the above list that he might have been (or still be) struggling with? Really ponder this. What might be (or have been) this person’s legitimate concerns? If your conflict is ongoing, is there a way to arrive at a solution that accommodates both your and his concerns?

If you find that you’re frustrated with many people in your life, then I have another exercise that might help. Think of the three or four people closest to you. They could be friends, family members, or colleagues at work. For each of these people, list the three most annoying or problematic behaviors of theirs, the ones that cause repeated tension or conflict. Perhaps it’s your mother’s tendency to pry into your business. Or your brother’s habitual lateness. Or the tendency of your best friend to fly off the handle. Or your son’s habit of thinking only about himself at times. For each of these behaviors, go through the above list of skills and try to pinpoint those where a relevant weakness might be at play. Spending time on this will allow you to take the abstract concept of skill, not will and make it more concrete. The next time you experience challenging behavior, you’ll remember the skill struggles that you identified in these individuals. Although you might still feel irritated or upset, you’ll find that these feelings pass more quickly. You’ll move more quickly to a place of calmness, compassion, and empathy.

Of course, it’s important to set realistic expectations. I am not suggesting that you will find it uniformly easy or hard to apply a skill, not will perspective to people in your life. Some relationships and contexts are more emotionally loaded than others. We can regard the relationships in our lives and the areas of life in which we move as a continuum. At one end are those where our emotions are relatively subdued. At the opposite extreme, we can find relationships or contexts in which we feel intense emotions. Even with a skill, not will mind-set firmly entrenched, we’ll have a much harder time feeling compassion and empathy for people who have hurt us, and for whom we feel deep negative emotions. In thinking about people in your life and their challenging behavior, be sure to also consider where you’d place them on the continuum. If you can feel just a little more empathy for those who arouse the most intense emotions in you, that’s progress.





Solving Problems When the Relationship Is Power Neutral


In addition to helping us to feel more compassion and empathy and to process difficult experiences in our lives, CPS allows us a way to handle conflict as it arises with many people over whom we don’t have formal authority. Most healthy relationships in everyday life don’t involve a power difference. Neither you nor your neighbor wields authority over the other. You also don’t wield authority over your spouse, your friends, and acquaintances, the customer service representatives at your local bank, or the strangers you happen to encounter on the street. You may feel beholden to these individuals, and vice versa, but the power relationship remains neutral or ambiguous. Although earlier chapters of this book have presented Plan B for use in situations where people are in charge, Plan B works equally well in power-neutral situations.

Heated conflict in power-neutral relationships occurs all the time—during road rage incidents, or arguments with your spouse over household chores, or encounters with rude or disrespectful servers or guests in restaurants. When these situations arise, it’s hard to get past the emotions enough to conduct a calm, rational, problem-solving conversation. I spend my days teaching and thinking about Plan B, and sometimes even I have trouble.

So what do you do? Try Emergency Plan B. Let’s say you’re coming home from work at the end of a long day. You live in an apartment building located on a densely populated block in your city, and parking spaces are scarce. But as you turn onto your street, you see one, just feet from your building. Great! You had stopped at the grocery store on your way home, so now you won’t have to lug those bags of groceries very far. Tapping on the accelerator, you zoom up and slink your car into the spot before anyone can take it. You shut off the engine, respond to a text for a moment on your phone, and get out of your car. It’s then that you notice the woman who lives down the hall from you. She’s standing beside her car with the motor running, her cheeks bright red. “I was waiting for that spot!” Was she? You don’t think so. You made a point of looking, and there weren’t any other cars waiting. You want the spot, but you also would prefer not to alienate your neighbor.

If your neighbor feels wronged, she is likely to be dysregulated. She’s thinking low down in the brain rather than with her cortex. Because dysregulation is contagious, you are probably about to respond in kind. If even a small part of you can bypass that urge and remember the first ingredient of Plan B in this charged environment, you can exert a calming influence. In short order, you will both be in a better position to actually solve the problem.

Hostage negotiators will tell you that the last thing you want to do in a crisis situation is try to impose a solution, as that will just add emotional fuel to the fire, increasing the odds of a blowup. Rather, they will try to build rapport with hostage takers through empathy. One police website offers the following advice for law enforcement officials in a hostage situation:


In many instances, the whole rationale for the hostage situation is so the [hostage taker] can “make a point” or “tell [his] story.” Good. If that’s what he wants, allow him to freely express his frustrations and disappointments, but don’t let venting become ranting or spewing, which can lead to further loss of control. Instead, modulate your own speech style and content in a calming direction.4

Police in hostage situations try to modulate emotions. In essence, they follow the three Rs: regulate and relate before attempting to reason.

If a situation is so inflammatory that you or the other person can’t make it through all three steps of Plan B, then don’t try to run methodically and thoughtfully through them. When it comes to regulating emotions, the essence of Plan B is empathy. Rather than being curt with your neighbor or shouting something nasty, try to calm her with reflective listening and reassurance. Don’t think about the other steps, and don’t think about the other two empathy tools of asking questions and hazarding guesses. These tools elicit information. They don’t regulate the other person’s emotions. Your goal now is simply to do the latter.

Confronted by her anger that you took “her” spot, reflect her thoughts back at her by saying, “I hear you. I get it. You thought you had claimed that spot, and the next thing you knew, there I was.” Or offer reassurance: “Hey, listen, I’m really sorry. I didn’t think I was taking your spot. This must suck. You were just about to park and all of a sudden, someone’s in your spot.” If your neighbor says something rude or nasty to you, then respond with: “Listen, I know you’re pissed. You don’t have to swear at me. I understand why you’re pissed.”

If you’re so upset that you can’t think to offer reassurance and perform reflective listening, try at least to remember the basic argument of this book. Skill, not will determines behavior. People don’t want to behave poorly. When they aren’t behaving well, it’s because in that moment they can’t. That neighbor who wants your parking spot might be behaving like a jerk, and that’s unacceptable. But there are probably some important reasons why she’s acting like this—reasons that perhaps have nothing to do with you.

In some volatile situations when you aren’t dysregulated, you might be better equipped to use Emergency Plan B. Once when I was out to dinner I came across a couple on the street shouting at each other. The man looked like he was about to hit his companion. I ran up to them, got in the middle, and told the woman to get away. As she ran down the street, the man was shouting at me, “That no good bitch! That whore! She’s going to come back here and I’m going to kick her ass!” As the man was smaller than me, I didn’t feel he posed much of a physical threat. I thought to myself, I’ve got some options. Plan C is not an option. I’m not going to sit by while someone is assaulted. If I use Plan A, I’ll be trying to intimidate him into submission. Although I may get away with that, I’d prefer not to go that route.

I chose Emergency Plan B. I was able to do that only because I wasn’t the one having the fight, so I wasn’t dysregulated. I was thinking clearly, and, as a result, I could help to de-escalate an otherwise fraught and violent situation. A dysregulated person can’t regulate another person. But if dysregulation is contagious, fortunately so is regulation.

“Hold on. Whoa,” I said to him. “I don’t know what she did to you but it sounds like it was bad. Fill me in. What’s going on?”

The man shook his fist. “You can’t trust women.”

“So did she do something?”

“You just can’t trust them.”

“So you’re saying you can’t trust her, huh? I hear you, man.” I by no means agreed with his unabashed misogyny, but I was trying to reassure him and reflect what he was saying in a way that did not compromise my own values and beliefs. After several minutes of conversation, he finally calmed down. I looked for the woman and found that she was calm, too, and had the help she needed. My job as a bystander was done.

When emotions aren’t running high, you can use Plan B in power-neutral relationships to solve problems, just as an authority figure would do to address challenging behavior. Let’s say that you and your spouse are fighting about where to spend the holidays. You want to spend it with your family. Your husband wants to spend it with his. What happens in most cases when conflict like this arises is the couple tries to resolve it by agreeing to a compromise. One year they spend the holidays at one partner’s family, the other year they spend it at the other partner’s. That arrangement might sound reasonable enough, but it doesn’t really satisfy both partners. On any given year, one of the partners will be happy and the other partner will be less so. The arrangement is not a mutually satisfactory solution that addresses everyone’s concerns. It’s only a compromise.

In this situation, and in many others that arise in everyday life, compromising is a relatively easy way out, one that leaves both parties feeling somewhat dissatisfied at best. Couples, friends, and others in longer-term relationships tend to use compromises as a way to coast past problems. Once while doing couples counseling, I worked with a married couple who struggled with their sex life. The man wanted more sexual intimacy, and his wife wanted less sex and more emotional intimacy. Classic problem, right? To solve it, the couple created an intricate schedule of when they would have sex, which was not as often as he would’ve liked but not as infrequent as she would’ve preferred. That might have tamped down the problem for a period of time, but do you think both spouses felt as if their real concerns had been addressed? Do you think they each felt that the other had taken the time to solicit, acknowledge, and understand the other’s concern? It’s easy to arrive at compromises, but unless these arrangements reflect an underlying collaborative process, they often don’t last as long as we’d like. They also don’t allow the parties in the relationship to move to new levels of understanding, respect, and trust.

As this last example suggests, having collaborative Plan B conversations with spouses, friends, and others in your life can prove tricky. In many cases, you might need to broach a topic that seems sensitive. Think through where you might raise this conversation so that it feels nonthreatening. Is it during an evening walk? While you’re in the car together commuting home from work? As we’ve learned in our work with kids, it’s important to think about what you’ll be doing during the conversation. Trying to do Plan B while sitting and staring at each other might make the conversation harder. Talking while your bodies are in motion works far better. As research in neuroscience has demonstrated, patterned, rhythmic, and repetitive motions—walking, riding bikes, hiking, performing chores, even eating—can help regulate your brain stem and open up the cortex so that it can process information better. There’s a reason that the military has new recruits march while they learn orders. The marching is soothing and regulating, and it opens the cortex—the smart, reasonable part of our brain.

Also, try to use measured language, taking care not to frame the problem in a way that will arouse an emotional response. If you’re a man trying to start a Plan B conversation with his wife about sex, you wouldn’t want to kick off the proceedings by making a general statement like “I’m worried about our relationship,” as that might cause your wife to feel anxious and overwhelmed. Instead, try to identify some specific difficulties to discuss. For instance: “There seems to be a great deal of tension between us when we’re getting ready for bed. There’s a sort of elephant in the room about whether we should have sex. Have you noticed that? Why do you think that is?”

When you solicit your partner’s concerns, you might uncover information that is hard to hear. For instance, your partner might say, “Well, I still find you attractive and I love having sex, but I just, I don’t know, I’m kind of turned off and bored.” Your natural response—because you’re a human being—is to feel hurt and react defensively. “You’re turned off?” you might say. “So you’re saying I’m boring?” Or you might become fearful about the relationship, thinking that it’s doomed. “Oh, great,” you say, “so the passion is gone? So now what?” Stop yourself. Remember that any reaction of this nature would bring you out of the state of empathic listening. You would simply be stating your own perspective, in emotionally heated terms, instead of listening and absorbing your partner’s.

One of the great tragedies of allowing yourself to react is that you’ll miss out on a potential trove of valuable information. Instead of reacting to your partner’s statement that sex with you is “boring,” have her elaborate on that idea by reflecting what you’ve heard and asking clarifying questions. “You’re turned off?” you might ask as a follow-up. “Fill me in. Turned off by what? By me? By what we do in bed?” Of course, this isn’t easy to do when you are hearing upsetting information. So hold on tight to the tools used during Plan B’s empathy step. Ask questions, take guesses, reflect what you’ve heard, and provide reassurance. You won’t go wrong. You might even discover that the issue isn’t what you think. “No, I’m not turned off by you,” your partner might say. “I just said I find you attractive. I’m turned off because we always go right to the sex, and I don’t feel that we have the kind of emotional intimacy I need.”

Now you have another opportunity to learn more. “Okay, so what do you mean by ‘go right to the sex’? What would you like to be doing that we’re not?”

Perhaps your partner responds that she just wants some more time cuddling or talking or to go out to dinner. So now you’re able to clearly recap her concerns: “Okay, if I heard you right, you’re saying that you’re still interested in me, you still want to have sex, but you’re sort of turned off by the way we’re having sex and you want to try new things to connect emotionally. Am I hearing you correctly?”

As this is Proactive Plan B, you might take some time before the conversation to anticipate some of the general concerns your partner might raise. That way, if your partner has a hard time thinking about what to say, you can move the discussion forward by hazarding some educated guesses. In this scenario, you might say, “Okay, you’re having a hard time expressing your concerns about our sex life. Let me ask you this: Does it have to do with my weight? Is it about how sexy you have been feeling yourself lately?” But don’t go much further than that in anticipating your partner’s concerns. You don’t want to short-circuit the process. The point is to do as much active, open-minded listening as you can.

As with kids, problem solving with adults often doesn’t work the first time you try it. Sometimes you must try Plan B multiple times to gain more clarity about the other person’s concerns and to tweak the potential solutions. But while Plan B takes work, it’s far better than what many couples do in situations like this, and, more generally, what many friends, neighbors, and others in power-neutral relationships do: simply avoid the issue. People in relationships don’t talk about what’s bothering them because it seems too scary to have a frank conversation. When people do talk, they often make little progress, settling for compromises. Alternately, there is no compromise possible, and endless conflict ensues. Each party lays out his or her desired solution, and the partners battle it out, never reaching a mutually satisfactory solution, and becoming increasingly agitated and upset. The relationship deteriorates. It’s far better to talk issues through in a structured way using Plan B. By working together, two people in a power-neutral relationship can generate a solution that feels reasonable, satisfying, and meaningful to everyone.





Plan B: There When You Need It


Linda, a colleague of mine, had been using CPS and Plan B in her work for seven years when she got terrible news: Her father was diagnosed with terminal cancer. He had only months to live. Linda (not her real name) and her siblings had always been close and were used to spending a lot of time together. But tensions existed in the family. After a thirty-year marriage to Linda’s mother who passed away, their father had recently gotten remarried to Tracy. Neither Linda nor her three siblings got along well with Tracy. Now that their father was sick, they found themselves fighting with Tracy over numerous issues concerning their father’s care and how much access they had to him. “We loved our dad,” Linda explained. “Everyone’s emotions were super high. We wanted to see our dad more, and Tracy was pushing back against that.”

Despite the original prognosis, Linda’s father wound up living for another two years before succumbing to his cancer. During this period, it fell to Linda to help negotiate the tensions and try to resolve some of them. As the oldest sibling, she was the rock of the family, or, as she puts it, the family’s “pseudoparent.” Holiday celebrations took place at her house, and her siblings took their cues from her. Yet playing the parental role here was extremely taxing, because her siblings had trouble seeing their stepmother’s point of view as even remotely valid. As Linda reports, she got through this “extremely challenging” period by relying on Plan B.

Linda turned to Plan B on many occasions, including the single hardest moment of her father’s illness. He had fallen on a number of occasions, and it became too hard for him to bathe. The siblings decided they just couldn’t keep him safe and comfortable at home. Their father had always stated his desire to live at home as long as he could. During the Plan B conversation, held one-on-one with her father, Linda gave him the opportunity to express the concern that led to his desired solution to stay at home. Probing into his thinking, Linda learned that what her father really cared about was maintaining his dignity. She voiced the siblings’ concerns: They just couldn’t take care of him at home anymore given Tracy’s reluctance to involve them, and home hospice care wasn’t available in their community. They had kept him there as long as they possibly could, and it was time.

A solution came into focus: If her father cared about his dignity, and the siblings cared about his basic safety and comfort, both concerns could be handled best by transferring him to a hospice facility. As Linda recalls, “Hearing our concerns in that conversation, he could understand better what was necessary. The conversation then became about making his last weeks as enjoyable and meaningful as possible rather than trying to manage risk minute to minute. Dad understood that he would no longer have the dignity he wanted at home. We needed a place that was equipped for it. So we began to talk about how to make this transition to hospice run as smoothly as we could.”

The structure of Plan B served Linda as a crutch she could lean on for support. As we’ve learned by working with kids, the more traumatized someone is, the more they seek out control, structure, and predictability when interacting with others. For those of us who haven’t experienced trauma, this need for control carries over when we’re dealing with situations that are disturbing or potentially traumatic. With Plan B supporting her, Linda could stay focused during tough conversations and not worry about where they would go, because she knew what the next steps were.

More broadly, the approach allowed Linda to feel more confident and in control throughout the two-year ordeal. No matter what happened to her father, and no matter how her siblings and stepmother reacted, she knew she would be able to handle it. “With Plan B, even if people get stuck in conflict, for instance by being unable to articulate their concerns, you still have a way to move forward. You might not get everything in the first conversation, but you know that you can come back to it. You have the tools you need.”

Linda’s siblings didn’t know about Plan B, but they appreciated it all the same. As their father’s illness progressed, they expressed their appreciation to Linda for handling the situation so well. Whenever an issue arose, they called on her to help because “they had a lot of confidence that [she’d] be able to get to the bottom of it.” In the wake of their father’s death, this pattern has continued. Her sister has even called her to see if she could use CPS to help her husband resolve conflict among members of his team at work.

The more you work with Plan B, and the more you do it in a variety of situations and with a variety of partners, the better you’ll get at it. We’ve seen that kids we work with start to get so proficient at Plan B that they begin applying the approach on their own with parents to solve problems. Adults find that they develop more resourcefulness in problem solving that they can apply throughout their lives, even in extreme situations that might have otherwise overwhelmed them. Put in the time working with CPS in everyday conflict situations, and it will be there for you when you really need it. Instead of feeling overwhelmed by conflict and unsure of what to do, you’ll have both the resources and the confidence to push ahead, even when others around you may not.

As time passes, you might even learn how to take Plan B further and use it spontaneously to prevent conflicts. When I come home from a business trip, I usually find that my kids have stored up a bunch of requests for me. “Can I do this? Can I get this? Can we go here?” Often when parents are confronted by requests like this, it’s tempting to just respond instinctively either yes or no. Yet saying no will often quickly put parents in an Emergency Plan B situation if the child lacks the skills to handle the disappointment (saying yes might lead to the same result if a sibling had pinned his or her hopes on a different course of action). As Plan B has become sort of second nature to me at this point, what I often find myself doing is delaying a decision and instead slipping into the first step of Plan B and asking for information. Even when I’m inclined to bark out a no, I’ll say, “I don’t know. Fill me in. What’s up?”

My kids like this approach, because they understand that my request for information might turn into a yes. They perceive me as taking an open-minded stance, and they’re happy because they’re given a chance to articulate their points of view. They also know, however, that I might still say no. But they will be heard regardless. The process buys me time as well to think calmly about the issue and understand what’s at stake. If after hearing my child’s rationale I still have concerns of my own, I can go on to articulate them. Then the two of us can explore options that might address all of our concerns. All along, I also reserve the option of going with Plans A or C, if that’s what I want or need after I learn more about the situation.

Most of us don’t naturally respond to requests with empathy and collaborative problem solving. Much of the time, we let our emotions determine our responses. It’s never easy getting past our emotions, but if you’re well practiced in Plan B and collaborative problem solving, you discipline yourself over time to do precisely that. You instinctively respond in a more open-minded way, showing more curiosity about the other person’s viewpoint and more objectivity in soliciting it.

We call this approach Spontaneous Plan B. A crisis hasn’t arisen yet—emotions have not yet flared up, so there’s no need to use Emergency Plan B. You’re not using Plan B proactively, either, to address a recurring or predictable problem. Rather, you’re using it spontaneously, in the moment, to explore issues before they grow into full-blown conflicts. Spontaneous Plan B is not as easy to perform as Proactive Plan B, because you don’t have time beforehand to gather your thoughts or to plan where and when to hold the conversation. It’s not as hard as Emergency Plan B, because there is no glaring problem and you don’t have to regulate your partner’s heightened emotions. In a sense, Spontaneous Plan B is most important for handling everyday life, because it gives you a reliable way to handle myriad issues before they escalate. If you build up to using Spontaneous Plan B, you’ll find over time that you’re avoiding a lot of conflict. You’ll be using Emergency and Proactive Plan B much less often. You and others in your life will still diverge on issues, but you’ll have developed a problem-solving rhythm. You’ll be communicating much more and finding collaborative solutions, often without even realizing it.

EMERGENCY PLAN B, SPONTANEOUS PLAN B, AND PROACTIVE PLAN B


Emergency Plan B: Solving a problem right in the heat of the moment. Crisis management. De-escalation.5

Spontaneous Plan B: Using Plan B in the moment to explore issues that are not yet crises. A way to stay open-minded and prevent issues from mushrooming. Proactive Plan B: Using Plan B preventatively—not in the heat of the moment—to address a recurring or predictable problem.6





I’m not suggesting that you apply Spontaneous Plan B to every issue that arises in your life. Some issues are best handled with a quick yes or no. Not every issue has to be discussed. You may find, however, that when you do say yes or no quickly, a certain kind of issue doesn’t get resolved well. In the future, you might choose to put off a decision in these instances and move immediately to Spontaneous Plan B. Also, you shouldn’t expect to use Spontaneous Plan B until you’ve put in a lot of practice working with Proactive Plan B. You need to get to the point where you don’t even need to think about the steps and how to execute them. Then you’ll have a feel for when to use Plan B spontaneously to preempt problems and when not to. Empathy and an eagerness to hear the other person’s concerns will begin to flow naturally.





CPS and the Wider World


I often find myself wondering about the effect that individuals adept in CPS might have on the wider world. It’s wonderful enough to imagine what our country might be like if a critical mass of staff in our schools, prisons, hospitals, companies, and other institutions practiced Plan B. But what would happen if an entire generation of kids knew how to solve problems collaboratively? For that matter, what would happen if leaders began using CPS and applying the skill, not will mind-set in the public sphere to address problems? What if companies and unions used Plan B to resolve or even avoid labor disputes? What if instead of the usual congressional debates, in which candidates battle publicly over different policies, we held public Plan B conversations? What if nations in conflict applied Plan B instead of resorting automatically to Plan A responses, such as the rupturing of diplomatic ties, economic sanctions, and military action?

Take the problem of terrorism—might we use Plan B to address this great scourge of our time? Most politicians espouse Plan A–style responses to the problem of extremism. They talk tough, declaring a war on terror and arguing for cracking down on extremists using military and legal means. Asked during the 2016 presidential election campaign how he would deal with the threat posed by extremist groups, candidate Donald Trump said he would “bomb the shit out of ’em”7 and broaden the use of torture. While other politicians are less bellicose, they, too, emphasize military solutions, giving much less thought to softer strategies, like engaging preventatively with young people to steer them away from extremist ideology. Confronted with horrible events like the one that happened in my own hometown, the Boston Marathon bombings, our first instincts understandably are to crack down and rely almost exclusively on our superior power to keep us safe. We also reflexively seek to punish wrongdoers to deter others from becoming extremists or supporting their causes. What we don’t want to spend much time doing is listening to extremists and understanding their perspective.

Perhaps we should. Government attempts to crack down have largely failed. In recent years, terrorist acts have become more common, not less. According to terrorism expert Richard Clarke, who famously warned George Bush about an imminent al-Qaeda attack in 2001, there are approximately one hundred thousand terrorists operating today, a substantial increase over the number fifteen years ago. Clarke uses a cancer metaphor to describe the terrorist threat, observing that it has metastasized, becoming more virulent and destructive. The 2015 report of the Global Terrorism Index confirms this, noting that the number of deaths from terrorist attacks increased a staggering 80 percent from 2013 to 2014.8

As we’ve seen, CPS holds that challenging behavior—even that which is immensely violent and destructive—is most accurately understood not as a matter of will but as a result of underlying deficits in neurocognitive skills. People who lack skills like flexibility, frustration tolerance, and problem solving unfortunately arrive at terrible solutions to what are usually reasonable concerns. This mind-set shift in turn leads us to Plan B as an alternative. Instead of automatically lashing out and punishing, we try under most circumstances to solve problems collaboratively in order to develop and hone underlying skills. The first move we make in applying CPS to extremism is thus to shift our mind-set and show empathy for the perpetrators, interpreting acts of terror as an outgrowth of reasonable concerns met with skills deficits. Separating ourselves from our emotional response to terrorism and its consequences, we dedicate ourselves to understanding as objectively as we can the root, cognitive causes underlying terrorist acts.

Let me be clear: In arguing for empathy, I am not in any way excusing extremist behavior or diminishing the suffering of terrorism’s victims. Acts of violent extremism, big or small, are wrong. They are unacceptable. They are brutal. They are dangerous. And they must be stopped. Period. In thinking about such acts, we must always strive to occupy the victims’ perspectives and understand the full trauma inflicted upon them. It’s true that we can never truly understand victims’ pain and suffering unless we’re victims ourselves, but we should try our very best. And yet doing so need not preclude us from also understanding the behavior that produced that trauma. Indeed, if we want to make long-term progress against extremism, and prevent ourselves from occasioning more terrorism unwittingly through our response to it, then we must attempt to understand. Why and how did a person become attached to extremist ideology? What takes place in the minds of extremists?

Scholars and terrorism experts have presented a range of explanations for why some people join extremist groups. Some cite identity crises, economic dislocation, or psychological conditions as explanations. Although these factors all possess explanatory power, I would suggest that the most satisfying explanation is a combination of challenges such as these coupled with skills deficits. As I’ve argued, behind even the vilest, most unacceptable behavior you can almost always find legitimate concerns. Challenging behavior—even that which is extremely violent and callous—occurs because people arrive at completely wrong, unacceptable, and repulsive ways of pursuing their concerns. They lack the skill, not the will, to find better, more socially acceptable ways to obtain their objectives. To respond most productively, we must disavow the violent actions but also seek to grasp the root causes behind them.

So what legitimate concerns motivate people who commit terrorist acts? It may be that they feel alienated or rejected from society. Or their concern might have related to something else entirely—disenchantment with specific government policies, say, or a personal or emotional problem with which they couldn’t properly deal. If my clinical work with children is any indication, the nexus of concerns that underlie extremist violence varies among individuals. Behind two actions that appear superficially similar, two very different sets of concerns can lurk.

Whatever these concerns are, we’ll never discover them unless we begin asking more questions of extremists. Let’s acknowledge the difficulty of this task. For example, one staff member I worked with at a residential treatment center used Plan B to resolve a high-intensity dispute with a teenager. The youth, who had a history of aggressive behavior, had jumped onto a table and was waving a piece of a chair with nails sticking out of it. He told the staff member that he would “bash [her] fucking head in.” In that situation, it was immensely challenging for the staff member to see this not as willful aggression but as a result of an underlying skills deficit (and to take steps to empathize with the youth in turn). But she did, and it made all the difference in calming the youth and averting disaster. Terrorist attacks put us all in a position similar to the staff member’s. We want to lash out against extremists and the people who sympathize with them. But doing so only perpetuates the problem. It fosters even more alienation and anger. By restraining ourselves and connecting with extremists’ underlying humanity, we might find ways to defuse negative emotions and steer extremists toward more socially acceptable ways of pursuing their concerns. In the process, we stand to create a more peaceful world.

It might seem novel or even outlandish to think that a collaborative approach could help with behavior as violent, hateful, and destructive as terrorism. Don’t we need to get tough and wage war on hardened extremists? To some extent, we do. As we’ve seen with kids, when imminent safety is an immediate concern, it’s appropriate to apply Plan A. Likewise, if we know that terrorists are about to strike, we must take decisive action, even if this means disabling or killing the would-be terrorists. We must also pursue an array of other actions to keep populations safe, like dismantling extremist networks, disabling extremist websites and social media accounts, and cracking down on terrorist financing.

But in the absence of an immediate threat, we also have leeway to consider more collaborative solutions to rehabilitate extremists and prevent recruitment of vulnerable youth. As we’ve seen, CPS works with kids and adults who behave in extreme ways, including those who seem the most irrational or intent on doing harm. Institutions have documented dramatic declines in recidivism among populations that include perpetrators of extreme violence. By uncovering the root causes of challenging behavior and helping us to address those causes, CPS might improve not only traditional prisons, hospitals, and schools but also institutions dedicated to countering violent extremism, such as government-sponsored prevention and rehabilitation programs. We’ve tried to fight extremism with Plan A without much success. Let’s give Plan B a try.

Deploying Plan B in the public arena, whether in relation to extremism or used for any other area of conflict, won’t happen on its own. It requires leaders with excellent Plan B skills: leaders who can regulate their own emotions, listen effectively, see past the deadening confines of conventional discipline, understand complex problems, and help generate creative and flexible solutions. In every organization where we’ve successfully introduced CPS, we did so because we had the firm backing of leaders. In New York City, where our approach was initially controversial, school safety officers eventually embraced CPS because New York Police Department chief Brian Conroy publicly pledged his support. I’ll never forget the day he came to one of our training sessions to deliver this message. The hundreds of security officers in the room stood and saluted him in strict military fashion. It was as if the president of the United States had just entered. Conroy walked down the long aisle, took the microphone from my hand, and commanded everyone to be at ease. Then he gave a speech explaining to the officers that the department expected them to converse with kids and attempt to empathize with them. He told them that he wanted them to build relationships—not because the department was going soft, but because listening, empathy, and relationship building would get results. It would ease conflict. The department would continue to stand behind officers and protect them, but the officers had to pursue the difficult task of engaging calmly and compassionately with individuals who seemed hostile and bent on antagonizing them.

Anytime violence erupts or political discourse breaks down, you’ll find parties in a dispute stuck in their own perspectives, perceiving their solutions as best and regarding solutions advanced by the other parties as inherently flawed. What’s missing are the leaders in a political party who would urge us to stop for a moment and listen nonjudgmentally to the other parties’ points of view. It’s the leaders at every level who would routinely say to the rest of us, “Hmm. I might not like my opponent’s solution, but I bet there are reasonable concerns behind it. Let me learn about those concerns and then instead of squabbling over whose solution is better, let’s try to put our heads together to reconcile our concerns.”

The violent conflict we witness throughout the world owes not simply to the intractability of the disputes involved. It also owes to the persistent Plan A mind-sets of the disputants. Disruptive kids act out because of skill deficiencies, and because authority figures impose solutions on them. It’s the same with adults in the political arena. A power differential between two individuals causes emotions to flare in the disempowered party. Confronted with someone imposing his will, the subordinate person can act only with more primal, emotional parts of his brain. Might makes right leads, in short order, to an inflamed environment where the disempowered are rendered incapable of calmly conversing. When such a disenfranchised person lashes out, a downward spiral of action and reaction follows, and soon both the strong and the weak are locked in their corners, lashing out at one another, and getting nowhere. You see this dynamic playing out today in the thousands of disempowered youth joining extremist groups, the armed uprisings that have engulfed countries from the Middle East to Africa and beyond, the riots that have broken out recently in American cities, and in the rancorous American political scene generally.

Political leaders can pull us all out of this trap by deciding unilaterally to embrace a more productive way of handling conflict. For a leader who has long been locked in conflict with an antagonist, it might seem a radical proposition to put that antagonist on the same level when trying to resolve a problem. Yet it’s the only way out, and it might bring us to the kind of pragmatic, collaborative, “hybrid” policy solutions for which the New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman has passionately advocated. These are policies that cut across conventional political divides, melding good ideas from opposing sides and bringing disparate parties together in support.9

We have so much to gain by listening to one another and engaging collaboratively to resolve our disputes. As we’ve seen, a structured, empathic, collaborative process helps even the toughest kids to learn new skills and adapt in healthier ways. It would likely help the toughest, most alienated terrorists and political adversaries do so as well. When kids misbehave, it’s a question of skill, not will. With disaffected groups of any kind, it’s the very same thing.





No More Hurting People


On February 26, 2012, Florida resident George Zimmerman shot and killed Trayvon Martin, an unarmed seventeen-year-old African American youth. In the aftermath of the shooting, a groundswell of young Americans upset about racial disparities in America founded the Black Lives Matter movement. One early activist for this cause, a man named Bobby Constantino, marched from Boston to Florida to protest. During the march, Constantino visited with a second-grade class in Boston that was studying protest and social change. When Constantino suggested that the children and faculty join him for part of the march, a boy named Martin Richard shouted, “Oooh, oooh, oooh, I want to!” in unison with a few budding social activists from among his classmates. Prior to marching, the children made posters showcasing their messages of nonviolence. Martin’s read “No more hurting people. Peace.”10

Tragically, Martin was killed in the 2013 Boston Marathon terrorist attack. After his death, Constantino’s photograph of his poster went viral on social media. President Obama also gave it prominent mention in a stirring homage to Boston that he delivered shortly after the bombing. Since then, the image has resurfaced repeatedly on social media and elsewhere as an icon of peace. Following terrorist attacks in 2015 that rattled the city of Paris, Jane Richard, Martin’s sister who lost a leg in the bombing, executed a similar image, this time in box letters with vibrant colors and translated into French. Posted to Facebook, it received thousands of likes, shares, and heartfelt emotional responses.11 During the 2016 presidential election, people in the Twittersphere affixed the hashtag #NoMoreHurtingPeoplePeace to critiques of Donald Trump’s divisive language and to express sadness and exasperation following other mass shootings and acts of terror.

Martin’s story suggests not merely the importance of peace and compassion but also the surprising power of kids to lead the rest of us. As Martin’s parents have suggested, “Kids are natural bridge builders—on the playground, at the lunch table, in the classroom—and all of their simple acts of kindness can add up to make a big difference.”12 This book has also argued that kids are bridge builders. The world’s most challenging kids can help us uncover the pervasive and devastating failings of conventional discipline. They can help us understand the true causes of challenging behavior, and they can help us grasp better, more compassionate ways of resolving conflict wherever we experience it. Learning from challenging kids, and incorporating the findings of the latest science, we can make our society safer, more humane, and more prosperous.

But transcending both traditional discipline and hierarchical ways of interacting means surmounting a critical challenge, one that may be articulated implicitly by Martin’s famous poster. No more hurting people—that means all people, including those whose behavior seems most irritating, hurtful, obnoxious, or obscene. Like crime, delinquency, and other social ills, conventional discipline and its “get tough” ethic also hurts people. If getting tough kept the rest of us safer over the long term, we might perhaps judge the harm done a necessary price to pay for our collective well-being. But most of the time, getting tough doesn’t keep us safer. By any measure, it’s an abysmal failure. To achieve more peace, we must build more bridges, not just with people we like but with people who seem to wish to do us harm.

Seem to wish—that’s the key. When you analyze it, people who commit crimes, act out in school, or rage against their parents almost never do it out of malicious intent. They do it because they don’t know another way. And that’s because they struggle with problem-solving skills. Attending to these skills can help these people behave in more productive, adaptive ways. So let’s honor the memory of victims like Martin Richard, and secure the future of the next generation of children growing up today by opening our minds and our hearts to people with whom we’re in conflict. In the spirit of Martin Richard, let’s invite these people in—for their sake as well as our own. Like the thousands of parents, teachers, school safety officers, and hospital staff who’ve deployed CPS, we’ll be amazed at what we can accomplish.





Epilogue





Twelve year-old Adam (not his real name) had one of the worst trauma histories I’d ever seen. As a toddler, he witnessed his mother being abused by his biological father, and, afterward, by her boyfriend. His biological parents and his mother’s boyfriend neglected him, abused him emotionally, tied him up with duct tape and handcuffs, hit him in the head with a bottle, and locked him up in a room for long periods. Although his case- workers didn’t know for sure, they suspected that Adam had also been sexually abused.

As you would expect, this intense, unremitting trauma devastated Adam. As he grew older, he behaved disruptively and acted out violently against others and himself. When he was still in elementary school, he was placed in a foster home, but his foster parents couldn’t control him, so the state put him in another foster home, and then another. He was hospitalized. And then hospitalized again. Eventually, he landed in a special residential treatment facility for extremely challenging kids. This was the end of the line for Adam, other than jail eventually. There were no other treatment options available for kids like him. While at this facility, he destroyed property, hit and kicked other people, hurt himself by banging his head against the wall and choking himself, and threatened to commit suicide. Psychologists diagnosed him with a number of disorders, including oppositional defiant disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. The staff who dealt with him on a daily basis described him as haunted and tortured. He flew into rages several times a day and had to be physically restrained multiple times a month.

By the time I learned about Adam, staff at his residential facility had given him medications, a range of traditional therapies, and the neurofeedback therapy described in chapter 7. They had also begun practicing Plan B with him. His behavior had improved somewhat since he’d started Plan B, but he had a long way to go. He had become so fearful and distrustful of authority figures, and of people in general, that it was hard for him to solve problems collaboratively, even with well-meaning staff. One of the skill areas with which he struggled most had to do with cognitive inflexibility, or black-and-white thinking. When life didn’t go as he expected, he lost it, throwing violent tantrums. That made a lot of sense: His life had been so chaotic for so long that to the extent he could, he was trying to regain some sense of control. But as we’ve seen, neuroscience has another, more satisfying explanation. All the chronic stress he’d experienced had likely delayed his brain development.

Sometime after Adam had started working with CPS, I had a chance to see a video of him participating in a Plan B conversation. Adam had wanted to go barefoot because he felt more comfortable that way. Staff members were concerned that he’d step on something sharp or pick up an infection. Adam got so upset when staff wouldn’t let him go barefoot that he had to be physically restrained. So a staff member had called him in to try to resolve the issue. In the video, Adam appears intimidated and extremely dysregulated to be sitting face-to-face with an authority figure. It’s subtle: On the surface, he seems calm. Look closely, though, and you see that his mouth and hands are twitching, and that he’s bouncing his leg repeatedly. This poor kid who has been through so much, and is so distrustful of adults, is scared out of his wits and jumping out of his skin.

When the staff member asks Adam about his concerns, he learns that Adam wants to go barefoot simply because he feels uncomfortable wearing socks. The staff member articulates his concerns about the safety and hygiene implications of walking around barefoot. Then the staff member starts the process of generating solutions. But he is new to Plan B, so he makes a misstep. Instead of asking Adam what he thinks they might do to address both of their concerns, he says, “So what do you think we can do to make you feel more comfortable wearing socks?” Without realizing it, the staff member has veered back toward imposing his own desired solution—forcing Adam to wear socks. In that moment, he was doing Plan A masquerading as Plan B.

Oh, crap, I thought to myself as I heard the staff member’s question. There we were, trying to do some solid therapeutic work with Adam. We were trying to help him develop new, healthier, more trusting relationships with authority figures. We were so close in this conversation to making progress—and this staff member slipped up. Adam would come away from this conversation distrusting authority figures more. He would learn that even this apparently nice and caring staff member would listen to his concern but then still try to impose his will. In his eyes, this staff member would look pretty similar to so many other adults in his life who had told him what to do and then harshly punished him when he didn’t comply. Adam’s struggles would continue. His behavior would only get worse.

Happily, that’s not what happened. Watching the video, I was surprised to see that Adam is nonplussed by the staff member’s question. Rather than respond to it directly, giving in to the staff member’s implicit demand that he wear socks, he answers as if the staff member has invited him to collaborate to address both of their concerns, and has not tried to impose his own solution. “Well,” Adam says, “you could get me some slippers.” It’s a beautiful moment. This kid, who was quite familiar with Plan B, is telling the staff member, “Hey, look, what you just said, that’s actually Plan A. Let me give you a solution that would work for both of us.”

Through past Plan B conversations, Adam had internalized the notion that during the problem-solving process he could express his concerns and authority figures really would listen to him. So that when an authority figure wasn’t quite listening to him the way he should have been during a Plan B conversation, Adam was able to recognize that and steer the conversation back toward collaborative problem solving.

I feel so much heartache working with challenging kids. Their stories are devastatingly tragic. But in a fleeting moment like this, I can perceive all the difference that Plan B makes. New pathways have been created in Adam’s traumatized brain. Trust has been formed. New, more productive relationships with authority figures have taken root. Yes, Adam will need many more moments like this to recover from what he’s endured. He’ll need years of collaborative problem solving, and likely other therapies. He might never heal entirely. And yet hope lives on. Think of it: An adult wants to force a terribly traumatized kid to wear socks, but the kid isn’t lashing out. Instead, he contributes an idea that might work for everyone. A creative solution. One that he thought of. Slippers.


