CHAPTER 10





Becoming Health Learners


If you are mindful that old age has wisdom for its food, you will so exert yourself in youth that your old age will not lack sustenance.

—Leonardo da Vinci





As the end of the counterclockwise study drew near, I couldn’t help but notice the difference in the participants’ appearance. They stood taller, walked faster, and spoke with more confidence. When we took Fred’s blood pressure the last morning, we asked him to raise his shirt sleeve to expose his left arm and he kindly but assertively said he’d rather we use his right arm. He knew what was comfortable for him better than we did and didn’t hesitate to tell us. John had come to share my appetite and seemed to walk to dinner faster and faster each evening. When Fred told him he shouldn’t eat so much or so fast, John replied, “Who says so?” After a few days, this had become almost a refrain. When one of the men would tell another what he should or shouldn’t do, the response not infrequently was, “Who says so?” Sometimes they smiled when they said it.

When I first wrote about this study in 1981, I hesitated to describe my experience fully, thinking that to do so might taint acceptance of the experimental findings and that the results would be rejected. I am older now and there does not seem much risk in describing what to me were the most rewarding aspects of the entire experience. These were men who many would have thought to be on their last leg before we set out on this adventure. At the end, one of them had begun to walk without using his cane.

On the last day of the retreat, we waited outside for the bus to take us back to Cambridge. One of my graduate students had brought a football to throw around with the other students. I asked Jim, a man who had seemed so frail to me in his interview, if he wanted in on a game of catch. He agreed, and quickly a few of the others drifted over to join us. In just minutes, we were in the midst of an impromptu touch football game on the front lawn. No one would mistake it for the NFL, but at the start of the study no one would have predicted this was possible. Fifteen minutes later, amazed at what just happened, energized, and a little reluctant, I boarded the bus home.

When we returned to the lab in Harvard’s William James Hall, we set about analyzing the data we had collected over the course of the study. I didn’t yet know if we had chosen the right measures to assess improvement or whether the data would be statistically significant, but in all honesty it really didn’t matter that much to me. The two weeks I spent watching these men change—one week with each group—was ample payback for all the effort we went through.

As I’ve said, we did indeed find improvements for both groups of participants in measures of their physical strength, manual dexterity, gait, posture, perception, memory, cognition, taste sensitivity, hearing, and vision. The group for whom we turned the clock back (those who experienced 1959 as the “present”), however, showed greater improvements on most of the measures. In order to confirm our sense that the men seemed to be healthier and more youthful, we had four people who knew nothing about the study view random photographs of the men taken both before they left for the retreat and on the last day. These are the objective observers I briefly mentioned earlier. Each of them were shown either the before or the after photo of the person, but not both, and we asked them to judge the age of the men. They rated the appearance of the participants for whom we turned the clock back as being more than two years younger at the end of the study than they were at the start.

These improvements were the result of one week spent with a group of strangers. Imagine the possibilities if our culture afforded us a different set of mindsets than we have about old age.





We Can Influence Our Lives if Not Our Deaths


While death may be inevitable and life after death unknowable, we certainly can influence life before death. If we put together all that we have learned thus far, we come up with a new way to understand health. Several of the research findings I’ve presented provide reasons to question the traditional way we respond to medical information and the motivation to find a new way. When we recognize that doctors can only know so much, that medical data are not absolute truths, that language hides decisions that rob us of choice, that incurable really means indeterminate, and that our beliefs and most of the relevant external world are social constructions, we should be ready to seek a new way. If we attend to variability and understand that there are always small improvements we can make, we are ready to embark on this new path.

When I first hear my car’s brakes screech, I realize the brake pads need to be changed. I could, however, be more attuned to them on a daily basis, so that I recognize there is a problem after hearing a slightly less obvious and aversive noise. I could next become more attuned, so that I catch the problem even sooner, and eventually I could be so sensitive to the workings of my brakes that I avert a problem not yet arisen. The same may be done with respect to our health. If I knew that my ankle felt a bit “funny” I could be more attentive to avoid the possible sprain or break that is just around the corner. If I noticed subtle changes in my skin tone or the color of my urine I could spot trouble soon enough to take action before an emergency situation arises.

But we have to make a decision to be more mindful to accomplish this. I sometimes go full out until I virtually collapse. I often stop eating only after I feel stuffed. Clearly there are signals to which I could attend sooner that would lead me to stop and rest in the first instance and put down my fork in the second.

When I was twentysomething I fainted every so often. The doctors scared me when they suggested that I might have a mild case of epilepsy. When the tests they had ordered were finished, they concluded I didn’t have epilepsy, but they didn’t know what was wrong with me. I took matters into my own hands and attempted to “catch” myself sooner and sooner each time I felt as though I was about to faint. I’m not sure exactly what I did, but the fainting stopped. Of course, as a scientist, I have to acknowledge the possibility that it might have stopped on its own. That being said, my attempt to control my condition was empowering in its own right.

Oftentimes things feel impossible even though we recognize that they are not. As I pointed out already, if it is overwhelming to think about losing fifty pounds, imagine losing an ounce. When we engage this strategy, we will probably see that our progress doesn’t follow a straight line. Sometimes we can easily go forward and sometimes not. Sometimes yesterday’s progress is today’s failure. This changing aspect of attending to small steps and seeing how unsteady progress may be is perhaps the most important part of pursuing the Reverse Zeno Strategy. The result is attention to variability.

There are practical ways we can use what we’ve learned about variability across most situations in which we must confront problems. We might consider keeping a diary in which we note for every two- or three-hour block of time whether or not we have experienced a particular symptom and if so, what the surrounding circumstances were. This can accomplish several things. First, it will show that most of the time we probably don’t have the symptom. Second, it may reveal some similarity in the circumstances where we do have the symptom and implicitly suggest ways of controlling it. Third, taking the time to notice in order to keep the diary is mindful and has its own advantages. Researcher James Pennebaker has found in his studies that mindful writing results in many health improvements, including fewer stress-related visits to the doctor, improved immune system functioning, reduced blood pressure, improved lung function, improved liver function, fewer days in the hospital, improved mood and affect, a feeling of greater psychological well-being, and reduced depressive symptoms before examinations, to name a few of his findings.1

Many of us are blind to the changes in our bodies and simply wait to fall apart. That’s what my friend Mary did. Mary was told she had a lump in her breast and needed a biopsy. Not surprisingly, she was scared. At first I tried to reassure her with the statistics regarding women of her age. The numbers suggested that she was an unlikely candidate for cancer. She rejected that argument because she knew that even if the odds were low, she could be the one in a hundred. I told her, “No worry before its time;” if it turned out to be cancer, there would be plenty of time to worry if she needed to. The biopsy could not be scheduled immediately, however, so she had to live in fear. Her story turned out fine; the tumor was benign. What would have helped her during that difficult time while she waited for her answer? Given that our belief that cancer is a death sentence is so strong and our psychological strength when afraid so weak, most reasoning will fall on deaf ears. What if she considered how she could help herself right then? If she paid attention to the variability in her body’s physiological state—sometimes better and sometimes worse—and thought about how she might use diet, exercise, or other factors to improve it, she could begin to feel back in control and thus improve her psychological state. Simply attempting to help ourselves can turn out to be an invaluable way to do so. Waiting was hard and so we shouldn’t wait. Distraction may be useful but often doesn’t last very long. In Mary’s case, the “distraction” was actually attention to the problem. If we are taking care of ourselves in this way, we do not seem as helpless to others and, more important, to ourselves.

Recent research tells us that dogs are able to discern if someone has a tumor.2 If we enhance our ability to sense subtleties, eventually we may be able to do so as well—one very small step at a time. The fact that we can’t do it now only means that we haven’t yet found the way. We are more likely to find the way, however, if we at least are open to the possibility.

Mindfulness, as I’ve studied it for more than thirty years, is the simple process of actively drawing distinctions. It is finding something new in what we may think we already know. It doesn’t matter what we notice—whether it is smart or silly. Simply noticing is what is important. When we do this, we will find ourselves in the present, more aware of context and perspective and ready to take advantage of opportunities that would otherwise go unnoticed. My social psychology colleagues are fond of saying that behavior is context-dependent. I am saying that if we are mindful, we can create the context.3

We can wait for science to catch up and then do as it suggests, or we can begin today to become more involved in our own care. The problem is that scientists often fall into the same mindless trap as the rest of us, and so the wait may be quite some time. Consider the following of how our categories trap us once we forget that they were initially based on decisions with uncertainty. As scientists, we divide the brain in half and compare the right and left hemispheres. This works in many respects, but it also limits us when we forget that other ways of categorizing the brain could also work. Right now we study the brain by looking at the right or the left hemispheres because the hemispheres are clearly demarcated in space and are anatomically similar. If we focus on the right side of the brain and a problem occurs there, for example, we might conclude that treatment would be hopeless since all of that part of the brain is not functioning. If, on the other hand, we divided the brain into top and bottom, rather than right and left, for argument’s sake, we might see that some of the brain still functions, which might provide the motivation to figure out how to recruit that part in “fixing” the rest.

Right now we wait for the medical world to dole out medication that has been tested against a placebo. Others have acknowledged that the placebo itself is powerful medication. In many of the studies illustrating the placebo effect, subjects were deceived into thinking that the pill they were taking was “real” medication, that the coffee they were drinking was caffeinated, or that the leaves they were touching were real poison ivy. In all of these examples of the power of the placebo, the question remains: who is doing the healing? Since the placebo is inert, we must be the ones responsible for the improvement. If we are responsible for the placebo’s effectiveness, we should be able to learn a more direct way to affect our health—we can ask, “Given that this pill is not doing anything but priming our thoughts to be healthy, why do we need a pill at all?” We should also ask if the placebo effect in part can be attributed to attention to variability. Doesn’t taking any drug encourage us to be more aware of our bodies? If so, it is interesting to think about how much of the effectiveness of drugs in general is a result of this attention we pay to our bodies. Perhaps we’ll learn that most drugs are not as necessary as we have thought.





The Power of Mindfulness


The research that I’ve described here (and in my three previous books on mindfulness) makes clear that actively noticing new things is literally and figuratively enlivening. Not only is it not tiring, it is exhilarating. It is the way we feel when we are fully engaged. There seems to me little reason not to begin applying mindfulness to understanding and attempting greater control over our health. There has been new research on the positive effects of meditation that suggest we do so. Psychologist Richard Davidson has been leading the way in showing the changes in our brains that result from meditation and mindfulness.4

But mindfulness does not require meditation. Dan Siegal points out in his book The Mindful Brain that the contemplative practice of meditation results in no greater health improvements than the more immediate steps to mindfulness that I’ve studied for over thirty years—attending to variability.5

Let’s reconsider the idea of viewing our health along multiple criteria instead of seeing ourselves as sick or healthy at any particular time. Rather than accept diagnoses as if disease categories don’t overlap—the “you either have it or you don’t” approach—we need to gather information that would help us view ourselves along a continuum. It would make clear that the disease is not all or nothing and remind us that it is more controllable than we might have thought. It is easier to imagine moving along our health continuum than to move from fully sick to fully cured. These multiple continua would convey that we are in some respects always healthy but not invulnerable, so mindful attention to our bodies is more than a part-time job to be entered into only after we become ill. Most important, by showing that on several dimensions there is more of some diseases and less of others, we reinforce the idea that we are not our illness.

If we get at least an idea of where we are on several dimensions and take whatever measures we’ve used a few more times, we will come to see that these indices don’t stand still. Once that happens, we open up the possibility of asking why we are sometimes better, and with that comes the possibility of control.

Not only do we need to actively question the dichotomy of healthy versus sick, but we may prosper from recognizing that health isn’t just the absence of illness. Why take where we are when we’re not ailing as the best we can be? Who established those upper limits? Many of the studies described in these pages question the limits others take to be wired into our bodies or genetically predetermined. They’ve questioned whether vision can be improved, whether aging must look the way it currently does, whether exercise has a strong mental component, and whether on many dimensions we can turn the clock back. These studies show us how to fight the negative effects of unconscious primes, question the hidden decisions that rob us of choices, and unpack the way the world has been socially constructed when it doesn’t fit us and rebuild it to our own specifications. No one is stopping us from making use of this information.

Whenever we try to heal ourselves and do not abdicate our responsibility completely to doctors, each step is mindful. We welcome new information, whether from our bodies or from books. We look at our illnesses from more than the single perspective of medicine. We work on changing contexts, whether it is a stressful workplace or a depressing view of the hospital. And finally, when we attempt to stay healthy rather than to be made well by the medical world, we become involved in the process rather than just the outcome.

It is this deliberate nature of mindfulness that makes its potential so enormous.

Mindful health is most relevant for the prevention and cure of disease before it becomes serious. At the point of dealing with major depression, a cancer that has already found its way to the major organs of our body, or even an extreme case of ADHD, it is helpful, but the solutions are not as easy. Still, even in these extreme cases, increasing mindfulness can only help. The goal, rather than to feel as we once had when we were younger and fully vital, would be to engage in mindful living until we have taken our last breath. It is a goal worth striving toward and one within our reach—to live all the moments of our lives fully conscious.





The Psychopathologizing of Everyday Life


Instead of mindfully attending to our health, we are a culture bent on the psychopathologizing of everyday life. Instead of recognizing that in certain circumstances sadness is rational, we call ourselves depressed. Rather than recognize that there is more than one view of any situation, we deem people—even ourselves—to be “in denial” if they disagree with the dominant view. If we have a positive view of events, we are told we are rationalizing. Almost every pain becomes a syndrome. How many of us declare that we suffer from insomnia after just one night of little sleep?

Let’s explore that last case as an illustration of the rest. For many people, the quiet that comes as soon as we get into bed is actually the best time to problem-solve. The catch is that not all problems are so easily solved. If a solution doesn’t come readily and we keep at it, we may be up a good portion of the night. The next day a television commercial might suggest that if we can’t sleep, we might not only be suffering from insomnia but also obsessing, and we need to take whatever pill they are selling.

It may be common for people who have to get up very early the next day to go to bed early the night before. If they can’t fall asleep right away, it’s not because they are suffering from insomnia. The sleep we need is a function of the day we’ve just experienced and the amount of sleep we got the night before—not some notion of the sleep we’ll need in the future. How was it determined that we need eight hours of sleep? Who were the subjects in these studies and what hidden decisions were made in the tests? If so many people are declaring that they can’t sleep, perhaps the problem is our expectation about the amount of sleep we need. Shouldn’t the amount of sleep necessary depend on how much exercise we got that day before we got into bed and what we ate and experienced, rather than the expectations we put on ourselves?

The disorders we create for ourselves do much to explain our nearly pathological relationship with doctors and the world of medicine. Most people agree that being in the hospital is a stressful experience. To some extent, this belief comes from the fact that physicians are trained to be concerned but detached.

While most physicians surely care about their patients, in a study of medical training, psychologists Harold Lief and Renee Fox found that there was more focus on detachment than concern because dealing with death is so difficult.6 Yet for most of us, personal relationships go a long way toward reducing our stress and helping us heal. Physicians are taught to be detached so they can carry out difficult procedures that would be harder if they had a meaningful relationship with the patient. Detachment may hide uncertainty. If I cared deeply for you and knew for sure that cutting off your arm would save your life (a difficult procedure to carry out, to be sure), I believe I wouldn’t hesitate to cut. But since I care so much for you I don’t want to be mistaken, and so because of my uncertainty I can’t easily follow the prescribed procedure. If detachment helps physicians proceed when they are not sure, do we want them to proceed? Regardless of the answer, relationships are healing and we don’t need to accept their detachment. Mindfully engaging physicians will increase the chances that they will respond in kind.

Previously I argued that medical data, while useful, cannot be fully trusted. It should guide rather than govern what we do. We also saw that we cannot trust past experience as though it informs us independent of any perspective. Whether we accept it or not, experience only teaches us what we’ve already learned to learn. How then should we proceed as health learners? We need to take cues from normative medical data and our own personal past experience and integrate them into our current experience. When we do this mindfully, what we really learn from experience is the experience of being.

My mother, although an intelligent woman, was not a mindful learner. I well remember the day she called to tell me she had heard on the radio that John Wayne had just died. She had been living with breast cancer for the past six months and, scared, she asked me if she was going to die. I told her that she and John Wayne had very little in common, including the kind of cancer they each had. But, more important, I told her that she ought to be the first to know how she feels, not the last. What have we come to as a society that we rely on experts and technology to such an extent that we pay such little heed to the personal information we each have about ourselves, information that others can only guess? While being a mindful health learner might or might not have extended my mother’s life, it would have enriched her time while alive.





The Journey to Possibility


This book attempts to describe a journey we each can choose to make, how we have come so far from where we might better be, and how we may return home safely and mindfully. It is a place where we gather and respect personal information to which only we are privy and then use medical information as a guide, rather than absolute truth.

What would happen if we considered all illness to be psychosomatic, as I suggested in the beginning of this book? Would we learn anything new about ourselves and our diseases? Would we be more likely to notice the times we are disease- or symptom-free?

Until a few weeks ago, my father was strong and essentially of sound mind. After a minor heart attack, too many medical procedures, and lots of medication, he became much weaker and confused. The medical world deemed him to be incompetent. If his disorientation was from the drugs he was given, was there anything he could he do that would change people’s understanding of his competence? Once an elderly adult is diagnosed, it serves as a lens through which to view who they are. Much of our behavior, no matter how old we are, is idiosyncratic and looks even stranger when viewed through that lens. The research on dementia focuses on the period of time the patient spends disoriented. What would happen if we spent as much time looking at this person when he is functioning perfectly well? We might think to take an MRI when the patient is showing symptoms and compare it with another when he was not showing symptoms. Starting with a view of health rather than sickness leads to a different information search. My father was at that time improving and his faculties had returned. He and I both noticeed it. The diagnosis didn’t change, though. Like medical theories, indeed all theories, diagnoses rarely do. In my father’s case, all they said was that the progress of the dementia had slowed.

Everything we find today that was presumed to be impossible yesterday could lead to a healthier respect for uncertainty and the general questioning of limits. All too often, however, the new finding only leads to a specific change in the theory generating it. It could do more by questioning the whole idea of limits.

Questioning presumed limits is the essence of the psychology of possibility. Asking why we can’t become better even when we feel we are at our best and our healthiest is the only way we will ever know how good we can be. The psychology of possibility takes our desired ends as its starting point. It’s not just a matter of asking if we can reverse paralysis, blindness, brain damage, or “terminal” cancer, or even regenerate limbs that we’ve lost, because we’ve been taught that we cannot. And as such, the past determines our present. Everything is the same, however, until it is not. When we acknowledge that things change and that once again our current “facts” are not immutable, possibility presents itself. If instead of asking whether we can effectively change any of these we ask how we can do it, we can begin finding out.

The very first step may be to put the mind and body back together again. When they are seen as separate, the importance of the body is often placed above the importance of the mind. And so we drink first to our health and then to our happiness. But as we’ve seen, our attitudes, ideas, and beliefs are at least as important to health as our diets and our doctors. Our minds are not separate from our bodies. While we object strenuously to people trying to control our minds, we too easily give up control of our bodies. It is time to take back control, to become mindful—to notice subtle changes in our bodies, in our circumstances, and in our relationships, and to help those we care about do the same.

At ninety years of age, my friend Dodi Powell understood the importance of mindfulness to our health and well-being. She knew the benefits that accrue to both when we take charge of our own care. Our last visit, shortly before her death, was particularly important to me because of my abiding interest in old age and my father’s life as an elderly adult.

The table beside Dodi’s bed held books, a vase of flowers, a mug of pens, medicine, Kleenex, and our cooling cups of tea. We talked about the way many older adults live out their last years. She said comforting words about old age, but she was clearly thinking about the long span of her life. Before we parted she said, “I’m not afraid of dying, Ellen, but living sure can be fun.”

We could all be so wise.



