CHAPTER 2





Health, Unlimited


His situation was exacerbated by reading medical textbooks and seeking advice from doctors. The deterioration continued so smoothly he was able to deceive himself when he compared one day to the next—there was little difference. But when he asked for medical advice it seemed to him that everything was getting worse, and very quickly too. And yet he continued to consult the doctors, regardless. That month he went to another eminent specialist, and that eminence said almost the same as the first one but posed the questions slightly differently. The advice of this eminence only intensified Ivan Ilyich’s doubts and fears…. The pain in his side kept wearing him down and seemed to be getting steadily more sustained and severe. The taste in his mouth grew more and more peculiar; it felt to him as though some revolting smell was coming out of his mouth, and his strength and appetite were both diminishing.

—Leo Tolstoy, The Death of Ivan Ilyich1





The world of medicine didn’t have much to offer Ivan Ilyich. Not one of the celebrated doctors he consulted knew how to cure him, nor did they offer him much understanding or emotional support. They kept him busy with any number of regimens and medicines, but none of these proved to be effective. Tolstoy’s story presents what many of us would imagine to be the worst possible picture of an illness: a patient helplessly caught in a downward spiral from an unknown and untreatable condition.

While there are many interpretations of the meaning of Ivan’s struggle, one observation stands out to me: Ivan Ilyich wasn’t a very good patient, however much the medical system failed him. He mindlessly gave himself over to the medical world, much the way Tolstoy described he had given himself over to the social and material world earlier in the story. Most of us do this, of course, but it’s not a good approach to our well-being. As the physician and writer Jerome Groopman once remarked, “We doctors need you to help us to think better. We need you to question us and engage us from a position of knowledge about how and when we think well and how and when we go astray…. It’s really hard to be a doctor. But it’s much harder to be a patient.”2 Ivan Ilyich never took up that challenge.

If it’s hard to be a patient, it’s harder still because of the mindsets that we bring to health and disease. “The baby, assailed by eyes, ears, nose, skin, and entrails at once, feels it all as one great blooming, buzzing confusion,” wrote William James in 1891, a line often quoted to endorse making life simple by reducing uncertainty.3 Most of us embrace simplicity without hesitation, even as we moan that our lives could well be simpler still. We don’t pay close attention to things we deem to be irrelevant, although we all have had the experience of finding out that the irrelevant can become critical down the road. We apply convenient labels to most everything we encounter, blinding ourselves to alternative ways of understanding that would have made just as much sense and could turn out be far more useful. We seek out certainty over a more nuanced understanding, only to feel frustration when even experts aren’t able to be certain.

Ever since the counterclockwise study, my students and I have continued to research how our well-being is linked to our mindset. We recently conducted a study that looked into the question “If the life we live resembles that of a different age group, will we age like that group or be more similar to our own age cohorts?” We found that women who marry men much younger than they are live longer than average and those married to much older men die younger. The same is true for men, even as the average life expectancies are different. The psychologist Bernice Neugarten suggested we are deeply influenced by “social clocks”—that we gauge our lives by the implicit belief that there is a “right age” for certain behaviors or attitudes.4 We reasoned that if we set our own social or biological clocks in accordance with our spouse’s age, we change the game. In this way, the older spouse becomes “younger” and lives longer than expected, while the younger one becomes “older” and dies sooner than expected.

Other research has shown that women are less likely to die in the week before their birthday but more likely to die in the week after.5 Men, on the other hand, are more likely to die in the week before and show no rise above normal the week after. The results suggest that women and men “package reality differently,” in the words of David Jenkins, commenting on the research.6 The packaging we create or the way we frame information for ourselves has real effects. For example, women tend to be hopeful in the lead-up to their birthdays and look forward to the celebration. It would appear that men do not care as much.

In a recent study of personality, aging, and longevity, my former student, psychologist Becca Levy, and her colleagues found that people’s mindsets may contribute more to their health than the physiological factors we and our doctors typically focus on.7 They looked at the life spans of a group of more than 650 people in Oxford, Ohio, who in 1975 had been asked to respond to positive and negative statements about aging. They could agree or disagree with thoughts such as “Things keep getting worse as I get older,” “As you get older, you are less useful,” and “I am as happy now as I was when I was younger.” Scoring their responses allowed the participants to be categorized as holding either a positive or negative view of their health and aging.

In checking the records of the participants more than twenty years after the survey, Levy and her colleagues found that those who viewed aging more positively lived, on average, seven and a half years longer than those who were negative about it. Simply having a positive attitude made far more difference than any to be gained from lowering blood pressure or reducing cholesterol, which typically improve life span by about four years. It also beats the benefits of exercise, maintaining proper weight, and not smoking, which are found to add one to three years. In 1999, psychologists Heiner Maier and Jacqui Smith published a study of the relationship between mortality and seventeen indicators of psychological well-being, including intellectual ability, personality, subjective well-being, and social ability.8 Using data from the Berlin Aging Study, which had collected information on the physical and psychological health of more than five hundred people in the early 1990s, they also found that dissatisfaction with aging was one of the principle factors in how long people live.

People read the results of studies such as this and think, “That’s interesting, but that can’t have much to do with me.” The idea that our beliefs might be one of the most important determinants of our life span goes too much against the grain of what we “know” to be true. We have to put aside our mindless belief in what we “know” in order to understand that while we can know that something is, we cannot know that something cannot be. No science, no matter how sophisticated, can reveal that something is uncontrollable. At best, all that it can tell us is that something is indeterminate.

There is an important benefit in understanding the difference between an uncontrollable world and an indeterminate one. The fact that something has not happened doesn’t mean it cannot happen; it only means that the way to make it happen is as yet unknown. We might never try to cure a disease if we believed that it was incurable or uncontrollable. The effort would be pointless. Most diseases medical science has conquered were at one time thought to be uncontrollable when they were really just indeterminate, and that change in attitude has made all the difference.

If our beliefs have influence on our well-being, surely we can learn to influence our beliefs. To begin to do so, we must make a critical choice. We must choose to believe that we have control over our health. There isn’t a guarantee that we will always succeed, but if we are correct, we will have conquered the “uncontrollable.” If not, we will find other rewards from the search itself. The greater loss, however, is if we choose not to believe. In that case, we have lost at least the rewards of having tried and more likely the opportunity to exercise meaningful control over our health.





Taking Control of Health


In more than thirty years of research, I’ve discovered a very important truth about human psychology: certainty is a cruel mindset. It hardens our minds against possibility and closes them to the world we actually live in. When all is certain, there are no choices for us. If there is no doubt, there is no choice. When we are certain, we are blind to the uncertainties of the world whether we recognize it or not. It is uncertainty that we need to embrace, particularly about our health. If we do so, the payoff is that we create choices and the opportunity to exercise control over our lives.

We don’t often recognize how our mindsets limit us. Consider just a few of the common beliefs about health that many of us hold.

We are either ill or healthy. Just as we like to imagine that the mind and the body are separate, so we imagine that at any one point in time we are healthy or we are not, an attitude that brings unexpected consequences. When we are healthy, we imagine that we don’t need to pay much attention to our health. When we are sick, we imagine that we should be able to find expert information that cures us. Whether that information comes from an expert or conventional wisdom, we expect that it will be a prescription for health. In both cases, we are favoring certainty over a more complex understanding of what health is.

The medical world knows best. Doctors surely know more about health in general than we do. But consider that just as surely, we ought to know more about ourselves than anyone else. Given the fact that no one can know us better than we can know ourselves, we need to take advantage of the medical world in association with the perspective we uniquely can offer.

Health is a medical phenomenon. It is not an exaggeration to say that we overmedicalize the world. It is rare that we experience sadness; instead we are depressed. If we problem-solve at night and our sleep is less than the “required” eight hours, we call ourselves obsessive or insomniac. Instead of taking responsibility for our choices, we call ourselves procrastinators, although every time we do something, there are other things that by necessity and definition we are not doing. Why do we see it as appropriate to label ourselves and what is the cost of doing so? We have mindlessly exchanged healthy experience for medicalizing our behavior, where almost everything becomes a medical condition or syndrome.

Challenge or difficulty becomes disability, and sensations become symptoms. In attributing so much of our experience to a medical condition, we limit our understanding of it (indeed, we abdicate the need to understand it in the first place since we believe that doctors understand these things better) and come to see that medical condition as affecting more of our lives than is warranted.

The way to regaining control of our health is through understanding the reasons we unknowingly give it up. Often when I lecture on mindfulness, I ask if anyone knows their cholesterol level. Someone with a fine bill of health usually waves an attention-getting hand. After he tells us his cholesterol level, I ask when it was last checked. The answer always varies, but it’s typically at least a month old. “So,” I respond, “you haven’t eaten or exercised since? If you never get it checked again, you’ll die a healthy person.” My response always gets a laugh, but it’s a serious observation. The medical world gives us numbers like cholesterol level, and we act as if they are unchanging—at least until our next visit to the doctor. Our health right now is not fixed by our past or defined by past experience.

The mindlessness of our approach to our health is remarkable in its backwardness. We ignore our health until we think we need to become health experts. Instead, we ought to attend to our bodies mindfully while being health learners.





Granting Permission—Mindlessly


We don’t realize how mindless our interactions with the world and each other can become. It’s common for us not to question even absurd information when it presents itself, because it fits some established belief or ingrained form of behavior.

In 1978, I conducted a study with my students Arthur Blank and Benzion Chanowitz in which we approached people in line to use a copy machine and asked if we could move ahead of them.9 We sought permission through one of three requests: “May I use the Xerox machine?” “May I use the Xerox machine because I want to make copies?” or “May I use the Xerox machine because I’m in a rush?” As one might expect, permission was granted more when we used the second and third forms of request, since unlike the first, they gave the person ahead of us a reason for the request. What was interesting was that permission was granted equally to those two requests, even though asking to use the Xerox machine because I want to make copies is not much of a reason to allow me to move ahead in line. What else would I use it for? The “because I am in a rush” request had a better rationale for needing to move ahead, but it didn’t result in convincing more people to agree to let us do so.

We concluded that people mindlessly agreed to the “because I want to make copies” request because it had the structure of a request containing a valid reason for moving ahead in line, if not the content. In other words, people were willing to grant permission so long as a reason was offered, no matter how inane the reason was. It seems silly, but we do much the same thing when we mindlessly accept a piece of information as fact, assume advice to be prescription, or grant that doctors know more about our health than we can. We aren’t paying attention to content because we are mindlessly focused on form. While it doesn’t matter all that much in minor social situations, it matters a great deal if our health is at stake.

The triumph of form over content is so ingrained in us that we rarely think to question a doctor’s orders. Just as rarely does the medical world bother to request that we follow their “orders;” they just give them. It may be called advice rather than an order, but we are expected to go along with it without much questioning. And we do. While in the copying study an empty reason increased compliance, in the case of the doctor the implicit reason is “Because I am the doctor,” or the explicit reason given is “This medication will reduce or eliminate the problem.”

This is not to say that the medical world is not trustworthy. It is simply, but importantly, to say that the medical world is itself operating in uncertainty, no matter how cut-and-dried some physicians may make it seem. And it’s important to note that the medical world is operating in enough uncertainty that it makes no sense to absent ourselves from the decision-making process regarding our health because of our own uncertainty.





Diagnosis: A Starting Point


Years ago a student of mine, Anne Benevento, and I did research on the effect of labels on our sense of competence, a phenomenon we called self-induced dependence.10 In a series of experiments, we showed that titles such as “assistant” demonstrably undermine our abilities. To extrapolate, the same effect can take hold when we think of ourselves as patients who are less knowledgeable than doctors. We become, in fact, less able. Furthermore, when we relinquish control to others, we often have a hard time taking it back. We come to see ourselves as incompetent, even if we are not.

Diagnoses, for example, are labels. They tell us what certain sensations signify and how they ought to be interpreted. They tell us whether a series of experiences is chronic or congenital, whether a decline suggests a relapse or deterioration. They tell us what to expect and what to look out for, whether something is curable or incurable. They tell us if an ache is a symptom or a side effect or merely a sensation. They tell us what to fear and what we should learn to ignore or tolerate. Diagnoses are an essential component of medical decision making, but like any other label, they hold variable phenomena still and provide a single lens for understanding multiple phenomena, not all of which may be reasonably attributed to the diagnosis. A diagnosis describes the averaged experiences of many individuals, but it may not speak to a single individual’s experience at any one moment. In light of the inherent variability in our bodies, sensations, and experiences, it is misleading to put one label on the myriad manifestations of any one diagnosis or to suggest that one label can sum up a person’s identity, condition, experiences, or potential. As with other labels, diagnoses are best seen not as answers or explanations but as starting points to guide the asking of additional questions. Too often, though, diagnoses are taken at face value and hopes dashed as a direct result.

We can become effective health learners only by questioning the traditional ways we respond to medical information. We will be ready to seek a new way if we recognize that doctors can only know so much, that medicine is not an accumulation of absolute truths, that incurable really means indeterminate, and that our beliefs and most of the relevant external world are social constructions.

Diagnoses aren’t unhelpful, and I am by no means suggesting a hypervigilance that leads us to act like hypochondriacs. I am suggesting paying mindful attention to our bodies so that we notice small changes that can be dealt with before larger problems arise. Mindfulness is very different from vigilance. It is a soft awareness marked by an absence of mindless attention to any specific part of the body (or anything else, for that matter) that prevents us from experiencing our fuller selves.

When we learn mindlessly, we look at experience and impose a contingent relationship between two things—what we or someone else did and what we think happened as a result. We interpret that experience from a single perspective, oblivious to the other ways it can be seen. Mindful learning looks at experience and understands that it can be seen in countless ways, that new information is always available, and that more than one perspective is both possible and extremely valuable. It’s an approach that leads us to be careful about what we “know” to be true and how we learn it. At the level of the particular experience, each event is unique. Why then do we think we can learn from experience? That is, if events don’t necessarily repeat themselves, what can one event teach us about a future event? What can one pain on one occasion teach us?

I was on a walk with two friends and one recounted a horrible experience she had had several years earlier. I missed the reason for her mishap but tuned in when she said she had been standing on top of a porcelain toilet. It cracked, she slipped, and the porcelain nearly severed her leg, resulting in 106 stitches. She said she’d learned her lesson. I asked her what the lesson was, and she replied, “Don’t stand on porcelain toilets.” Perhaps, but I suggested that the lesson could be any of the following: “Be more cautious,” “Don’t try to fix things yourself,” “Make sure you’re not alone when attempting something new,” “Don’t attempt anything new,” “Wear heavy clothes when fixing things,” “Don’t be afraid to try new things because the body is amazing the way it heals itself,” “I can take a hit and not be defeated,” or “Lose weight so toilets can hold me.” I could have gone on indefinitely, but I valued our friendship, so I stopped there. It’s not that her response was wrong, but that it was only one way to view the experience. Rather than try to learn from experience, we might be better off to experience learning.

Experience can be a feeble teacher. How do we learn when we think we are learning from experience? We look back at the experience—an experience that could be understood in countless ways—and impose a relationship between two things even though many other relationships could have been constructed. Once we have the relationship in mind we look for confirmations and eliminate alternative understandings. So experience too often “teaches” us what we already know. Sometimes yesterday’s progress is today’s failure. We try walking on a broken leg that is healing and we’re doing fine, and then we see we’ve pushed ourselves too far and the next day we have to take it easier. We could have understood our past experience to lead us to give up, take it easy, or try harder. Becoming a health learner requires us to be open to all the lessons we can take from the world. It also demands that we attend to small things as well as big ones and to appreciate that small changes can, over time, prove significant. Often something feels impossible even though we recognize that it is not. It may be overwhelming to think about losing fifty pounds. It is the rare person, I think, who would be overwhelmed with the thought of losing an ounce. We need to find the ounce of cure.





