CHAPTER 3





Variability


One morning, as Gregor Samsa was waking up from anxious dreams, he discovered that in bed he had been changed into a monstrous verminous bug. He lay on his armour-hard back and saw, as he lifted his head up a little, his brown, arched abdomen divided up into rigid bow-like sections. From this height the blanket, just about ready to slide off completely, could hardly stay in place. His numerous legs, pitifully thin in comparison to the rest of his circumference, flickered helplessly before his eyes.

“What’s happened to me,” he thought. It was no dream.

—Franz Kafka, “The Metamorphosis”





People aren’t all that observant, although we think we are. We see what we expect to see, even to the point that we don’t notice things that others clearly do. Sometimes it’s because our expectations blind us to the world; other times it may be that we’re afraid to notice change, even if the change isn’t nearly as dramatic as being turned into a giant insect.

What we have learned to look for in a situation determines mostly what we see. At some point every semester I ask students in my seminar if I have time to tell them a story before going on to the day’s discussion.

They look at their watches and say, “Sure, we have time.”

I then ask them what time it is and most look again. Shouldn’t they know what time it is, given that they just looked at their watches? The surprising answer is no, they shouldn’t. The first time they looked they weren’t really looking at what time it was; they were looking to see if there was enough time left before the class ended. It is not surprising that they didn’t know the time. If we look for one thing, we may well miss another. While our expectations help us see, they also blind us to what we don’t expect.

Consider the difference between a traditional analog watch and a digital one. A digital watch shows us the time most clearly, but all it displays is the time. An analog watch tells us “almost,” “just past,” “soon it will be,” et cetera. In some ways it gives us more conditional information. Conditional information brings advantages, especially in that it leads us to notice variability. Noticing variability is the key to mindfulness. If I see that information changes, I’m in a better position to ask important questions about the changes, such as “When?” and “Why now and not then?”

For a researcher, variability is typically a curse. It can mean the difference between a publishable study and one that goes straight to the file cabinet. Essentially, researchers test their hypotheses, be it a drug treatment or assessing the effectiveness of ukulele instructions, by seeing whether it can improve conditions enough so that they can notice a difference beyond that which occurs by chance or “natural” variability. If I tested a drug to make people taller and everyone who got the drug got taller, and no one got taller who didn’t get the drug, it would be easy to see the effectiveness of the treatment (though not the side effects). Rarely, however, are things so straightforward. The more variability there is in the conditions of the experiment, the harder it is to see if the drug is effective. If some people in both groups grew but the drug group got a little taller on average, the drug may or may not have resulted in a statistically significant difference. If not, the paper is not publishable and the drug—assuming there might have been a market for it—will not be easy to promote.

Recall the study with Judith Rodin that I described in Chapter 1, in which we wanted to see if nursing home patients could be made more engaged and improve their well-being if they were given the responsibility of taking care of a plant. One of our measures of the effectiveness of the experiment was a series of ratings of the participants’ psychological well-being by the nurses who cared for them. Both day and evening nurses were asked to rate each nursing home resident. From a research perspective, it would have been perfect if they all reported the same thing. Glancing at the data, however, it appeared that some participants were seen as doing fine by one nurse and not very well by another. Some of them were reported as better in the morning and some were better at night. Was this variability significant enough to hide the effect of our treatment? The nurses’ ratings of residents turned out to be close enough to each other to allow us to conclude that our hypothesis was correct and to publish the results, but a lingering question for me was whether the variability was actually among the nurses (that is, different nurses saw the same person differently) or whether the residents themselves changed from morning to night, so anyone would have noticed the change. As we will see, these alternatives—we are different from each other, and we are different from ourselves at different times and in front of different people—have important implications for our health.





Reversing Zeno’s Paradox


At some point in school, many of us have had to confront Zeno’s Paradox. I believe that Zeno must have been a pessimist. In one of the better-known examples of his paradoxes, we learn that if you always cover half the distance between where you are and where you want to be, you’re never going to get there. In other words, if I’m two feet from a water fountain and always traverse half the distance to it, I’ll never get a drink.

Ever the optimist in the eyes of others but the realist in my own, I’ve found a simple, positive use of this thinking that I call Reverse Zeno’s Strategy. It states that there is always a step small enough from where we are to get us to where we want to be. If we take that small step, there’s always another we can take, and eventually a goal thought to be too far to reach becomes achievable. One moment in the counterclockwise study provided me with a very clear example of this approach.

When all of the preparations for the retreat were in place, the participants met me and my graduate students in the parking lot of Harvard’s William James Hall, where the psychology department is located. After they said their goodbyes to their families, we told them to get on the bus we had arranged to take them to the retreat. As I watched them hobbling—in some cases, almost being carried—to the bus I began to wonder again about what I had gotten into, but soon enough all were aboard and we were on our way.

As we traveled, we listened to music from the 1950s, including Nat “King” Cole singing “Mona Lisa,” Johnny Ray’s “Cry,” and Hank Williams’s “Your Cheating Heart.” (To appreciate the effort it took to make the tape, go back in time to before the Internet existed. My students had scoured music stores in search of the appropriate music to record on the tape ourselves, a task they found more difficult since they knew little about 1950s music and didn’t much like it.) As we rode, some of the men quietly watched the scenery out their windows while others chatted with the person sitting next to them.

The trip was uneventful, which led me to return to being excited about the week ahead. When we reached the retreat, my students made a quick exit to go pick up some equipment we would need for the week but hadn’t yet set up. As soon as they were gone, I realized that I was alone with eight elderly men and just as many suitcases. The question of how the suitcases would get to their rooms hung in the air. My students weren’t there to act as bellboys and the thought of being a “bell-professor” was totally unappealing, so I announced that each of them would be responsible for his own luggage. At first quietly surprised, they began to express their discomfort at the thought of carrying a heavy suitcase: “I haven’t carried a bag for over a decade.” “There must be a bellboy.”

Not to worry, I told them. I suggested that if they couldn’t take their suitcase to their room directly, they should do so slowly, moving it a few feet at a time toward their room. If that was too hard, then move it a few inches at a time. I also suggested that they could unpack their suitcase right there and bring each article one at a time to its final destination to lighten the load. A couple of them briefly winced but, to my relief, no one seemed to find any more reason to object. Although the incident was unplanned, right from the start they began to feel that this experience would be different from the overprotected way most of them were used to being treated.

Each of them took me up on the suggestions I had made that suited them best. A few managed to carry their suitcases directly into the building and to their rooms. Most carried them a short distance, stopped to rest, and then began again. I could see from their faces, however, that the task was actually empowering. Although they would not have thought themselves capable, and some literally carried their suitcase up one step at a time, they all managed to get their luggage to their rooms without help. As I watched, the ancient proverb came to mind: “A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.” In Reverse Zeno’s Strategy, the single step is defined differently—halfway between where we are and where we want to be.

People have a tendency to see what is and to assume that is what must be. If there is always a small enough step that we can take toward our goal, however, it suggests that the limits we often assume as necessary may be of our or our culture’s making in even more dramatic cases. Years ago, while consulting to a nursing home, I worked with an elderly woman whose upper body was paralyzed. I asked her, “What can’t you do that you wish you could?” She explained that she wished she could blow her own nose, as she found needing someone to do this for her humiliating.

I began to work with her, asking her to move her arm six inches from her side toward her nose. She couldn’t do it, but we kept lowering the distance until there was slight movement. After much work and many steps, she was able to blow her own nose.

Skeptics will cry out, “Her paralysis was probably misdiagnosed, and so there isn’t any proof that there’s always a step one can take.” To the first, my response is that yes, there may have been an error in her diagnosis, which meant that trying to get her to move her arm was exactly the right thing to do. Moreover, how many of us are similarly misdiagnosed? To the second I would reply that even if our efforts had not worked, it would not mean that for anyone else the attempt would not work. Negative results only mean we have no evidence for a hypothesis, which is a very different thing from saying we have evidence against it. By assuming misdiagnosis whenever the “impossible” happens, we rob ourselves of the chance to question the original presumption.

We can all say we believe in the possibility of improvement, but unless we really do, we won’t find it. That is, we are more likely to find it if we look than if we presume it cannot be found. All told, we can accept the idea that we have no control and be correct or incorrect, although life is meaningless in the first case and wasted in the latter. But if we accept that we have control and are incorrect in any one instance, again, we can never be sure we won’t find a way in the future and will reap the benefits of the search. And if we are correct, we have conquered the so-called uncontrollable.

Why try to help ourselves if we have a disease that’s uncontrollable? There wouldn’t be much point. Remember, virtually every disease medicine has conquered was at one time thought to be uncontrollable, and again, it took someone to think it indeterminate to find out how to conquer it.

Even scientists often make a mistake with this distinction. One notices a phenomenon and creates a theory to explain it. Then the theory is tested and voil&à, the phenomenon occurs and the theory is taken to be true. One problem with working backward like this is that often these theories are like a house of cards: the theory is the first layer and subsequent layers are made up of facts that fit the theory but could have also been used to explain alternatives. Because the theory predicts the phenomenon, the phenomenon is then assumed to be more stable than it may be.

These confirmations do not mean that things could not be different. Years ago, there was a theory of disengagement to explain why elderly adults are typically less engaged in the world than younger people are. Research was undertaken and it was found that, yes indeed, elderly adults typically disengage—the observation that led to the theory in the first place. Because we had a theory leading us to expect elderly adult disengagement, it took some time for people to understand that disengagement needn’t result from getting older. We have no shortage of such theories when it comes to our health. We believe there are known limits to how fast we can run, how much we should eat or not eat, how quickly our bones can heal, or how much sleep is necessary to perform effectively, to mention just a few.





The Googliasaurus


Everything is the same until it is not. Tightly woven ideas and theories may be fabrications that make it hard to see how things could be otherwise. Scientists elaborate on theory with a series of concatenated probabilities to the point that it becomes very difficult to take accepted truth apart in the face of so much “supporting” data. For example, while we all have a pretty good picture of what dinosaurs looked like, clearly no one has ever actually seen one. At first, a few bones were found and a picture of dinosaurs was constructed based on someone’s view of how they fit together. Then more bones were found and it was easier to put together the picture of other dinosaurs once we had a starting point. Now imagine that a new and different set of bones were found and scientists began creating a picture of what would become googliasaurus, where the bones made a reasonably complete image. After it was finished, imagine that a new bone was found that didn’t fit the prior conception of the googliasaurus. How many new, previously missing pieces that don’t fit would have to be found before we remade entirely our conception of a googliasaurus?

We might “know,” for instance, that certain brain injuries create “irreversible” brain damage, and accept that as fact. But if we asked how we could reverse “irreversible” brain damage, we would seek out information different from what we now examine when we take these labels as hard-and-fast truths and merely test existing theories. And so our medical conditions appear more and more as they have been defined by the research behind them.





Attending to Variability


In 1961, Yale psychologist Neal Miller suggested that the autonomous nervous system, which controls blood pressure and heart rate, could be trained just like the voluntary system, which allows us to raise or lower our arm and other deliberate acts.1 His suggestion was met with a great deal of skepticism. Everyone knew that the autonomous system was just that, autonomous and beyond our control. Yet his subsequent work on biofeedback—which makes autonomic processes such as heart rate visible by hooking people up to monitors—found that people could be taught to control them. If we recognize that we can control the unseen, controlling the visible can seem a more doable task. Once we learn to pay attention to variability, that is, to notice change, we are in a better position to ask what the reason for the changes we observe might be and to ask what we can do to control the change.

My colleague Laura Delizonna, Ryan Williams, and I recently conducted research to see if people could be taught to regulate their heart rate after focusing their attention on how it varies.2 We asked participants to record their heart rate by taking their pulse over the course of the day for a week, although we set different conditions for each of four groups. People in what we called the “stability group” measured their heart rate upon going to sleep and at first awakening every day for a week. We expected that this group would be likely to see their heart rate as reasonably stable, with little change from one measurement to the next. A “moderate attention to variability group” was asked to measure their heart rate twice a day, at different times each day that we predesignated for them. We expected that they would see a greater degree of variation in their rate.

The “high attention to variability group” was told to measure their heart rate every three hours, which would most likely ensure a great deal of variability in the recorded numbers. In addition, we instructed this group to record the activity they were engaged in at the time of the reading and to pay attention to the degree to which their heart rate differed from previous measurements as a way of getting them to be more mindful of the variability. Finally, a control group of participants did not monitor their heart rate; they were simply asked to monitor their activities for the week.

Beforehand, all the participants completed a brief questionnaire about one’s ability to control their heart rate, completed a test of their mindfulness, and were sent home. They returned to the lab after a week of monitoring, and after gathering their data we gave them the surprise task of first raising and then lowering their heart rate. No one was instructed on how to control their heart rate; they were just asked to use their mind to change their heart rate without changing their muscle tension or breathing.

Both the “stability group” and the “moderate attention to variability group” weren’t very good at increasing their heart rate, but the “high attention to variability group,” the more mindful group, did significantly better. The difference was small but meaningful. The control group, interestingly, tended to decrease their heart rate even as they were attempting to increase it. Those who scored highest on the mindfulness scale, regardless of the group to which they were assigned, were more successful at raising their heart rate and exercised greater control over heart rate regulation. We don’t know exactly how they did it, but our concern was with whether mindful awareness would enable them to find a way.

Instructing people to notice variability and biofeedback both provoke mindfulness. While they are similar, there are important ways attention to variability is different. Biofeedback assists a person to gain control over autonomous processes by employing an external device, such as a heart rate monitor, to make the process accessible. Biofeedback is a very important tool that deserves to be more fully explored, but attention to variability need not rely on external devices, nor need it be focused on solely biological phenomena. The effects of our attention to variability can be very general, bringing physiological responses, emotions, and behaviors within our control. Probably the most important difference between the two is that in biofeedback experiments, people are instructed how to change their bodily process. In our study, the “high attention to variability” group, told to notice change, was simply exposed to conditions that would foster such learning.





The Illusion of Stability


If attention to variability can be effective in such an “uncontrollable” process as heart rate, it may be effective in situations where our control is even more apparent—if we choose to notice, as in a disease such as asthma. Although we lead ourselves to believe that chronic conditions such as asthma become “manageable” as we learn to approach them in a consistent, predictable fashion, all diseases and the symptoms they present vary to some degree day by day if not minute by minute. An asthmatic’s first task should be to recognize that the most stable thing about her disease is her mindset about it. The shortness of breath she experiences is never really the same as it was the last time or the time before that, although the differences too often go unnoticed.

Medical devices such as inhalers foster this illusion of stability. The inhaler doles out much the same amount of medication regardless of our need; it is not calibrated to lead us to consider how much we actually need at this particular moment. If an asthmatic noticed that his current episode is not as bad as—or is worse than—the last, it likely occurs to him to ask why that is so. It might be that when he has an episode while visiting Jane, he doesn’t need the inhaler, but he needs an extra dose at Stephen’s house.

With that information, he begins to figure out what tends to trigger his asthma and how to control these episodes better. Perhaps he shouldn’t spend time at Stephen’s anymore, or he might investigate what is different about each environment. Recognizing that there are distinct external circumstances that give rise to our symptoms is itself empowering, and using that information sends us on a self-rewarding, mindful journey in search of a solution.

All types of diseases and psychological processes are just as open to our attention. Consider depression. Typically, when we are depressed we have little or no desire for the company of others or interest in looking for activities that might break the spell of depression. We tend to feel that no person and no distraction can help and that engaging might even make us feel worse. Our answer is to retreat even further and avoid a change in circumstance, lest it prove to worsen our condition. Familiarity is comforting and we cling to the familiar to avoid the possibility of stress. When we’re depressed, we take comfort in holding our routines still, even as they induce and reinforce our disengagement. The mindset of depression is such that people who are depressed often believe that they are always depressed, that their depression is a constant factor in their lives.

There is a different approach. When we grow depressed we tend to imagine that we are falling back into a familiar and even necessary condition, one no different from the other episodes of depression we’ve experienced. We don’t consider that there are surely differences in our present circumstances or look to identify them. Our first experience of anything will be different from the tenth if we consider it clearly. One instance of depression may have needed a significant provocation; the next time perhaps all we needed was a subtle cue to bring it on. If we notice the differences between these bouts of depression, we have a chance to cope in a more successful way. One reason people come to see being depressed as a constant condition is that when we are content we don’t check in with ourselves to see how we feel. We simply feel fine and go about living without gathering evidence about our feelings. When we grow depressed, we tend to ask why we are unhappy and gather evidence to support our depression. Thus, when we are depressed we ask why, and when we’re happy we don’t ask. As a result, when we become depressed we don’t have complete information about our mental state and we have little evidence supporting our happiness, which allows us to imagine we’re always depressed.

What would happen if we were encouraged to notice how our depression right now was different from the way it felt yesterday? We would become more mindful about our mental state. When we use a single attribution, “depressed,” for our feelings, we are retreating into that term’s familiar and mindless meaning. We feel less than alive, in part or whole, because we are not living. We’re only existing. Now imagine if science led us to understand that there isn’t a single kind of depression but rather five or more similar but distinct kinds of depression and that it was our job to figure out which kind we had. Let’s say that we were told by doctors that we might experience more than one of them, and that we might have one kind of depression in the morning and another one in the evening, or even vacillate among a few of them throughout the day. Now, instead of a single-minded mindless focus on ourselves—the hallmark, I believe, of depression—we would be mindfully focused. The result of this search, ironically, might actually reduce our depression.





Confronting Stability


There are several reasons that we cling to the illusion of stability to the extent that we do. First, although we recognize on some level that the world around us is always changing, we are oblivious to the fact that we mindlessly hold it still. When we are mindful, we notice. When we are mindless we “are not there” to notice that we are not there.

Second, from the moment we are born we are presented with absolute facts rather than situated ones. We aren’t taught that distinctions such as young and old or healthy and unhealthy are social constructions and that their meaning depends on context. We are conditioned to learn about and see the world as a set of facts, such as 1 + 1 = 2. The world is far more subtle than such facts allow, and we should have learned that 1 + 1=2 only if we are using the base 10 number system, but that it equals 10 if the number system is base 2, and that 1 + 1 = 1 if we are adding one wad of chewing gum to one wad of chewing gum.

The educational system forgoes that more nuanced approach in favor of certainty. It simplifies and makes the world seem more predictable than it is. And so we educate ourselves into mindlessness. As psychologist Silvan Tomkins often noted, some of us believe the world is to be discovered, while others believe it is to be invented.3 There are great rewards to be had by “discovering” the “truth” and knowing these “truths” that provide incentives for us to cling to the illusion of stability. The stable, consistent world we accept mindlessly isn’t the one we live in. One person’s depression is different from another’s and different from itself on different occasions whether we choose to notice these differences or not. Searching out the nature of our depression would be engaging, and that engagement may be mutually exclusive with feeling depressed.

Consider how we might mindfully approach interacting with a spouse who has a diagnosis of dementia. As many will agree, few people, if any, will manifest symptoms every minute of every day, which could lead us to ask whether people are demented when they do not show any symptoms. Putting that important but sticky question aside, we can still take advantage of the moments of lucidity. The occasional lucid moment is one of the heartbreaking things about dementia—the person we know and love is still in there somewhere. Recognizing that the diagnosis is only a probability could lead us to look more closely at those times when our spouse is more connected. (For those convinced that there might not be any lucid moments, consider, perhaps, the period just before falling asleep or right after a meal.) With this approach, we win by being more mindful in our interaction with the person, and he wins by getting mindful attention. Shouldn’t we have the chance to cherish “sane” moments? Consider if a nursing home adopted this strategy, for example. Staff could look for variability in residents, family could be instructed to do so also, and even the resident could be brought into the process. Not only could they attend to each other but each could be tuned in to variability in self, staff, and family. It offers us a much more positive approach.

Some family members already do this. They look for the smallest signs of difference day to day and realize that therein lies hope for connection and continued relationship. When I’ve observed this happening, I find it both interesting and sad if people make the smallest distinctions only at this point in their loved one’s life instead of having attended to them throughout their relationship.

The result of this mindful attention should be an increase in satisfaction, both direct and indirect. It is direct in that mindful attention makes our spouse feel cared for and seen. People are loath to accept statements about themselves when such statements are prefaced with the implied or explicit assertion that they always or never do something. We don’t like to be stereotyped. We feel cared for when we are seen for who we are right now. The only way that can happen is for people to notice the vicissitudes in our behavior. Satisfaction improves indirectly in that mindful relationships are more satisfying. In fact, in recent research my student Leslie Coates Burpee and I found that even intimate relationships are more rewarding when they are characterized by mindfulness.4 In a relationship, when I am mindful I’m likely to notice the subtle differences in your behavior and feelings, and you notice the same for me. I’m likely to make sense of your behavior given the particular circumstances you are in instead of making global attributions for what you do. If we are each mindful in our relationship, we’re more likely to see each other’s behavior from the actor’s perspective. So I may see you as spontaneous instead of impulsive, consistent and stable rather than rigid.

After my grandmother was diagnosed as senile many years ago, I was surprised that a person who appeared as normal as she did could receive such a diagnosis. She seemed fine to me whenever we were together, and so that was the way I treated her. I felt lucky that we had that much more meaningful time together. First I thought the diagnosis was wrong. Then years later I became aware that people who are diagnosed as having dementia have lucid moments. Then I understood that a meaningful relationship with someone who is so diagnosed is still possible. And finally I came to the question of what is behind the lucid moments. If we ask that question, might we find ways to increase the frequency of such moments?

There are unintended results of ignoring what is happening in the moments when symptoms of any disease disappear or lessen. If we mindlessly expect them to reappear undifferenti-ated, we are likely to group experiences as similar even though they may be better understood differently. For example, if I have arthritis and experience some back pain, I may overlook the fact that my mattress needs to be changed. Instead I presume all my pains are the result of the arthritis. If I can see some details close up without glasses, what does it mean to say I have poor vision? Am I dyslexic when I’m reading a short passage without problem? We are not our disorders, and we shouldn’t be defined or constrained by them.

I was playing cards with my eighty-eight-year-old father last week. He remembered every card I picked up and skillfully used that information to win the game. We later went to a pool, where he did his exercises, remembering how many laps he had done and how many more he needed to do. Later that evening he told me that he was having memory problems. When I asked him what sorts of things he was forgetting, he wasn’t specific. He knew he had forgotten a few things here and there, and he just accepted that memory problems must be memory problems. Why did he not differentiate between his problems? Why should I accept that I am nearsighted when I can occasionally see what I’m not supposed to be able to see (those times I bother to look)?

Solutions tend to come when we are specific about problems. I told my father to write down, if he could, the types of things he couldn’t remember, to see if a pattern emerged. My guess was that, at least some of the time, he was “forgetting” things he didn’t much care about and probably hadn’t commited to memory in the first place—a necessary precondition to forgetting. If that was the case, he could be a lot easier on himself, or he could come to care about remembering them and thus be more likely to remember. He might even work at trying to improve his memory for such things, which is not as daunting a task as trying to improve memory more generally. Most of us forget specific information, but most aids to memory are general and thus limited in their usefulness. My father remembered a great number of things throughout the day, yet he focused on the fact that he forgot a few.

We are more likely to remember information that is meaningful to us than facts that are irrelevant to our daily lives. In one of our early studies, my colleagues and I provided incentives to nursing home residents to increase their mindfulness.5 We gave the experimental group chips that could be exchanged for gifts every time they found out and remembered information we had requested, such as when certain activities would take place and nurses’ names. Because they wanted the gifts, the information we asked them to track now mattered to them. We ran the experiment for three weeks before we took our measures to see if the intervention had been effective. We found improvements in memory and concluded that when remembering mattered, memory improved. On the last day, we administered several tests of cognitive ability, including one that asked them to describe their roommates and another that asked them to find novel uses for a familiar object. We found the group that was more mindful outperformed the other groups in the “new use” portion of the program, and when asked they were able to give more detailed descriptions of their roommates and their rooms although we didn’t ask them to take note of either. Remarkably, this memory intervention also resulted in an increase in longevity. In our follow-up study, we found that only 7 percent of the mindful group had died compared to more than four times that in the comparison groups.

The common view is that long-term memory remains intact as we age but short-term memory diminishes: older adults often have trouble remembering the name of someone they just met but have no trouble telling detailed stories about their past. But the view that what is remembered is that which is meaningful (regardless of age) is consistent with recent work in the field of neuroscience. In studying memory, University of Michigan psychologists Derek Nee, Marc Berman, Katherine Sledge Moore, and John Jonides found support for the view that memory is unitary and little or no support for the long-held distinction between long-term and short-term memory.6 A new view of memory derived from such evidence may lead us to believe that memory as we age may be less diminished than previously believed. If it’s the case that we are more likely to remember things that are meaningful, it may well be that the old just happen to live in a world created for younger adults and therefore one less personally relevant.

We have four possible ways of looking at the world. We could always respond the same way to different things, we could respond differently to things that are the same, we could respond the same way to the same things, and we could respond differently to different things. What we don’t keep in mind, however, is that it is we who are creating the similarities and differences. We tend to deal with the world around us at an intermediate level of specificity. We observe a table. More generally, it is a piece of furniture. More specifically, it is a certain kind of table. Unless we are in the furniture business or need to furnish a new home, for many of us a table remains a table. But all tables are in some ways different. Change its location—move a side table to function as a coffee table—and the same table can become something very different. By expecting things to stay the same, we give up the chance to mindfully notice or create subtle differences. We needn’t. We could intentionally look for differences and choose whether to respond differently or not. At the level of the specific, nothing is ever the same.

ADHD is taken as a generalized disability that impairs attention, along with learning, memory, and other high-level functioning. Yet virtually everything we do requires some degree of attention, and those diagnosed with ADHD are able to pay attention to many things. What would happen if instead of focusing on having the general problem, we paid attention to the specifics? Exactly when do I have trouble paying attention—mornings, evenings, weekdays, holidays? To exactly what do I have trouble paying attention—directions to doctors’ offices or names of new acquaintances? Do I have trouble on these occasions and not on others because I don’t really care about the information, I’m stressed, or I don’t like being told what to do?

Attention to variability in our wants, needs, talents, and skills can result in the greater well-being we seek. Holding things still because we think we know leads us figuratively and literally to be blind to what needs improvement. A small growth, a change in breathing, a change in the color of our urine—these things too often go unnoticed unless the change is blatant. When we do notice the change, sometimes we don’t want to confront it because we feel helpless. But these are signs that something needs attention. And these signs—the first change—appear much sooner than is now recognized. This blindness is not restricted to those of us who are not medical doctors. Physicians too miss minor deviations that could be meaningful.

We should take an interpersonal view of our health care whenever possible. You help me notice the external factors that seem to co-vary systematically with my symptoms and I notice them for you. Ultimately, the responsibility is still the individual’s, but like therapists who point these things out to us, so too can our doctors, significant others, close friends, or relatives. Consider what would happen regarding an elderly parent in this regard. Adult children often feel helpless when trying to deal with their aging parents. Not infrequently they infantilize them and overprotect them. We often forget that whether or not a parent wants to wear a hearing aid, for example, is still her choice, not ours. Some older people may not want to hear what their children or nurses have to say. I have a friend whose liberal Democratic great-aunt would turn off her hearing aid when she and her arch-Republican husband set off from Boston to drive to the town where they voted. More important, hearing, like most everything else, is not likely to go away all at once, nor is our ability to hear the same for all types of sound and in all types of environment. A lack of interest may masquerade as a hearing loss. If we were to notice the distinctions in our parents’ ability to hear—the times and conditions when their loss is particularly great and when it is not—two things happen. First, we feel useful. Second, our parent may find the information useful. But most of us don’t make these distinctions. Instead, we see them as experiencing a general loss, make unhelpful comments about their inability to hear, and shout when we may not have to.

Noticing differences is the essence of mindfulness. Don’t imagine, however, that all this noticing need be exhausting and leave little time for anything else. Mindfulness is actually energizing, not enervating.





