CHAPTER 6





Words in Context


Words differently arranged have a different meaning and meanings differently arranged have a different effect.

—Blaise Pascal





We all know that good communication fosters healthy relationships. When two people “speak the same language,” they both presume they see the same world and share common experiences. We use language to communicate essential facts about the world and our experience in it. For the most part, it serves us well. Language does, however, lead us to believe we know less than we could; it often creates a naive realism and an illusion of knowing that comes with many built-in limitations.

When we all use the same words, we can easily get lulled into thinking we are having the same experience, when in fact our experiences may be very different. One way to look at it is that our experience is in motion, but our language holds that experience still. Our description of last night’s Red Sox game—“It was a close game, but in the bottom of the ninth inning the batter hit a walk-off home run”—while informative, doesn’t capture our felt experience.

Language needn’t be explicitly verbal; cues are so often paired with language that we are able to understand other people by their nonverbal behavior alone. Take a simple sound, for example, “psst.” Using only that sound, try having a conversation with someone where you want to communicate anger. “Psst, psst, psst”—your tone can tell another person how you feel. Now try to communicate appreciation and caring. It works just as well here. Language writ large—verbal and nonverbal together—is a highly social activity that leads us to ignore individual experience and seek to engage that which is common among us, and so we learn to listen to the outside world instead of listening to ourselves. When you ask me how I feel and I tell you I have a stomachache, I presume that your experience of stomachaches enables you to understand that I feel reasonably unwell. But the many possible differences between our experiences get lost, as language creates an illusion of knowing. Language is shorthand; individual experience is the full text.

I recently visited a dentist who told me at one point in the procedure that I would feel pressure. I didn’t feel pressure and I didn’t feel any pain. I did not know how to describe what I did feel and so I said nothing. In truth, I ignored the experience, because it didn’t fit the language of the situation. It might not have mattered at the time, but any information I don’t convey might be very important in different situations, so there may be an advantage in coming to better know our individual experience. At the least, I probably should have said that I was having difficulty describing what I was experiencing. At that point, I hope, he’d ask me questions that helped me to convey it.

Language too often binds us to a single perspective. By dint of their experience and training, doctors and patients come to the table speaking and hearing different languages. What the doctor understands when I say “It hurts a bit” may be quite different from what I mean to communicate. I might be trying to tolerate what is in fact a good deal of pain, and she hears that the pain is not a big problem. I might also be feeling very little pain, but she hears that I have a pain worthy of intervention and medication. We don’t often question information when it comes to us from an authority or it is presented in absolute and unyielding language. We simply accept it and become trapped in a fixed mindset, oblivious to the fact that authorities are sometimes wrong or overstate their case, or that language can be highly manipulative. When doctors speak with us, we all too often take their insights as revelations and their advice as dictum.

Imagine an approach that opens us up to uncertainty, which opens us up to possibility. If doctors simply preceded statements with phrases such as “In my view,” it would remind us that there are competing views. (Of course, some physicians already do this some of the time.) “Wait!” I can hear someone saying. “We want our doctors to be exact and certain of what they tell us.” Yes, we do, but they aren’t or shouldn’t be nearly as certain as we want to believe, and it does us no good to imagine that they are when they are not. When we communicate with each other using impersonal, absolute language we are led into a naive realism where we come to think there is a single reality that we all share. This naive realism in turn leads us away from realizing that we have choices and enjoy possibility.

In fact, in several experiments my students and I found that when we substitute conditional terms such as could be, perhaps, or in one view for is people actually question the information and are able to think about it in new ways. In one of these studies we altered part of a textbook on urban development to read conditionally, in another we altered a programmed text on learning CPR to read conditionally, and in a third we showed them objects labeled either conditionally or absolutely—“This could be a dog’s chew toy” or “This is a dog’s chew toy”—and then tested participants on the creative use of the item.1 Those participants for whom the information was presented as conditional were able to think about and use the information creatively in the future. If I tell you that a high cholesterol level is dangerous, stress is likely to follow. If we learned that a high level of cholesterol could be dangerous, we’re probably going to be less stressed but more attentive to our health than if we were told nothing. Using conditional language leads both the speaker and the listener to be more mindful. Of course, we as listeners can and perhaps should hear conditionally regardless of how absolute the speaker is being. Moreover, by recognizing that language is not the same thing as experience and that it speaks to our similarities rather than our differences, we are more inclined to recognize that our health experience, although described similarly to others, may be quite unique. Only we know what our experience is and we cannot afford to give up our control of it. No matter how careful a doctor is, his role as expert, combined with a patient’s expectation for certainty, make the language of medicine very powerful.

Recent research by psychologists Jean-François Bonnefon and Gaelle Villejoubert speaks to how we misinterpret doctors, even when they use words such as possibly to describe a patient’s illness.2 If your supervisor at work tells you, “You may possibly get to take a trip to Europe next summer,” you’re likely to imagine that even though the chances are slim, there is the possibility that you may get to actually go. But if she tells you, “Your raise will possibly be refused,” you’re more likely to think in certainties—it’s not going to come through and she’s just using possibly to soften the blow of the bad news. Bonnefon and Villejoubert found that in the case of minor side effects or ailments (“You may possibly suffer from muscle aches”), possibly is usually interpreted in the first sense: the doctor is not sure that it will happen and the chances are just as good that you might not suffer muscle aches. When side effects or medical conditions are mentioned less absolutely (“You may go deaf”), however, the interpretation is more likely to be that the doctor is sure that it will happen, but he is trying to be tactful. Patients who interpret it in this way imagine that they are very likely to contract the ailment, whatever the degree of probability the doctor actually has in mind, which can lead to irrational decisions about what action to take. The point is that sometimes conditional language is understood as absolute and sometimes not. It’s important that we understand that conditional language doesn’t guarantee a conditional understanding of our diseases.

Some people believe we have power over our diseases but they nonetheless unwittingly accept metaphors that may work against them. Instead of giving in to disease, we encourage ourselves to try to “fight” it. That’s an interesting word choice, one that feels quite dramatic but might incur hidden effects. If a very young child were annoying us, we would not “fight” the child; we only fight worthy opponents. Thus the idea of battling and fighting illness only bolsters the power we feel it has over our health. We may well be better off with another metaphor, such as mastering our condition, which implies learning everything we can about it in order to control it over the long haul. The words we use matter.





Priming and Placebos


Add the following numbers up: one thousand plus forty, plus one thousand, plus thirty, plus one thousand, plus twenty, plus one thousand, plus ten. Many people come up with five thousand as the answer to this problem, given to us by Shlomo Benartzi of UCLA Anderson School of Management. The repetition of the word thousand primes us to think in thousands. The correct answer, however, is not 5,000, but 4,100. We’re often unaware of our errors.

Most of us think that we are in charge of our thoughts and can choose to direct them one way or another. If we learn the information mindfully, this will be the case. Much of what we have learned, however, was learned mindlessly as we uncritically accepted information without thinking about it, often because the information was given to us by an authority or was initially irrelevant. Even if it is to our advantage to rethink the information at some point, it simply doesn’t occur to us to do so. This makes us very vulnerable to the effects of priming, which we saw in the previous chapter. The way priming works is to trigger ideas we have mindlessly committed ourselves to without our awareness. For example, if we’ve learned that women are not very good at math, and the concept “woman” is primed, math ability will suffer. Psychologists Margaret Shih, Todd Pittinsky, and Nalini Ambady found just this when they had female Asian students take math tests where for one group their identity of “Asian” was primed and for another group their identity as “woman” was primed.3 The stereotype of Asians is that they are good in math. The stereotype of women is that they are not good in math. They primed gender by asking questions such as whether they lived in a coed dorm. They primed ethnic identity by asking if there were any languages other than English spoken in their extended family. Their scores plunged when their identities as women were primed, but when their identities as Asians were primed, their scores soared.

We find primes everywhere in our lives and culture—a casual comment, the crossword puzzle we are filling in, a billboard, or a television program. No matter how inconsequential it may seem, a single word can lead us to behave in ways we would have rejected if only we were more aware of what was happening.

We have learned so much about physical and psychological health and health-related matters mindlessly that vast amounts of information can be primed with very little provocation. Psychologist Becca Levy found that when seniors were primed for positive stereotypes of aging, their memory and self-reliance in remembering improved, and when they were primed with negative cues, their memory and self-reliance in remembering grew worse.4 What most influenced their response was the degree of importance that they put on the stereotypes for their self-image. Those who were more sensitive to the negative stereotypes activated fears within themselves and impaired their memory and self-reliance in remembering. Levy had participants sit at a computer that was programmed to present descriptions of behavior that were related to positive images (“see all sides of issues”) or negative ones (“can’t recall birthdays”) faster than they could make out the words. Afterward, they were given a memory test and a test of their attitudes toward aging. The latter test presented participants with situations that could be interpreted in at least two ways—for example, one about a seventy-three-year-old woman who moved in with her daughter. Those who interpreted the situation negatively saw the older woman as dependent, and those who interpreted the situation positively saw her as interdependent. Participants who were initially primed with positive words showed memory improvements over control groups; similarly, when primed with negative words, they performed worse.

Another study conducted by Becca Levy with Jeffrey Hausdorff, Rebecca Hencke, and Jeanne Wei showed that priming individuals for health can activate healthy behavior, just as wisdom-related words primed a healthier memory.5 Participants completed a “language proficiency task” that activated thoughts about a healthy lifestyle or an unhealthy lifestyle. Those who were primed for a healthy lifestyle were more likely to use the stairs instead of the elevator later. Simply priming “health” can facilitate healthy behavior. Studies such as these seem to suggest that mindlessness can be a good thing in that it enables positive primes to affect us so easily. The problem is that the unconscious influence of primes also takes a toll on us. When we are mindless, we can’t control their effects.

This can be seen in the recent explosion of healthy fast-food products. McDonald’s now offers several salad options as well as yogurt and granola for dessert. Fast-food restaurants as a category, however, prime us for the burgers and fries. Despite the healthy food on the menu, the name McDonald’s, the smell of the burgers, and all the other things that we associate with fast food can prime us to eat burgers and fries instead of the healthier fare. In a study assessing people’s attitudes toward food, researchers found that the environment does prime participants to make certain mindless associations with food; when their attention was focused on how good the food tastes, they preferred food such as burgers and fries.6 Similarly, when participants were focused on health, participants displayed a preference for healthier foods and a greater preference for low-fat versus high-fat foods. The study also found that increasing levels of craving made them hungrier and less interested in health-related benefits and encouraged selecting and eating foods solely based on taste. McDonald’s has been in the business of burgers and fries forever, so it is reasonable that people will associate it with unhealthy fast food. Adding salads and healthier fare may diminish critics of supersized portions, but it not likely to greatly improve our eating habits. As these researchers point out, our food choices often depend on whether we are walking through a street lined with nice restaurants and filled with the smell of tasty food or whether we are walking past a fitness gym or an advertisement for beachwear right before we sit down to eat.

In a wonderfully interesting study, researchers Baba Shiv, Ziv Carmon, and Dan Ariely gave participants at a fitness center what they were led to believe was an energy-enhancing drink before beginning their regular workouts.7 One group was told that the cost of the drink was $2.89. Another group was told that the drink regularly sold for $2.89, but because they bought it in bulk, the discounted price was just 89 cents. Those in the “reduced price” group rated their workout intensity as lower and reported that they were more fatigued afterward than the “regular price” group. More expensive may often mean better, but in cases like these the expensive prime is unnecessarily costly.

In another clever study Dan Ariely, Baba Shiv, and Rebecca L. Waber conducted on placebos, a drug was described as a new “opioid analgesic,” approved by the Food and Drug Administration, that was supposed to work like codeine but faster.8 Half of their participants were told the drug cost $2.50 a pill and half were told it had been discounted to 10 cents. The researchers found that when the pill was presented as more expensive, it was more effective in reducing pain, despite the fact that everyone received the same placebo.

Price aside, placebos may be the best example of primes. We presume a pill is going to make us better, and thus it primes health, even though the pill contains an inert substance. Asking how placebos work means that we are essentially asking how we get from our thoughts to our bodies. If we conceive of the mind as a separate entity from the body, then to understand such phenomena as placebos, we need to figure out how they communicate with each other. Mind and body have not always been seen as separate, however. There have been periods of history and cultures in which this dualism is not an assumption. Today, in fact, among the !Kung, the people of the Kalahari Desert of southern Africa, mind and body are still considered one: healing practices for physical and psychological disturbances are the same. Their all-night healing dances are performed to treat problems ranging from marital problems to coughs to insufficient breast milk. The healing energy of the community is focused on the whole person, not simply the mind or the body. It’s unfortunate that only among an isolated tribe like this do we still see this nondualism.

In psychology, a dualistic view of mind and body has been very persistent. Until the end of the last century, psychology was a branch of philosophy and took its notions of mind from those held by philosophers. The separation of mind and body is often traced to Descartes, who thought the mind was nonmaterial and the body was material. Only the body was subject to the laws of physics. Though many have tried to dispel that kind of thinking, most of us still look at ourselves in this dualist way.

All this is not a matter of semantics or academic theorizing; the separation of mind and body has serious consequences. The distinctions we make between physical and mental illness are questionable. We shouldn’t separate them or try to reduce one to the other, nor should they be thought to be distinct but “related” entities.

The psychologist Herbert Lefcourt tells the story of an institutionalized woman who had been in a mute state for nearly ten years when she and others in her unit were moved to a different floor of the building while their own was being renovated.9 The third-floor unit where she had been living was known among the patients as the “chronic/hopeless” floor. Her new unit, on the first floor, usually held patients who were close to being released and enjoyed special privileges, including the freedom to wander the hospital grounds and the neighboring streets.

Prior to moving the patients, staff gave medical examinations to the patients, and the woman in question was judged to be in excellent medical health, despite being mute and withdrawn. Much to the surprise of her doctors, shortly after moving to the first floor and enjoying some of the first-floor privileges, the patient began to be responsive to the staff and other patients, and soon she began to speak, in time becoming quite gregarious. Unfortunately, the redecoration of the third floor was soon complete. Within a week after she had been returned to the “hopeless” unit, the woman collapsed and died. Her autopsy revealed no known medical cause, although some suggested that she had died of despair.

When we see mind and body as parts of a single entity, the research on placebos takes on new meaning and suggests we can not only control much of our disease experience, but we may also be able to extend our ability to gain, recover, or enhance our health.

Placebos often come in the form of a single word that captures a richer mindset. In one study I conducted with my students, we explored the mindset most of us have regarding the excellent vision air force pilots have.10 All participants were given a vision test. One group of participants was then encouraged to role-play “air force pilots.” They dressed the part and, in uniform, sat in a flight simulator. They were asked to read the letters on the wing of a nearby plane, which were actually part of an eye chart. Those participants who adopted the “pilot” mindset, primed to have excellent vision, showed improved vision over those who were simulating being in the simulator and simply asked to read an eye chart from the same distance.

Three members of my lab, Maja Djikic, Michael Pirson, and Arin Madenci, recently continued this work on vision with Rebecca Donohue at Simmons College Department of Nursing.11 Eye charts are designed such that the larger letters are on the top, with the letters growing progressively smaller down the chart. Since eye tests are administered top to bottom, this inadvertently creates the expectation that at some point we will not be able to clearly read the letters. What would happen if the chart were reversed, with the smallest letters on top? Now the expectation would be different. In this case we would expect that soon we’d be able to see. Participants tested indeed showed enhanced vision using the redesigned chart, and they were able to read lines they couldn’t see before on a standard eye chart. In all but one case, subjects could read the same number of small letters on a line on the reversed chart that was only visible on a line ten font sizes larger on the regular eye charts. Also interesting was that the subjects thought they did better on the normal chart. We’re blind to what we don’t expect.

Starting with the observation that people typically believe they can easily read the first few lines of an eye chart, we tried shifting the chart instead of reversing it. We created a chart that began with letters the size of those found a third of the way down a normal chart. We then measured how far down the chart subjects could read and found that they performed better than they did with a normal chart. Again, they were able to see letters that they couldn’t see before.

When someone reports that he has less than perfect vision, say 20/40 vision, what does that mean? Is it really reasonable to expect that under all circumstances he will be able to see equally well or poorly, regardless of how tired, hungry, or angry he may be? Regardless of the context in which the object viewed appears? Is seeing a moving target the same as seeing a still object? Is seeing something in one color the same as seeing it in others? Is seeing something familiar the same as seeing something novel? In each case, I think not.

There may be many ways to improve our vision. Psychologists Daphne Bavelier and C. Shawn Green, in fact, found that the act of playing video games can improve visual skills.12 Interestingly, they attribute the improvement to the uncertainty regarding what will happen—and when it will happen; when we don’t know what to expect, we stay mindful.

If our expectations affect our vision in this unusual way, it also may be the case for our hearing. Tom Mikuckis, another member of my lab, set out to test this using the vision study as a guide. We used an “equal loudness contours and audiometry” hearing test, provided online by the University of New South Wales. Each participant was played two series of tones twice separated in time by one week. For one, tones were played from loudest to softest, as the volume was decreased in three jumps of six decibels. For the other, the tones were played from softest to loudest. Participants indicated each time they heard a tone. To make this similar to the vision study, where people from the start knew that the order of the chart was reversed, participants in the second week were told what to expect before they began. The order of the series was controlled to eliminate practice effects. We used trials where there were no sounds to make sure all responses were honest. As with the vision study, we found that in the soft to loud series people were able to hear one step down in volume when they had the expectation that soon they would be able to hear but not in the control series (without the expectation). Fourteen of the twenty-one participants showed this improvement when the series was soft to loud. Just as language acts as a prime, so too do our expectations. They can have a measurable influence on bodies, including our ability to see and hear.

The placebo effect extends much further than many of us realize. It comes in many forms: subjects exposed to fake poison ivy have developed real rashes, and people imbibing placebo caffeine have been shown to experience increased motor performance and heart rate (and other effects congruent with the subjects’ beliefs about the effects of caffeine and not with its pharmacological effects). Herbert Benson and D. P. McCallie Jr. studied the effectiveness of several placebo-like treatments for angina pectoris (a type of severe chest pain) and found that when patients actually believed in the therapies, they were 70 percent to 90 percent effective, while for those people who showed some form of skepticism they were only 30 percent to 40 percent effective.13 Psychologists Alan Roberts, Donald Kewman, Lisa Mercier, and Mel Hovell looked at the effects of “undergoing” a glomectomy (a placebo surgery) for ulcer patients and found that the more the subject believed in the effectiveness of the treatment, the more effective it actually was.14

Irving Kirsch and Guy Sapirstein conducted an analysis of antidepressant medication and found that out of 2,318 studies analyzed, 25 percent of the patient responses were due to the actual drug effect, another 25 percent were due to the natural progression of depression, and 50 percent were due to the placebo effect.15 Other studies suggest that up to 65 percent of drugs and other therapies prescribed by physicians may depend on placebo action for their effectiveness.16

While the placebo effect has proven to be incredibly powerful in aiding health, the effect implies a double-edged sword in the same way as primes. The placebo response can also work in reverse when negative expectations are confirmed by negative outcomes in the patient. This effect is the “nocebo” phenomenon. For example, in the context of a cancer diagnosis, a very common mindset for Americans is the conviction that cancer means death. A person diagnosed with cancer has an extremely hard time viewing himself as healthy, even if the cancer has not yet had any effect on bodily functions. Yet at the same time there are people walking around with undiagnosed cancer who consider themselves to be healthy. “Malignantly diagnosed” patients may go into a decline that has little to do with the actual course of the illness, illustrating that the mere expectation of death can accelerate its occurrence.

The most dramatic example of language acting as placebo can be found in the counterclockwise study. The study used language to prime the participants, asking the elderly men at the retreat to speak about the past in the present tense. With language placing the experimental groups’ minds in a healthier place, their bodies followed suit.





Mindful Exercise


More recently, my student Ali Crum and I took this idea of “putting the mind in a healthy place” to have a positive effect on the body in a very different direction.17 We were curious as to whether some or all of the health benefits attributed to exercise were actually a function of our mindsets regarding the health benefits of exercise. Before looking at the dramatic results we found, let’s look at some of the recent findings regarding the benefits of exercise to help understand the potential importance of our findings.

Probably for several reasons, today, twenty-eight countries have healthy life expectancies that exceed those of the United States. (The highest is in Japan, which exceeds the United States by about five years.) How could we become a healthier culture? Many believe that if we were not so sedentary, we would be healthier. Systematic research on exercise and physical health began in the 1950s, focusing on occupational exertion. Dr. Jeremy Morris, first professor of social medicine at the London Hospital Medical College, and colleagues conducted the first formal, empirical study comparing the cardiovascular heath of double-decker bus drivers to conductors. The study found significant results indicating lower rates of heart disease for the conductors, who ran up and down the stairs, versus the drivers who sat all day. The study ignited a new flurry in medical research focusing on the health effects of exercise.18

Physical activity has been shown to reduce the risk of dying prematurely. It has been estimated that about 250,000 deaths per year in the United States are attributable to lack of regular physical activity. Indeed, several longitudinal, correlational studies have indicated that the mortality rate is higher in people who report less physical activity or who have significantly lower baseline levels of cardiovascular fitness.19 These studies are only suggestive since they were not controlled experiments. That being said, one study indicated that among middle-aged Harvard male alumni who were sedentary in 1962, those who took up moderately intense sports as physical activity during the study’s eleven-year follow-up had a 23 percent lower death rate.20 More recently, a study investigated seven thousand men and women ages twenty-nine to seventy-nine and found that increasing the amount of physical activity from low to moderate was associated with a reduced risk of death.21 Lower risks of diabetes, cancer, coronary heart disease, high blood pressure, osteoarthritis, and obesity-related diseases have all been shown to have been associated with exercise. Similar findings now exist for psychological issues such as stress and depression. It certainly looks like exercise matters.

In 1995, after an extensive review of the literature, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) issued new guidelines for all Americans: every adult should get thirty minutes or more of moderate-intensity physical activity on most, preferably all, days of the week.22

Studies suggest that physical activity doesn’t need to be all in one session but can be accumulated throughout the day to be beneficial. While the exact amounts are debatable, the minimal or reasonable amount of exercise is approximately 150 kilocalories/day, which can be achieved by any of several activities, such as thirty minutes of walking or raking leaves, or fifteen minutes of running. Secretary of Health and Human Services Donna E. Shalala, in her foreword to the report, summed up the new guidelines by saying that we don’t have to train like professional athletes to enjoy the benefits of exercise. Everyday activities such as walking, bicycling, or even tending a garden for at least thirty minutes per day most days of the week are good for our health.

Physical activity alters many different pathways—metabolic, hormonal, neurological, and mechanical—affecting virtually every tissue in the body. The report summarized the results from five surveys that provided data on national levels of physical activity. The conclusions were as follows:

Approximately 15 percent of U.S. adults engage regularly (three times a week for at least twenty minutes) in vigorous physical activity during leisure time.

Approximately 22 percent of adults engage regularly (five times a week for thirty minutes) in sustained physical activity of any intensity during leisure time.

About 25 percent of adults report no physical activity in their leisure time.

Physical inactivity is more prevalent among women than men, among blacks and Hispanics than whites, among older than younger adults, and among the less affluent than the most affluent.

The most popular leisure-time physical activities among adults are walking and gardening or yard work.



One reason that America appears to be so sedentary is that the tools we are using to measure exercise fail to take into account all types of physical activity. To an increasingly white-collar workforce, exercise consists of activity done outside of work. Since the measures were created by white-collar workers, they didn’t think of work as exercise. For example, the surveys used in the CDC report on prevalence of physical activity in 1996 included leisure-time physical activity and intentional exercise but failed to take into account household, family care, or transportation-type activities, which may explain why fewer women met the criteria than men. They also omitted occupational exercise, which may explain why Hispanics, blacks, and the less affluent fail to get sufficient “exercise” (since most of them have physically demanding jobs and have little time or energy to exercise after work). The data suggest that they need exercise. On the other hand, if we can prime the idea of exercise, can these people benefit without actually changing their daily habits? Can the idea of exercise act as a placebo?

Although many people today have sedentary jobs, there are some jobs in which people are getting plenty of physical activity throughout the course of their work. Hotel room attendants, for example, clean on average fifteen rooms a day, each taking between twenty and thirty minutes to complete and requiring such exertion as pushing, reaching, bending, and lifting. Room attendants are therefore meeting or exceeding the surgeon general’s requirements for a healthy lifestyle. Yet despite their levels of activity, descriptive statistics reveal that the health of these women is exceedingly poor. Room attendants appear at risk with respect to blood pressure, body mass index, body fat percentage, total body water percentage, and waist-to-hip ratio, all important indicators of health.

Room attendants also tend to have the mindless view that exercise and work are distinct and separate activities, which provides an opportunity to see whether they can get the health benefits of exercise if we prime exercise. When Ali Crum and I decided to study this group in 2007, we determined that these women did not initially view their work as exercise. At the outset of the experiment, two-thirds of them reported not exercising regularly, and around one-third reported not getting any exercise at all. If we change the attitudes of room attendants who are getting the required amount of physical activity but do not perceive it as exercise, will they reap the benefits?

We first asked how healthy female room attendants are, in general. What is the relationship between their physical activity and their actual health? Further we asked, “Are room attendants aware that their work is a good source of daily exercise?” Seven hotels helped us study these questions, and each was randomly assigned to one of the following two conditions.

In the informed group, to make room attendants aware that they are getting a sufficient amount of exercise at work to reap its benefits, participants in this condition received a notice discussing the benefits of exercise and were informed that their daily housekeeping work satisfies the CDC’s recommendations for an active lifestyle. This notice, written in both English and Spanish, was read and explained to the participants by an experimenter unaware of the hypotheses and then posted on the information bulletin board in their lounge.

Participants were told that we were interested in getting information on their health so that we could study ways to improve it. In return for helping, we would give them information about our research on health and happiness. They had no knowledge that the information was related to the physiological measures taken.

The control group was treated in the same way as the informed group except they did not receive information about work as exercise (although we later told them this information, after the second set of measures was taken).

Participants for the study were recruited through the hotels. We began the study by taking several health measures including weight and blood pressure. To prevent participants in different experimental groups from sharing information, all room attendants within a hotel were put in the same condition. In total, there were eighty-four participants.

In a one-hour session, all participants were told that we were interested in studying ways to improve the health and happiness of women in a hotel workplace. They were each given a questionnaire to complete. While the women began filling out the questionnaire, they were individually taken to another room to complete their physiological measures. Following this, the experimental group was given a short presentation on how their work is good exercise, similar to workouts that people do at the gym. Four weeks later, we returned to take follow-up measures. We asked all the questions we could think of to see if participants changed their actual behavior over the course of the study. Participants also were asked to report how hard they perceived themselves to be working compared to other housekeepers.

What did we find? The experimental group increased their perceived exercise over the course of the study, whereas the control group did not. The percentage of informed participants who reported that they were receiving regular exercise more than doubled. All but one person in the experimental group reported getting at least some exercise. Neither group, however, increased their actual exercise.

Now that we knew the instructions were understood, how did they do?

This shift in mindset from the lack of awareness of exercise to exercise was accompanied by a remarkable improvement in physiological health. After only four weeks of knowing that their work is good exercise, the participants in the informed group lost an average of two pounds. In addition to the weight loss, the room attendants also showed a significant reduction in body fat percentage. Further, the fact that the participants in the informed condition showed an increase in body water percentage indicates, first, that they did not simply lose water weight and, second, that they may have gained some muscle mass (muscle mass has a higher water content than fatty tissue), making the 2.7 percent loss even more significant (since muscle weighs more than fat). Finally, the fact that these were significant differences between the informed group and the control group, who were actually gaining weight and body fat, makes these findings even more powerful. With respect to blood pressure, the informed group showed a drop of 10 points systolic and 5 points diastolic in their blood pressure—a significant change.

While there may be numerous reasons why the women in the study may have been unhealthy, including genetics and diet, our study focused on exercise. These women did not initially view their work as exercise. At the onset of the experiment, two-thirds of the participants reported not exercising regularly, and around one-third reported not getting any exercise at all.

It is important to note that while the informed room attendants did report getting more exercise, they did not report getting any additional exercise outside of work. There was actually a decrease in reported physical activity outside of work, including such activities as running, swimming, or doing sit-ups. The room attendants did not walk more often on the way to work and did not pick up any other jobs that required cleaning or manual labor. In addition, information provided by their supervisors indicated that their daily work level remained consistent throughout the course of the experiment. The changes in reported physical activity are attributable not to actual increases in physical activity but to a shift in mindset initiated by the information given to them in the intervention.

According to conventional science, it is assumed that in order for weight loss and body fat reduction to take place, certain biological and physiological events must also take place. In the case of blood pressure, it is assumed that during exercise blood pressure is lowered because the peripheral blood vessels are dilated, and over time, the attenuating effect of exercise on the sympathetic nervous system activity helps to control blood pressure. In the case of weight, it is assumed that exercise helps to reduce body fat by increasing nonresting energy expenditure. To the extent that energy expenditure exceeds caloric intake the result is weight loss; theoretically, about one pound of fat energy is lost for each additional 3,500 kilocalories burned. If this is indeed the case, how did the change in mindset (increase in perceived exercise) initiate these physiological changes?

Skeptics will argue that despite our results, the connection between perceived exercise and health was moderated by a change in behavior. For example, a change in mindset may have given the informed participants an incentive to change their habits with respect to diet and substance abuse. Previous research, however, has found it very difficult to change behavior of this sort. If it did, that too would make these results interesting. Instead, given the plethora of research on the difficulty of changing such behavior and given the fact that participants in this study reported no such change, it seems that the explanation is that health follows a change in mindset just as in the case with placebos.

The search for explanations for findings such as these results from mind/body dualism that simply denies the direct influence of the mind on the body. This dualism has left us with few conceptual tools to aid us in understanding and explaining undeniable occurrences such as the placebo effect. Despite the fact that traditional medical models typically do not allow for the unity of mind and body, few deny the fact that stressors, sexual stimuli, fear, and disgust reactions manifest in bodily reactions. Our mindsets regarding illness and well-being can occasion powerful effects on our physiology.

As to what was happening simultaneously on the physiological level in our hotel room attendant study, we do not know. While having an explanation on that level is appealing, it does not speak to what we can do ourselves to improve our health. An interesting study by Deena Skolnick Weisberg, Frank C. Keil, Joshua Goodstein, Elizabeth Rawson, and Jeremy R. Gray is important here.23 The title of their paper tells it all: “The Seductive Allure of Neuroscience Explanations.” The researchers presented a set of research findings to students in a cognitive neuroscience class and to people with no neuroscience background, asking them to judge how good the explanation for the finding was. When the explanation contained irrelevant references to neuroscience—phrases such as “because of frontal lobe brain circuitry”—the participants found the results more believable than when they did not.

Although we haven’t done the research, one might ask, what would happen with people who perceive themselves as exercisers but are actually not getting exercise? I feel healthier when I set out to get exercise even if in fact I spend little time actually moving. In truth, I see time away from the refrigerator as exercise, but that is a separate matter. Do our thoughts about food actually determine the effect it will have on our bodies? For example, do those who do not lose weight from sugar substitutes essentially believe they are consuming sugar? If we imagined eating candy, would our blood sugar increase? Do our thoughts about clean air actually affect our ability to breathe? Do our thoughts about contagion actually affect our getting sick?

Many people these days elect to have plastic surgery. If we put the ideas of the experiments just described together, we end up with an interesting idea: if I think I look younger, I should be younger on whatever measures of age we take. Further, I may now exercise more, which may have added benefits. I probably will also think I am getting more exercise because younger people simply do. Vanity in this case, then, may pay off.

Psychologists Gerald Davison and Stuart Valins conducted a study back in the 1970s where people were given shocks and the researchers kept track of how much pain they were willing to take.24 They were then given a pill (a placebo) and told it would make them better able to withstand the shock. The machine administering the shocks was rigged so it appeared that everyone was able to withstand more shock than they were actually being subjected to. Then half of the subjects were told that it was actually a placebo that they had taken. The other half were told that the effects of the pill had worn off. All were retested to see how much shock they could take. The group told they had taken a placebo now attributed their greater performance to themselves rather than the pill and as a result, they were able to withstand more shock. If we gave a person a placebo for their health symptoms and the symptoms disappeared and then we told her it was a placebo, she would know that she was actually responsible for the improvement. Would it generalize? I think so. What would we do differently? I think we would tune in to and try to use the subtle messages our bodies give us.

It is a widely known fact that placebos are effective in treating a vast number of disorders. When a study finds that medication resulted in, say, a 90 percent improvement and the placebo gave only a 30 percent improvement, the drug is seen as effective. What is missing from these studies is a comparison of the side effects. Placebos have no negative side effects, while the side effects for most drugs are significant. Surely it is more than worthwhile to figure out how to harness the potent effects of more benign substances. In fact, do we really need the placebo pills at all?

Placebos are wonderful things, it seems. We accept a pill along with the lie that it is effective, and so we adopt a beneficial mindset and heal ourselves (it can’t be the pill, after all, because it is a placebo). And then attribute the success to the pill. Wouldn’t it be more advantageous to recognize that when placebos work we are the ones controlling our health, to learn how to exercise it directly, and to see ourselves as efficacious when we do?

Social psychologists are fond of saying that behavior is largely a function of the contexts in which we find ourselves. We behave differently, for example, in libraries than we do at football games. Contexts serve as primes. What few have addressed, however, is who controls the context. Since situations can be viewed in many different ways, and situations control our behavior, we can choose the view that supports how we want to be. There are what we can call healthy contexts and those that are less so.

Laura Hsu, Jaewoo Chung, and I collected archival data to provide further evidence of the effects of our minds over our bodies.25 This work also suggests a way to begin taking more direct control of our health. Negative stereotypes about aging, as we have seen, may directly and indirectly prime diminished capacity for older adults. Similarly, the absence of these cues may prime improved health. The general hypothesis examined here was that if we are in contexts that prime older age, we will age more quickly. We examined the effect that our clothes may have on us given the age-appropriate stance we take on clothing. Imagine a sixty-year-old woman trying on a miniskirt. In most cases, she’d be well advised not to make the purchase, but we would think nothing of a sixteen-year-old wearing the same skirt.

Since uniforms are less age-related than everyday clothing, we reasoned that people who wear uniforms are not exposed to as many age-related cues as those who wear their own clothes to work. As a result, we expect the absence of these cues would be related to better health. We examined morbidity data from 206 professions from the National Health Interview Survey conducted between 1986 and 1994. We found that those who wear uniforms do have better health, as indicated by fewer lost days from work due to illness or injury, doctor visits, hospitalizations, self-reported health status, and chronic conditions, when compared to those who earn the same amount of money and do not wear uniforms.

We next considered whether clothing serves as an even greater age-related cue for the middle and upper-middle classes. We reasoned that if wealthier people wear clothes that are more varied and change their wardrobe more frequently because they can afford it, they should experience more age-related cues. Thus the uniform effect should become more prominent at higher income levels. Indeed, we found that wealthier individuals who do not wear work uniforms have poorer health than their uniformed counterparts, and the effect was greater as we looked higher up the income spectrum.

A count of the number of different brands and styles of jeans and shirts at Nordstrom, a high-end department store, and Sears, a less expensive department store, revealed a significant difference. While Nordstrom had thirty-eight different brands of jeans and ten different leg styles (i.e., boot cut, flare), Sears featured seventeen jean brands and five leg styles. Nordstrom had 930 styles of shirts compared to 560 styles at Sears. The greater selection of clothing at Nordstrom suggests there are more buying options for people with more earning potential. Since clothing is a status symbol, having more money means having the purchasing power to keep up with constantly changing trends in fashion. For those in the higher income levels, a uniform may act as a “buffer” for being all too aware of one’s age.

We also examined premature balding to test this idea. Baldness is a cue for old age. Therefore, men who go bald early in life may perceive themselves as older and are consequently predicted to age more quickly. We found that men who bald prematurely have a greater risk of being diagnosed with prostate cancer and of getting coronary heart disease than men who are not bald. When I describe this finding to people they assume that the result is due to some hormonal difference between the men who bald prematurely and those who don’t. Yet when we asked several medical specialists about their understanding of a relationship between premature balding and prostate cancer, none of them could explain it.

Next we looked at women who bear children later in life, believing that they are surrounded by younger cues and thus are expected to live longer. We found older mothers have a longer life expectancy than women who bear children early in life. Given the wear and tear of raising children on a parent of any age, you might expect the opposite here.

Finally, we compared marriages in which spouse’s ages differed by more than four years to those with a lesser age difference. In the former, the younger spouses are surrounded by “older” cues provided by the older spouse, and thus we predicted them to have shorter life spans. Conversely, older spouses are primed by “younger” cues by the younger spouse and thus we predicted they would have longer life spans. As predicted, we found that spouses who are significantly younger than their partner have shorter life expectancies than spouses who are much older than their partner.

It seems that certain contexts typically cue age. If we are in these contexts, we could choose to attend to those cues that best serve us, rather than be mindlessly led to be less than we can be.

The effect of being in one context or another may also be relevant to physiological states. Consider the degree to which fatigue may be a psychological construct. If contextual cues signal that we “should” be tired, we may experience more fatigue than we would if they did not signal exhaustion. Many years ago, my students and I tested this hypothesis informally. People in class asked their friends to do either 100 or 200 jumping jacks and asked them to tell us when they got tired. Both groups reported that they experienced fatigue two-thirds of the way through the activity. That means that the first group got tired after about 65—70 jumping jacks but the second group after about 130—140. In another experiment, we had people type one or two pages in a word-processing program that gave them no feedback regarding errors, so they would type the assignment continuously. For the one-page group, the most errors occurred around two-thirds of the way through. Although the second group typed twice as much, their errors didn’t appear until two-thirds of the way through the two pages.

What’s going on here? I think we impose a structure on the tasks we do so that we have a sense of a beginning, a middle, and an end. Feeling ourselves grow tired as we near the finish of a task may make it easier for us to leave it so that we can begin the next task. Perhaps people who can’t seem to “get on with things” have a poorly developed or nonexistent structure of the task they are doing.

Everyday examples of the psychological aspect of fatigue abound. Consider the end of the workday, when we may feel we are running out of energy, only to go home and have a night on the town. Indeed, the 3:00 P.M. coffee break may be a result of this “two-thirds effect.” Be that as it may, the larger point is that much of what we take to be physical limits may be a result of learning. We’ve learned concepts such as beginning, middle, and end, and our bodies behave accordingly.





