CHAPTER 8





Limiting Experts


Perform all [these duties] calmly and adroitly, concealing most things from the patient while you are attending to him. Give necessary orders with cheerfulness and serenity, turning his attention away from what is being done to him; sometimes reprove sharply and emphatically, and sometimes comfort with solicitude and attention, revealing nothing of the patient’s future or present condition.

—The Hippocratic Oath





Human health is a complex issue and stories of medical errors are rampant. Amy Edmondson, who studies patient safety issues in hospitals, has done important research into how medical errors occur, especially in how the medical system facilitates them.1 Her research makes clear that health care organizations rarely learn from their mistakes, observations, and concerns. Nurses are not infrequently afraid that if they speak up, they will be reprimanded. Not surprisingly, they don’t often speak up. Most hospitals, indeed most organizations, prefer to have on their staff “adaptive conformers,” people who easily adjust without raising objections and seamlessly correct the errors of others. They make things smoother, unlike the “disruptive questioner,” who speaks up when there’s a problem, is vocal about the mistakes they and others make, and asks those annoying “Why do we do it this way?” types of questions. The problem, as Edmonson points out, is that organizations that learn—and improve—need the disruptive questioner.

Even small groups are vulnerable to “groupthink,” or mind-lessness. As psychologist Irving Janis pointed out in his seminal book on the topic, Victims of Groupthink, legitimizing the role of a contrarian in a group helps keep the group from mindless conformity.2 Few hospitals, however, train their staff to avoid mind-lessness and to be open to learning from mistakes. While patients are not made part of the safety process, we, as patients, can and perhaps should play the part of the disruptive questioner, as mindful learners about our own health.

The introduction of new technology is especially difficult for group process, especially when it interferes with routine ways of doing things. The surgeon, the nurses, the anesthesiologist, and the perfusionist (a technician who runs the heart-lung bypass machine) all work together in open-heart surgery, and they have done so hundreds of times. Bring in a new piece of equipment and they must now do something different, and that change can be hard. Edmondson found that when new technology for cardiac surgery was introduced, those medical teams with leaders who minimized concern for status differences—in other words, were willing implicitly to admit they didn’t have all the answers and take advice from underlings—had the most effective communication, learned the most, and found the transition the easiest.3

Would that was more frequently the way of doctor-staff interactions. Instead—and largely because of the institutionalized denial of mistakes that they might otherwise learn from—physician mistakes are so abundant that doctors even have a field of inquiry devoted to their study, iatrogenic medicine—literally, physician-induced disease. According to the Institute of Medicine’s 2000 report “To Err Is Human,” more people die in American hospitals from medical errors than die nationwide from better-known causes, including highway accidents, breast cancer, or AIDS—up to ninety-eight thousand deaths annually in the United States.4 Given that physicians are generally caring, intelligent, and well-educated people, how could this be? A close analysis would probably reveal mindlessness as a major culprit. Trained physicians may expect to notice deviations from the norm because of their experience, yet it may be that very experience that blinds some of them. I have wondered what might happen if hospitals teamed up novices and experts. They do that now, of course, but the novices are supposed to learn from the experts and not the other way around. In my scheme, the learning would be mutual. They would be taught to respect that an expert may see what only her training can show her and the novice might notice what the expert was trained to miss.

In Complications, Gawande describes a study by researchers Hans Ohlin, Ralf Rittner, and Lars Edenbrandt in which they tested a top cardiologist, who typically read about 10,000 ECGs a year, against a sophisticated computer program to find out which more successfully read ECG information to predict heart attacks.5 Each read 2,244 ECGs, half of which were known to be from people who had heart attacks. The computer identified 20 percent more of the cases that had led to heart attacks than the cardiologist did. Computers, it seems do a better job at diagnoses than physicians do.

Gawande is a physician and writes brilliantly about the physician’s perspective. As he looks at it, the research ought to lead us to conclude that we need to trust technology. The point for me, though, is that the computer still missed 384 cases. One solution he suggests is that we rely more on machines for diagnoses; another of his suggestions along the same lines is that we teach physicians to act like machines.

Thirty years of my research on mindfulness and mindlessness would take issue with both of these suggestions. In my view, the only time we should practice to the point of mindlessness is when two conditions are both met:

We have found the best way of doing something.

Things don’t change.



We know, however, that we can never be sure of the former and the latter is simply never true. It doesn’t matter what behavior we want to make “automatic.” In matters of our health, since none of us is “us,” the statistical mean, there is no best way. And we know that our health is always changing.

Consider, as physicians David Bates and Lucian Leape have, the number of steps involved with prescribing and administering drugs in a hospital setting that can and do go awry:6

The physician writes the prescription.

The prescription is delivered to the secretary.

The order is transcribed.

The nurse picks up the prescription.

The nurse verifies the prescription and transcribes it again.

The prescription is given to the pharmacist.

The pharmacist dispenses the medication.

The medication is given to the nurse.

The drug is administered to the patient.

The patient receives the drug.



At each step errors are made every day. The average hospital patient receives ten to twenty doses of medication per day and stays for about five days, all of which considerably increases the chances of an error.

To illustrate how even the latter parts of this process can go awry, consider a case the social psychologist Robert Cialdini has written about.7 A doctor’s order for the medication to treat an earache read “administer in Rear.” The nurse read it as “rear” instead of “right ear,” and inserted the drug in the patient’s rectum. The doctor and the nurse were not incompetent; they were mindless.

Even when physicians aren’t making obvious errors, problems may arise. While getting a second opinion may seem straightforward, a closer look reveals that the process is not so simple. There are hidden effects of language priming at work here. The word second is typically not as good as first, regardless of what it modifies. Next, if we take the word of our doctor as truth, then what might we expect when we compare “truth” with an “opinion”? Just as second is less than first, opinion is less trustworthy than fact. In a class demonstration I asked half of my students the following: “A doctor tells you that you need surgery. You get a second opinion and that doctor tells you that you don’t need surgery. On an eleven-point scale ranging from zero, meaning ‘definitely not,’ to ten, meaning ‘definitely yes,’ how likely are you to get surgery?”

I asked the other half of the students, “A doctor tells you that you need surgery. Another doctor says you don’t need surgery. How likely are you to get surgery?” Thus, for the first group a second opinion was mentioned, but not for the second group. When a doctor gave a “second opinion” the average score was 5.

The average response for the group where “second opinion” was not mentioned was 2.5. That is, it became twice as likely that the first doctor’s view would be followed when posed against a “second” “opinion.”

Dr. John Glick of the Abramson Cancer Center at the University of Pennsylvania has estimated that when patients come to him for second opinions regarding a treatment plan, his view only completely agrees with the first opinion around 30 percent of the time. In another 30 to 40 percent of the cases, he and his colleagues recommend significant changes to the plan. Sometimes his team comes to a completely different diagnosis.8

If physicians are all trained in the same approach, they very well may suggest the same course of action; if they are trained differently, different opinions might prevail. Thus, we could have the same people viewing the same facts but differing in their views of them; also, we could have different facts considered by the different physicians. People often don’t get second opinions. Is that sensible? If we got a second opinion, regardless of what the next doctor says, it really doesn’t tell us what the next fifty doctors would say. It is a very small sample size and as such may not be reliable. On the other hand, there could be a hidden positive side effect. By us—patient and doctor—considering the need for a second opinion, we are implicitly acknowledging uncertainty.





Becoming a Health Learner


To keep our bodies in tune, we usually visit the doctor for an annual checkup and have whatever tests are recommended at that time. If the tests say we are okay, we assume our health is in order and we go forward until next year, unless something out of the ordinary occurs. We often treat our bodies the way we treat our cars, giving over control to the doctor the way we turn our cars over to our mechanic. Once the car passes the inspection or whatever it was treated for, we drive away presuming all is fine. I believe, however, that many of us may be more attentive to our cars than to ourselves. We notice the subtle changes that indicate something is wrong with our cars—a small shimmy, a squealing brake, a muffler that is louder than usual—and we bring the car in for repair (if we can afford it) before the problem gets out of hand even if we know nothing much about cars. We often pay little attention to the subtle changes that our bodies tell us about our health. We’ve become too reliant on doctors. A useful alternative model may be to use the physician as a consultant. Indeed, perhaps all experts should be called on in this way.9

By attending to variability and coming to know our bodies, we are in a better position to have useful information regarding our health. By recognizing the limits to what the physician can know, we can become more confident in the importance of sharing that information. We act as health learners, fully engaged in our health and better able to work with the experts. We become the expert on our individual health and the doctors become our consultants.

If we’re our own expert, we might consider using several consultants, not just for different parts of our bodies but to get different views of the same part. Different views signal to us that we are in charge. When we understand the limits of medical data, we can accept that receiving the same view from multiple people does not necessarily mean they are correct. It may only mean that the physicians were trained similarly. We don’t become stressed when views differ; we become more aware of how important our own role is to the process. To help us make decisions, we take a more active role not only in considering the information we receive but also in bringing information to the discussion.

We shouldn’t wait to be asked questions that our doctor believes are important to help with the diagnosis; doctors’ questions are based on normative data, on what is true for most people. If we were the experts, we would offer information that we feel correlates with how we are feeling. Instead of asking “Is this related to that?” we would ask “How might this be related to that?” Doing so encourages a different sort of information search, one that leads our consultants to consider our particular case instead of the general one.

In my seminar on the psychology of decision making, I often ask my students, “Can we prevent conception through nasal spray?” The answer is always no. When I ask, “How could a nasal spray be used to prevent conception?” I get creative answers that recognize that the whole body is connected; those students who are biologically sophisticated search for a possible pathway. Likewise, we should be in charge of at least some of the questions that are considered meaningful to our health.

When we are in charge, we more easily can ask about alternatives without feeling we are challenging the doctor. We might consider asking about other possible medications and their potential side effects as well as alternative treatments, and we should not hesitate to ask about the data on which any of the given advice is based. Once the physician consultant answers these questions, she or he too will become more mindful about the limits of what is known. If we do this in a nonconfrontational way, it is likely to have a humbling affect on the doctor and increase the doctor’s willingness to become our consultant and partner in health.

I once gave my seminar students the assignment to investigate health databases and see if they could ask original questions that spoke to any of the health issues we discussed in class. One of my students, Laura Anglin, came up with something provocative that is quite relevant. She examined data obtained from the 1995 Centers for Disease Control Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance results. Her interest was in health care access and utilization, and she found that of the ten states (Alaska, Arizona, Illinois, Kansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oklahoma, and Virginia) that asked the question “Is there one particular health care provider that you usually go to?” the majority of respondents (75 percent to 85 percent) in nine of the states answered “yes.” For the tenth state, North Carolina, the opposite was true. Here 65 percent answered that they did not see just one doctor. Elsewhere in the database, she found responses to questions asking how many days per month (from none to thirty) they experienced poor physical and mental health. Compared to the national average, residents in North Carolina were more likely to respond “none” (that is, no days of poor health) than the rest of the country. There were fewer respondents who also were likely to experience poor health for one to two days, three to seven days, and eight to twenty-nine days per month. The results for mental health were the same, with fewer days of poor mental health reported in North Carolina. Like virtually all medical data, these findings are correlations, and by now we all should know that they are meant to be suggestive rather than absolute. That being said, they do support the idea that perhaps seeking the advice of multiple consultants is good for our health.

To seek out several views requires that we become much more involved in the process even if that entails only choosing the people from whom to get the views. Moreover, in being in charge of whom we ask and what we tell them, we prime our own efficacy.

When faced with a diagnosis and the medical options for treatment, the patient is caught in a very difficult dilemma. The impulse to surrender our future treatment wholly to the professional hands of medical practitioners is understandable. Leaving the doctors to make all the choices relieves the existential fear of being responsible for a decision that could in the end hurt us. But not to be involved may hurt us more.

At what point is a patient’s cancer considered to be incurable or untreatable? Doctors seem to have to make this judgment call on a somewhat arbitrary basis. As my student Bo Meng pointed out, scientists today cannot even predict the expiration of a carton of milk with total certainty; the temperature at which the carton is stored, the variable conditions of the bacteria that are in the milk, and the degree to which any outside organisms might enter the milk carton are only three of the many factors which influence when the milk will go bad. The sheer complexity of human systems compared to the relative simplicity of a carton of milk ought to suggest that a culture that cannot even determine the course of milk going bad could not possibly have the technology to accurately and precisely determine the threshold at which most cancers cannot be treated.

On the other hand, we ourselves may be able to know. Certainly there are cases in which metastases have reached every point of the body and the patient could die at any minute. But many cases are not so severe even as they are diagnosed as being untreatable and terminal. In such cases, what is the basis of the judgment? To at least some degree, these decisions are arbitrary, and if understanding that would enable the patient to have some reason for hope, she might yet manage to improve her situation. The hope could be based on the awareness of the variability of the experienced symptoms—sometimes it is actually not as bad as at other times. This variability could be communicated to our physician consultant.

While it is true that doctors may know more about cancer than we do, that does not mean that we need to be unaware about the circumstances of our own situation. Today, approximately two-thirds of cancer patients do not actually understand the diagnosis given to them; without understanding the circumstances of diagnosis, dealing with the cancer has to be even more difficult. It would be like trying to play a sport without knowing any of the rules. Yet millions of terminal cancer patients worldwide play this game every day.

Today, we have what is essentially a three-stage continuum for cancer: one can have no cancer, one can have treatable cancer, and one can have terminal or end-stage cancer, which is considered untreatable. Between these categories, however, there are significant distinctions that ought to be made but typically aren’t. A patient who is on the line between operable and end-stage cancer, for example, may be deemed inoperable due to a high rate of metastasis or cancer growth. Certain forms of therapy, however, have demonstrated some ability to slow metastatic growth and therefore could conceivably help to bring a patient back into the “treatable” categorization. By asking our physician consultants about the ways in which our disease is different from that of most people in the category, we may come to learn to be more differentiated about our condition.

Given that we know ourselves far better than our medical practitioner will ever be able to, that we can know our unique history and our physical, emotional, and cognitive makeup, we are the ones who will know which treatment options might be best suited to us. Our satisfaction with the treatment will depend on how the particular treatment serves our unique needs, not the needs of some statistically compounded generalized person. Knowing our own values, character, and emotional and cognitive makeup will be essential when making the decision about treatments; keeping these in mind will help us choose according to what would be best for us. So, in the answer to the question of whom to follow if not the doctor, the best answer would be ourselves. After all, while the medical professionals are the best experts on the general course an illness may take, we are the best experts on our particular journey.





