CHAPTER 9





Mindful Aging


Old age ain’t no place for sissies.

—Bette Davis





For most of us, there is probably no greater time of concern regarding diminished capacity, pain, and disease than late adulthood. Nevertheless, this phase of our lives can still be one of growth. While many of our experienced debilities may be a natural part of aging, many are not and instead are a function of our mindsets about old age. As we saw with the counterclockwise study, even cognitive abilities, vision, and symptoms of arthritis may be improved by becoming more mindful.

Stereotypes regarding the negative consequences of old age are widely known and are almost unconditionally accepted, at least in the West. Studies have shown that older people are seen as forgetful, slow, weak, timid, and set in their ways.1

Older adults often hold negative feelings about the elderly that are as strong, if not stronger, than those held by younger adults. In their analysis of studies measuring American’s attitudes toward aging, Mary Kite and Blair Johnson found that expressions of negative stereotypes in aging were greatest when people were asked to evaluate the physical attractiveness or mental competence of the elderly.2 Moreover, research has demonstrated that many of these negative stereotypes about aging are experienced as unconscious or automatic processes.

In addition to their impact on the way older adults are viewed or treated, age-related stereotypes are often internalized by the elderly, and may affect their ability and willingness to engage with younger members of society. Thirty years ago I was part of a small group of doctors and psychologists that came together to examine biology, behavior, and aging. I was the youngest member of the group and the most positive about the aging process. Given that my personal experience with aging was lacking relative to the others, I questioned why this was so. Perhaps the others had already had some firsthand experience with aging or with aging parents that made them more negative about aging. But wasn’t it also possible that I had a fundamentally different—not naive—view of aging based on something I too had experienced? Where did I get the idea that aging was not all about decline?

I considered that the word grandmother meant “old person” to a young child and that word likely was one of the first introductions many of us have to the idea of being elderly. When I was introduced to the idea of old, my grandmother was reasonably young in age, spirit, and ability. Perhaps my view of old was derived from that experience. Indeed, when we are young, many of us learn what it means to be old from our grandparents and extrapolate from there. If our own grandparents also embraced stereotypes about what it means to be old, we may have inadvertently and unwittingly accepted exaggerated ideas of limits regarding the physical and psychological abilities of the elderly.

More recently I set out to test whether that was indeed the case. My students and I compared elderly subjects who had lived with a grandparent before they were two years old with those who had lived with a grandparent after they were thirteen (as a two-year-old ages to thirteen, of course so too will her grandparent age).3 For the first group, their grandparents were expected to be and act younger then those of the second group. Given their relative ages, those in the two-year-old group should now, elderly themselves, have a more youthful mindset about old age then the thirteen-year-old group. If that was the case, as the younger group aged they should embrace a “younger” version of old age.

Indeed, we found this to be true. The elderly subjects were independently evaluated by researchers unaware of our hypothesis; those subjects who lived with a grandparent when they were younger and had more youthful mindsets of old age were rated to be more alert. There was also a tendency for them to be more active and more independent. The results suggest that many of us inadvertently may have been taught to grow old by exposure to mindsets that are more limiting than they need be.

There are four lessons from mindfulness research that may be helpful in counteracting the negative effects of stereotypes about the elderly. Based on the research, we need to focus our attention on

The criteria used to evaluate the elderly

Our inability to see past our own levels of development

The concept of change versus decay

A more mindful approach to old age, among both the elderly and among those who stereotype them



Let’s consider these more carefully.

For young children, the admonition to “act your age” is accompanied by expectations of industry, gravity, and the acceptance of responsibility. For the elderly, however, the idea of acting one’s age takes on a more burdensome connotation. Ironically, older people are often expected to act like children, to relinquish a degree of agency, responsibility, and control over their own lives. In its most extreme form, the expectation that adults over a certain age will (or should) begin to “act like old people” can become oppressive, suggesting that behavior is and must be determined by a chronology over which the individual has no control.

Fish can’t ride bicycles; therefore, by the criteria established by bicycle riders, fish seem less competent. The difference between the (anthropomorphic) fish here and the elderly lies mainly in how both the elderly and nonelderly view the relationship between an individual and his or her environment. It seems obvious to us that considering their inability to ride a bicycle to be a deficit in fish is ridiculous—the utility of a bicycle should not be judged by its ability to be used by a fish, and the utility of a fish should not be judged by its ability to use an apparatus that was designed for organisms with two arms, two legs, and well-defined bottoms.

Ironically, we often forget this hierarchy of utility when evaluating the competence of the elderly. If an older person has difficulty getting out of a car, for example, we may attribute this difficulty to the weakening of leg muscles and the loss of a sense of balance. Instead, we might consider the inadequacies of a car seat that does not swivel to allow the passenger to emerge straight ahead rather than sideways. While a focus on the inadequacies of automobiles may seem useless, consider how ridiculous it would seem to conclude that a twenty-five-year-old man’s difficulty in riding a tricycle is due to an enlargement of his limbs and a loss of flexibility. Tricycles were not made with twenty-five-year-olds in mind; car seats were not made with seventy-five-year-olds in mind. That does not mean, however, that the seventy-five-year-old is deficient when it comes to emerging from cars any more than it means that twenty-five-year-olds are incompetent at tricycle racing.

The old are not the young. Every day, older adults are forced to negotiate an environment that was designed neither by them nor for them. If we were to focus our attention on external reasons for perceived deficits, adapting the bicycle to the fish and not the other way around, we might decrease negative perceptions of the elderly and might encourage creative environmental solutions that benefit people of all ages. Let’s again remember the example of the shelf outside an apartment door as a solution for the woman who couldn’t manage to carry groceries and open her door at the same time.

Similarly, an elderly adult’s mental capacities are often evaluated as if their desires, intentions, and interests were equivalent to those of younger people. To return to fish, it may also seem readily apparent to us that fish don’t care much about bikes. However, such an analogy is rarely used to explain (or understand) the behavior of the elderly adult. When a child’s parents cannot tell different cartoon characters apart or are unable to identify a top-forties hit from its opening bars, the children do not conclude that their parents have lost either their ability to recognize faces or their memory for music. Rather, they conclude (correctly) that their parents don’t care about Pok&émon or Britney Spears. It is possible that older adults appear more forgetful simply because they do not care about the same things that younger people care about, including performance on memory tests. If an individual is told a piece of information and does not particularly care about remembering it, he or she may not encode that information in memory. If the person is later asked a question about the information and cannot answer it, has the information been forgotten? Information has to be learned in the first place before it later can be forgotten. Perhaps the elderly are not as forgetful as we assume; they may, in part, simply be more selective encoders.

Researchers who study memory typically find that the young outperform the old. Let’s look closely at memory experiments. The experimenter chooses the words the subject is supposed to remember. But all words are not equally familiar to everyone. To make the point, let me take an extreme case. If the list consists of terms such as Game Boy, of course the young will outperform the old. If the list contained words like mahjong, the old might just as readily outperform the young. The subjects in many experiments are typically college students whose days are spent in the same academic environment as the experimenter. Now, a researcher might object, saying, “I chose these words from the word frequency list.” This has the look of objectivity, yet someone made up that frequency list, and all words spoken or read by all people are hardly equally likely to have been considered. As we discussed earlier, there are hidden decisions and there are hidden deciders. But the “facts,” when they reach the public, are presented as if they are immutable truths given to us from the heavens, rather than that they are based on decisions made by people who may have had us in mind and may not have.





Meaningless and Meaningful Remembrances


It is often observed, anecdotally, that older people have intact memories of events that occurred in their childhoods but poor memories for events of the recent past. Perhaps older memories are more meaningful to the elderly; this type of information was worthy of encoding in the past and is worthy of retrieval in the present. When the performance of an older person “falls short” on some measure, we invariably see this as a failure of the individual rather than question the relevance of the measure. And yet we never doubt the competence of the fish. What keeps nonelderly researchers from shifting their attention to the inadequate measure? In a recent study, for example, it was found that older subjects retain the gist of what they read but not the particulars. Given that the subject matter surely was chosen by a younger experimenter, how likely is it that more than just the gist is important for their lives?4

I meet many more people now than I did in my youth. I also have more status. In my youth I remembered their names. Now I tend not to. If I meet a person enough times so that it matters, I will learn his name. Am I forgetful, busy, self-involved, tired, bored, all or none of the above?

It is difficult to see past one’s own level of development. Ask a child what it would be like to be thirty and he or she will show remarkably little insight. Ask a thirty-year-old what it would be like to be eighty years old and, whether we care to admit it or not, the same thing may happen. Older people are often judged as if they subscribe to the same set of values and reference points as those who judge them. For example, some researchers have suggested that in old age people naturally regress to a state of childhood. There is an important difference, however, between the resumption of behaviors that one exhibited in the past and the enactment of these behaviors for the first time. For example, if both seven-year-old Jimmy and ninety-seven-year-old James tell a dinner guest her stories are boring, they may be using the same words, but they are hardly exhibiting the same behavior. A mindful analysis would suggest that Jimmy is uninhibited, meaning that he has not yet learned the socially appropriate response to dinner conversation. In contrast, James is disinhibited. He is well aware of the norms of social behavior but has chosen to ignore them. The observed similarity in the two behaviors creates a false equation of old age with childhood.

Not being able to see past one’s own level of development, coupled with a tendency to understand behaviors in ways that are most relevant to the observer, can lead to a whole range of incorrect, but stereotypically coherent, attributions about the elderly’s behavior. Perhaps we would all benefit from considering other reasons to explain why the elderly may exhibit stereotypic (and “negative”) behavior. For example, forgetfulness might be seen as a judgment that the information was not worth learning or even positively as the ability to focus intensely on the present. Driving slowly might reflect an accumulated wisdom of the risks involved.





Aging or Decaying?


Aging means change, but change does not mean decay. While the term development can be applied to changes over the entire life cycle of a person, the term is commonly taken to refer only to the first two decades of life. The influence of this attitude is persistent. Young people are described as “developing,” whereas persons changing in their later years are typically described as “aging.” It is like day and night, where day might formally refer to the entire twenty-four-hour span but is informally used to refer to the brighter side of day. So, too, aging has come to refer to the darker side of development. In this case, however, the nominal distinction has great consequence. To make changes in later life one must fight against all sorts of consensually held preconceptions before they are “recognized” as growth. This struggle for legitimate recognition would be less strenuous if development were cast in other contexts. Right now, our stereotypes about the negative aspects of aging prevail.

For example, an eighty-year-old man is frustrated by the fact that he no longer can play tennis the way he could when he was fifty. But perhaps the problem is not that he can no longer play the same way but that he is still trying to do so. Venus Williams, who is six foot three and has one of the largest grip sizes in women’s tennis, and Amanda Coetzer, who is five foot two and has one of the smallest, cannot possibly play with comparable strategies, nor would it occur to them to do so. Coetzer, however, is well aware that her small stature allows her to be quick on the court, and Williams understands that her height gives her stroke tremendous power. Because his social environment and mindless encoding of stereotypes has taught the eighty-year-old tennis player that his game is aging, not developing, it may never occur to him to adapt his game based on the identification of new skills. Because differences between young and old people are taken not as differences but as decrements, we are not likely to find ways that older people might metaphorically “change their game.”

If we do begin to notice such potential adaptations, we might still make the mistake of seeing these changes as compensatory: “Since I can’t do it that way, I’ll do it this way.” Instead, we could look for ways in which adaptations might be advantageous to individuals of all ages, we could thus learn from the very people we now feel sorry for.

Chronology aside, our age is relative and may vary depending on the domain in question. Just as we can pay attention to the variability in our symptoms to gain control, we can attend to the variability in our competences. Mary may feel old when playing bridge with her neighbors but young when playing Monopoly with her grandchildren, and even younger when playing the French horn in the community orchestra. As we’ve seen, certain contexts place labels on older people that then become difficult to escape. The more we are able to see ourselves and each other in a variety of social contexts, taking on a diversity of social roles, the more each may be viewed mindfully.

The relationship between age-related changes and physical and mental decline is not a universal truth. Think back to the experiment in which Becca Levy and I studied young and elderly members of two communities that do not hold negative stereotypes of elderly adults—the mainland Chinese and American deaf. The experiment confirmed that elderly in both the mainland Chinese and American deaf cultures outperformed the American hearing elders on four memory tasks. If memory loss in old age were determined only by a biological mechanism of decay, the elderly of these two cultures probably would not be expected to demonstrate better memory skills than the elderly American participants.

The results indicated that age-related changes do not inevitably mean decline and research on memory loss in general bears out this conclusion. Though some researchers have argued that such a decline is inevitable and have documented consistent trends, others believe that some aspects of the deterioration of memory may be environmentally determined, shaped by expectations and social contexts.

Many negative consequences of aging are the result of priming. In one study conducted by Becca Levy and her colleagues, older adults were subliminally primed with either positive or negative aging stereotypes.5 Stereotype primes in the positive condition were the words accomplished, advise, alert, astute, creative, enlightened, guidance, improving, insightful, sage, and wise. Stereotype primes in the negative condition were Alzheimer’s, confused, decline, decrepit, dementia, dependent, diseases, dying, forgets, incompetent, misplaced, and senile. When asked to take a variety of mathematical and verbal tests, participants exposed to the negative stereotypes experienced a heightened cardiovascular response due to stress, including elevated systolic and diastolic blood pressure and increased heart rate.

Priming, of course, can result in positive changes as well. Priming health and competence could reverse some of the debilitations assumed to be hard-wired in humans. Recall the plant study I discussed at the beginning of the book, in which we gave elderly residents in a nursing home the autonomy to make decisions and responsibility over a plant that resulted in significant differences on measures of alertness, happiness, active participation, and a general sense of well-being just three weeks later. Eighteen months later, these differences had grown to not just measures of physical and psychological health but also mortality rates. In a somewhat similar study, psychologist Richard Schultz found that increasing control by providing institutionalized elderly adults with the opportunity to decide when they would be visited also resulted in improvement on psychological and physical health measures.6

Charles Alexander and I, along with colleagues, replicated these results in a later study where both mindfulness as we study it (noticing novelty) and transcendental meditation (predicted to enhance mindfulness after meditation practice) were used to promote mindfulness.7 Both mindfulness-producing groups showed marked enhancement in intellectual functioning as well as physical health. They also exhibited an increase in perceived control, felt significantly younger, and were rated by nurses as improved on mental health. Further, both groups lived longer than the control group during the three-year follow-up period. All of these findings suggest that creating environments in which the elderly are challenged to counteract stereotypes rather than expected to express them may diminish their negative effects.





Mindless Institutional Living


Most of the retreat participants in the counterclockwise study had been living with their adult children, which meant that the houses they lived in and even their rooms were not fully their own. Given these circumstances, our subjects lacked the household reminders of their youth and their past vigor. The retreat was conceived to provide a better environment for them in that regard. While it was not completely personalized, the rooms were full of magazines of that week from twenty years ago, which would signal a more robust time in their lives. And all of the rooms were different, which was important both as a memory aid and to convey the feeling of living in an inn for the week, rather than an institution. If I lived in a nursing home where each room was the same, I’m sure I’d walk into the wrong room as often as my own. (I don’t think this is just true for me, although truth be told I’ve never understood how those mice my colleagues run in mazes ever find their way out.)

Before the study began, everyone was asked for a recent photo of themselves and one from twenty years ago. We distributed the latter among the experimental group and photos of their present selves to members of the control group. We did this to help the experimental group members recognize each other as younger and more vigorous.

We requested that participants not bring anything more recent than 1959 to the retreat with them. We specifically asked them to bring one small item that they had had since they were young. John brought a pen; Fred brought a beer stein; Ben brought his Zippo lighter, which he had bought right after he saw it used by the cowboy in the old Marlboro commercial. Irving brought a comb and brush set that had belonged to his father. Peter brought his Brooklyn Dodgers cap, and when we commented on it a few days into this exercise, he railed about the Dodgers moving to Los Angeles just a couple of years “earlier.” Max hadn’t remembered to bring anything, but he seemed to have an unusual attachment to the issue of Sports Illustrated that we put in his room. The main living room had multiple copies of Life magazine and the Saturday Evening Post from that same week in 1959.

Old radio programs—Gunsmoke episodes and Bob and Ray routines—played on an old radio, just as they might have in the past. The men seemed to especially like Ted Mack’s Original Amateur Hour, Milton Berle, Perry Como, and of course Jack Benny. All of these choices in entertainment were meant to bring forth thoughts and emotions of an earlier time.

Probably the most important choice we made regarding physical cues was that nothing was done at the retreat to make it more “elderly-friendly.” While for older adults, obstacles are typically removed to make life easier, the lack of obstacles signals incompetence. At the retreat, how to overcome minor difficulties, such as negotiating stairs, getting to their room by themselves, or figuring our how to pick up a dropped item, was left to the men to figure out so that they might enjoy feelings of accomplishment.

When we took our measures, we tried to weave them into the events taking place because we felt that medical equipment and psychological tests in and of themselves often signal problems. For example, we tested memory with a game where we showed slides of noteworthy people and they hit a key as soon as they recognized who it was. The experimental group was quicker and more accurate.

In the information packet we sent out before the trip, everyone was told what kind of clothing to bring. They were told not to bring anything fashionable but instead to bring comfortable and preferably very old clothing. The staff was also given recommendations for their attire. They were told to dress in “timeless” attire, rather than to wear lab coats or anything that could signal a difference in status. Given the clothing that graduate students tend to wear, this posed no hardship. We were all more or less equals with nothing external to signal to the participants that we were in charge, that they were being watched, that they were expected to have problems, etc. We were essentially people interacting with people where our various roles were not made salient. We essentially gave up any external markers of our roles, befriended the participants as individuals instead of as elderly men, and spent the week in an environment that by virtually all accounts seemed timeless.

Currently too many of our parents and grandparents live in institutional settings where mindless routine prevails. Even the decor of some of these places suggests the absence of change. If mindfulness is life-begetting, as several of our experiments suggest, perhaps excessively scheduled lives portend premature death. If finding a way to live mindfully in these environments is difficult and thus unlikely, then what is the alternative to excessive mindlessness? There may be three alternatives: somehow finding a mindful life, premature death, or senility. As odd as that sounds, I’m suggesting that senility may be a mindful response to an overly routinized environment. As described below, our research bears this interpretation out. If senility is a cry for more mindfulness, it may be biologically adaptive even if socially maladaptive.

To examine this, in 1979, psychologists Ronnie Janoff-Bulman, Pearl Beck, Lynn Spitzer, and I compared people in nursing homes who had been labeled “senile” with those who were not so labeled.8 We held disease constant. Thus, a person might have heart disease with or without a diagnosis of senility. We found those labeled senile actually lived six to nine years longer. This study on senility was conducted before brain scans became popular, and so those people today whose brain scans reveal dementia may be exhibiting something different from our subjects—we don’t know. Still, many people even today, especially those away from large medical complexes, are diagnosed from small samples of their behavior and, like those we described, may be seeking a mindful alternative to the environments they are experiencing.

If the old are expected to decline physically, it is unlikely that they will be given the extra medical attention that could make a difference. Moreover, small improvements are not likely to be noticed, and they will be the first to be denied help when medical resources are in short supply. The problem is exacerbated by older adults accepting this stereotype to be true. Neither the medical community nor the elderly patients themselves question the unconditional nature of their assumptions. Even worse, adult children often feel helpless in dealing with their aged parents. Perhaps instead we could start questioning all of these mindsets.





Mindlessly Giving In to Negative Stereotypes


The unconscious enactment of negative stereotypes is linked to three other processes that can lead to negative health outcomes among older adults. The first process is a self-fulfilling prophecy of decline. To the extent that older adults expect aging to be associated with physical or cognitive detriments, these expectations may be confirmed through conscious pressures on behavior. Another aspect of such a self-fulfilling prophecy relates to the interpretation of ambiguous information. Because they expect to experience deficits, older adults may be more likely to interpret their own behavior and experience as evidence of their physical decline. Consider a situation in which an older man spends the day working with his granddaughter in the garden and wakes up the next morning with a sore back. Because he knows that older people are likely to have aches and pains, he attributes his sore back to his advanced age. This association—“My back hurts; it must be because I’m old”—can act as a self-generated prime, causing the grandfather to walk more slowly than the sore back would dictate, which, in turn, confirms additional age-related stereotypes. Because of the grandfather’s association of age and physical decline, it never occurs to him to discover that his granddaughter awoke with an equally sore back, which she attributed to four hours of weeding.

An individual’s negative expectations about aging can also interact with the expectations of others, creating an interactionally fulfilling prophecy. Imagine that both George (age eighty-three) and Martha (age forty-five) believe that aging is associated with cognitive decline. When Martha tries to explain a concept to George, she attempts to simplify her explanation, but this oversimplification leaves out certain details. George notices the simplified way in which Martha is speaking, and her omission of certain details leaves him confused. Research suggests that not only will George worry that his confusion is a result of his age (rather than attribute it to a deficiency in Martha’s explanation), but his behavior will change to confirm the expectations of both conversation partners. In a positive example of this, research has demonstrated that students whose teachers were told that they were on the verge of an intellectual growth spurt not only were more likely than their peers to be evaluated more favorably by their teachers but also exhibited actual increases in IQ compared with students assigned to a control group.9 Many investigations of self-fulfilling prophecies have demonstrated similar effects on the attitudes and behavior of both partners in a given interaction.

Feelings of dependence also have been directly linked to negative health effects. Negative stereotypes about aging may increase psychosocial vulnerability to health risks among the elderly by exacerbating a loss of control. Research demonstrates that it is often not the exercise of control that is important but rather the belief (be it true or not) of one’s ability to exercise control in a given situation. If environmental constraints or physical limitations deny individuals the opportunity to exercise control, we may experience the type of “learned helplessness,” in which we continue to abdicate control once environmental constraints are no longer present, that we saw in Martin Seligman’s helplessness experiments. This loss translates directly into the absence of the exercise of control in health care settings; individuals over sixty often report that they desire less control over health-related decisions, preferring less information and asking health care professionals to make decisions for them. Research, however, has demonstrated that the relationship between age and decreased desire for control is mediated by perceived self-efficacy. That is, individuals who perceive themselves to be less able to make decisions report less desire for control.10

To the extent that physical or environmental changes limit control for older adults, the perception of control over some aspects of life becomes even more important. In a study by psychologists Lawrence Perlmuter and Angela Eads, older adult males who sought assistance from a memory clinic were presented with a memory test in which they were either given a degree of control over the task or given no control.11 Subjects in the enhanced-control condition showed improved performance on the test compared to subjects in the no-control condition. In a second study, these improvements extended to subsequent memory tasks, suggesting that increased control may motivate performance in the same way that loss of control impedes it.

The third mechanism through which the negative stereotypes of aging may hurt older adults is through the very institutions created to ensure their care. Health care professionals are not immune to the impact of negative stereotypes about aging and may be subject to biases that increase health risks for older individuals. Nurses make more negative attributions about older adults than any other age group, and misconceptions about older adults and their concerns have been identified as barriers to providing health care by health care professionals. Similarly, physicians have been observed to offer less aggressive treatment to older patients without considering other medical factors that might affect the treatment’s success or the course of the illness.

In a survey of adults over fifty in the United States and Canada, more than 50 percent of respondents reported instances in which their health care provider attributed an ailment simply to their age or told them that they were “too old” to engage in an activity.12 In these ways, negative stereotypes about older adults have the potential to directly affect health outcomes by limiting access to medical care, disrupting patient-provider communication, and reducing treatment options.

Many of the care systems created to provide treatment for older adults perpetuate feelings of dependence and loss of control. Research conducted in nursing homes suggests that “over-helping” can lead individuals to infer their own helplessness and incompetence, causing them to do poorly at a task that they had previously been able to accomplish. (This is what the counterclockwise study showed as well.) A series of research studies conducted by Margret Bakes and colleagues demonstrated that a “dependence support script” defines many social interactions between older adults and social partners, such that dependent behavior is reinforced through helping while independent behaviors are ignored.13 These studies demonstrate that dependence support scripts are more pronounced and prevalent in institutional settings. Interestingly, the behavioral particulars need not change to effect a reversal of these effects. Consider a nursing home program, for example, that has children “adopt a grandparent” versus one that has a program in which elders “adopt a grandchild.” In the latter, the elder is implicitly in control.





Behavioral Monitoring


Years ago, psychologist Lawrence Perlmuter and I developed a technique to enhance control for nursing home residents that foreshadowed the idea of increasing control through attention to variability. Briefly, we had residents focus their attention on the alternatives they rejected even for their most mundane activities, such as what kind of juice to have for breakfast. This monitoring task served to remind them of the choices implicit even in the most mindless routine activities, and increased their perceived control accordingly.

For many older adults, aging may be associated with a narrowing of self-definition. Changes in ability, opportunity, or perspective may cause older adults to focus on their current restrictions, comparing themselves with what they “used to do.” An understanding of aging as a process of increasing limitation or loss may result from equating behavior with identity—that is, defining an aspect of self in terms of only a limited and specific set of activities. For example, imagine an older adult with a strong identity as a painter who develops arthritis in his hands to an extent that makes it difficult for him to hold a brush. A mindless assessment of this situation might result in encouraging this individual to come to terms with the fact that at some point he may no longer be able to be a painter. He might be assisted in developing a new hobby, or asked to reflect on all the wonderful art he produced in his youth. Instead of coming to terms with the end of his career as a painter, this individual might be encouraged to reconsider the way he paints—holding the brush in his teeth or experimenting with finger painting, spray cans, or spilling paint on the canvas. But even if this individual is not interested in or satisfied with these modifications to his painting style, a mindful reconsideration of his abilities would focus on broadening the concept of “painter” to include a host of activities in which the individual can still engage and excel. Being “a painter” can mean a particular way of seeing the world, a way of understanding and interpreting art, a gift for matching color and tone with meaning. This individual does not have to give up those aspects of self, and will always be a painter, even if he is not painting at the moment. More to the point, even if he still paints with a brush, now he will do different things with it than before his arthritis. If he notices the differences as differences, not decrements, he may develop an entirely new way of painting for himself. Broadening both our understanding of identity-defining categories and the variety of environmental and motivational influences that shape behavior may allow older individuals to focus on continuity across the life span, rather than loss.

Similarly, older adults can consider themselves athletes long after their physical stamina or agility may prevent them from engaging in their preferred sport, like our older tennis player above. This idea of concept broadening stands in contrast to recommendations of downward social comparison, in which older adults are encouraged to feel good about themselves as “an athlete” because they are still in excellent shape compared to people of their own age. In contrast, this framing of self-definition does not rely on social comparison, and for that reason is both more satisfying and more enduring.





Increasing Discrimination


A mindful approach to the world may reduce prejudice and stereotyping by increasing discrimination not against people but between them. Mindfulness through active distinction making about given individuals prevents one characteristic from dominating or defining them. As such, global characteristics such as “Tom and Joan are old” might become more differentiated and may be perceived as specific attributes of an individual rather than a class of persons: “Tom has gray hair and whistles; Joan wears red nail polish and walks with a cane.” Without this differentiation, for example, the correlation between apparent age and chronological age is likely to be exaggerated as a result of illusory correlation. Consider the fact that while older people are more likely to have gray hair than younger people, we can all think of exceptions. However, the strangers we see every day are typically taken as confirmation of this hypothesis; young people with gray hair are assumed to be chronically older than they are, and old people with darker hair are assumed to be younger. So the correlation may not be nearly as high as we presume.

The same would be true, of course, for characteristics and abilities. By increasing the distinctions we notice about individuals in the world around us, we may improve our ability to discriminate among them and sharpen our understanding of the futility of arbitrary categorizations.

This is important in its own right but also because cognitive decline typically leads to physical decline. The assumption of cognitive decline, as we’ve said, overlooks several factors:

Old and young are motivated by different things.

The tests of cognitive ability have all been designed by younger adults. Consider again the results of a memory test using words such as Game Boy versus one using mahjong.

Is it that the older we get, the harder it is to remember facts, or is it that instances of a rule matter less once one has the general rule?

Our attention to interpersonal concerns can masquerade for cognitive loss and may be an asset and not a liability (who cares who did it or why; life starts right now). “Forgetting” harsh interactions allows us to go forward without dwelling on the past; forgetting is a cue to be in the present.



Older adults may face real difficulties associated with aging. Both the elderly and the not yet elderly, however, might be better off by questioning the applicability of age-sensitive measures of competence; by realizing that one can’t see past one’s own level of development; by accepting that aging means change, but not necessarily decay; and by promoting autonomy, active distinction making, and attention to variability for ourselves and those around us.





Seeing “Them” Differently


Our bodies are constantly changing, a statement that if mindfully accepted may allow us to gain control of functioning that appears only to be diminishing to the mindless observer. And each of our parts, so to speak, is changing at a different rate and in a different way. In the same way, our culture is made up of people who are aging differently. There is a tendency to see any group as a single entity—they all look the same and act the same. Hence for the not-yet-old, seniors may seem more similar to one another than a closer look would reveal. We notice differences among in-group members because of more interaction with them and greater need for their individuation. It would behoove us, however, to turn our mindfulness to the older adults we see around us. Just as we might ask “Why today at this time does my asthma seem better?” we could be asking “Why at this time does John at ninety-three or Nancy at ninety-six seem so healthy?” We can attribute their active minds and bodies to genetic factors, but to do so denies the possibility of learning from them. We can assume they spent their younger lives exercising and eating healthfully, but that provides little that would be helpful to us if we are over fifty ourselves. What are they doing right now? The more specific we are in our attributions for their strengths, the easier it is to learn from them. Although we can never know if our understanding is correct, we still gain in at least three ways: our observations increase our mindfulness, our mindful noticing is likely to be positively experienced by them, and the changes we make for ourselves may be good for us even if our understanding of them was wrong. For example, if I notice that Nancy walks in the morning before she eats a large breakfast and I assume that this may be the reason for her good health and so I decide to try it, I may benefit even if her good health is primarily the result of genetics.

If everyone in the family was taught to be mindful, problems for all of us could diminish. When my grandmother was diagnosed as senile many years ago, as I described earlier, I thought it must be wrong since in my presence she was as sharp as ever. When I got a little older I learned that people who are diagnosed with senility (we now call it dementia) don’t show the symptoms all of the time. For a while that settled it for me. For her, like for most people with the diagnosis, the problems manifest often but not all of the time, so I thought the diagnosis might be correct. In the end, they discovered that the senility diagnosis was wrong and that what she had was a brain tumor. I can only return again to the issue of having symptoms some but not all of the time. I think all of us on occasion probably seem irrational to those close to us. How irrational and for how long do we need to be in that state to warrant a diagnosis of dementia? If we are completely “out of it” for 15 percent of the day, would that qualify? Twenty percent? Who decides?

There is now another question that occupies my thoughts. For argument’s sake, let’s say a person is irrational 65 percent of the time, so most would think there is a real problem. What is happening for the remaining 35 percent of the time? Isn’t this what researchers studying the problem should consider? If my grandmother had been senile much of the day but fine when she was with me, was it that supportive and nonthreatening circumstances worked against the disease? Was it the time of day I was visiting? If so, what differentiates her biology at those times from the rest? And so on. From this perspective different questions for examination occur, and with different questions different answers are likely to follow.


My father—the man with the self-described “bad memory”—is, at this writing, in an assisted-living facility in Boca Raton, Florida. I’m actually writing this from his room while he is resting. We finished playing cards. He taught me gin when I was a child, and whenever I visited him since that time, we played.

As we were well into the first game and my hand started looking good, I tried to figure out whether I should let him win or whether that was too condescending. While I was busy making this judgment, he declared that he had gin. I looked at his cards and he indeed won. He won the next game also. I’m on the faculty of one of the world’s leading universities and I’m not a bad card player. Nevertheless, this man who is supposed to be suffering from dementia just won three out of five of the games we played.





