
15
The TDT Perspective
This is the final chapter. I started writing this book four years ago, while
living in Michigan. Since then, I moved to Korea for two years, and now I have
been at the University of Alabama at Birmingham for more than a year. I hope
you have found the content useful, informative, and engaging. I hope you now
have a different understanding of deceptive communication.
This last chapter provides highlights from the previous chapters and summarizes the most important take-home messages of the book. Here I sum
things up and emphasize my main claims, themes, and ideas. A word of caution, though: This chapter does not provide a quick summary of TDT the
theory. That is provided back in chapter 6. Instead, this chapter provides my
closing thoughts and summarizes the perspective offered in this book.
THE TRUTH-D EFAULT
The truth-default is the namesake of my theory and is in the subtitle of this
book. Both the theory and the book extend beyond the truth-default, but the
truth-default is the central idea. It is the starting point for my thinking about
deceptive communication.
The idea of the truth-default is that when we communicate with other
people, we tend to passively believe what we hear or read. Even though others might be deceiving us, most often that possibility just does not enter our
consciousness, at least at the time of the communication. We certainly can be
kicked out of our truth-default state. We can consciously wonder if others are
really honest. And we certainly can uncover deception. But such things are aberrations that can occur given the right set of conditions, not the business-as-
usual of most communication. The truth-default is the rule that usually governs communication. For the most part, we passively presume honesty.
I want to avoid a potential misunderstanding here. It is not TDT’s stance

THE TDT PERSPECTIVE

289

that all people are in the truth-default state all of the time. The truth-default
is neither inescapable nor inevitable. TDT is clear about this. Triggers of vari
ous sorts can take us out of our truth-default. There are people we know better than to trust. There are situations in which we know we need to keep our
guard up. But sustained vigilance is effortful; and chronic vigilance is bad for
our physical health, our psychological well-being, and our social relationships.1
According to TDT, the truth-default is supremely adaptive. It works very
well for us. We humans are a social species that evolved in families, tribes,
and groups. Our survival as individuals and as a species has always required
social coordination and cooperation with our fellow humans. Nothing is more
important to us than our ability to communicate with others, and the relationships we build and maintain through communication. The truth-default is
essential for efficient communication, cooperation, and coordination. If humans second-guessed all communication, it would lose much of its efficiency
and utility, and we would either have long ago become extinct or never have
evolved into the social species that we are. Thus, while the truth-default is not
always on, it is advantageous for us to keep it on unless we have a good reason
to temporarily turn it off.
TDT rejects the idea of an evolutionary arms race in humans between the
ability to deceive and the ability to detect deception in real time. First, the payoffs from the truth-default in terms of efficient communication vastly outweigh
the costs of being deceived once in a while. It’s true we get suckered once in
a while, but in return we get to interact efficiently with other members of our
species. Second, the human solution to the problem of deception is deterrence,
not real-time detection. Humans have cultures, religions, and legal-political-
regulatory structures to keep deception in check. Third, after-the-fact detection of deceit is more common than at-the-time detection. Maybe someone
does fool us. But if that was about something important, we will uncover the
deceit in time. The next time, we will either avoid that person or be on guard.
And we may warn others too.
TAKING THE BIAS OUT OF TRUTH-B IAS
The tendency to believe others is an old and robust finding in deception research. For as long as truth-bias has been a thing in deception research, truth-
bias has been understood as a “bias.” Biases have a negative connotation. Truth-
bias has long been seen as the result of flawed and lazy cognition. For previous
theorists, truth-bias reflected faulty cognition and led to erroneous judgment.
This is not at all how truth-bias is understood in TDT. Sure, truth-bias can
lead to probable errors in environments where deception is unusually prevalent. But most of the time deception just isn’t very prevalent. The tendency to

290

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

believe isn’t a “bias” outside the deception lab, where deception is less frequent
than it is in the deception detection experiments documenting so-called truth-
bias. From the TDT perspective, it is the base-rates in the typical deception lab
that are biased in the direction of lies, not the research subjects whose judgments align better with everyday reality. In fact, it was the idea that truth-bias
might be adaptive and reflective of reality that led Kim Serota and me to our
series of TDT studies on lie prevalence.
PREVALENCE: LYING IS NOT SO UBIQUITOUS AFTER ALL
For a long time, deception researchers made claims about the ubiquity of deception. Deception was everywhere. Frequent deception was tossed out as a
known fact, providing a rationale for studying deception. Deception was a worthy thing to study, claimed many academic authors, precisely because it was
so prevalent.2
TDT claims the opposite. Key to TDT is the idea that most communication
by most people is mostly honest most of the time. Most deception, in contrast,
is enacted by a few prolific liars.
I have not lied today. I did not knowingly deceive anyone yesterday or the
day before, either. Take the TDT lie prevalence challenge. Keep a diary for a
few days. What’s the ratio of truths to lies in your communication? Most readers will find that lies are quite infrequent relative to honest messages. However, this won’t be true for everyone. There will be some “outliars.”
LYING IS NOT A RANDOM EVENT
The vast majority of studies on the topic of deception involve some version of
an instructed-lie research paradigm. Some people are instructed to be honest
while others are instructed to lie, based upon random assignment by the researchers. An important insight of TDT is that outside the lab, deception is not
random. People lie for a reason. Motivation matters. What most of the situations where people actually attempt deception have in common is that in those
situations the truth poses a problem for the communicator, and deception offers a convenient solution. When the truth works just fine, everyone but the
pathological liar will be honest. People who often find themselves in situations
where the truth is a problem are likely very different from most of us, who
are seldom threatened by reality in ways that necessitate frequent deception.
MOTIVES AND BASE-R ATES
Among the big implications of non-normally distributed deception prevalence
and deception motives is that things like truth–lie base-rates and the nature

THE TDT PERSPECTIVE

291

of situations matter a great deal. Lying is not equally probable in all communication situations; therefore, truth-bias and the truth-default are not equally
advantageous across individuals and situations. There are times when it is
healthy to be on guard for deception. When dealing with someone that has
been dishonest in the past, or in situations where there may be motive to lie,
the truth-default can be temporarily suspended. Knowing a person’s character
and knowing incentive structures go much further in lie detection than paying attention to the person’s demeanor. Life experience helps us tacitly play
the odds. This way, we can be selectively vigilant while getting the advantages
provided by the truth-default the rest of the time.
THE IMPORTANCE OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES:
PREVALENCE, TRANSPARENCY, DEMEANOR
Individual differences play a much larger role in TDT than in most other deception theories. Importantly too, TDT does not presume that these critical
individual differences are normally distributed. By not only addressing which
individual differences are most important but also specifying how those differences are distributed across populations, TDT offers a level of specificity
and precision that rival theories lack.
Besides in their individual proclivity to lie, people vary in their ability to lie
convincingly. TDT holds that there exists a minority of people who just can’t
lie in a way that would deceive anyone. I call these people the few transparent
liars. They are the opposite of inscrutable. Transparent liars keep deception detection rates above chance because everyone gets them correct. The transparent liars also provide anecdotal and statistical support for the ideas that cues to
deception exist. In TDT thinking, reliable cues do exist, but only in the small
minority of the population that are highly transparent.
Besides in transparency, communicators also vary in sender honest demeanor. Some people just come off as more honest than others do, completely
independent of their actual honesty. Unlike lie prevalence and transparency,
however, the distribution of demeanor exhibits more person-to-person variability and is less skewed. Looking at what honestly demeanored senders do
to be so believable led me to the BQ (believability quotient) described at the
end of chapter 13.
SAYING NO TO CUE THEORIES
TDT turns attention away from many key ideas that populate rival theories of
deception. Foremost among these is the idea of cues. The idea behind cues is
that there are specific behaviors that we can observe that (albeit probabilisti-

292

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

cally) distinguish honest communication from deception. In folk beliefs about
deception, a lack of eye contact serves as a cue to deception. In older theorizing
about deception, any behavior linked with anxiety, such as fidgeting with the
hands or high vocal pitch, is a deception cue. In current legal-criminal psychology, the number and type of details are cues garnering much interest.
Many prior theories of deception exemplify what I call “cue theories.” According to the various cue theories, being honest and telling lies are psychologi
cally different. Maybe lies are more cognitively effortful, or more arousing, or
associated with specific emotional states such as guilt or fear of detection.
Maybe liars are more strategic because they are more invested in being perceived as honest, or maybe liars are less forthcoming because they don’t want
to get trapped in their lies. In cue-theory logic, these different psychological
states, whether just one or some combination of them, are signaled behaviorally. Spotting these behavioral signals (i.e., cues) provides the mechanism for
lie detection in cue theories.
TDT takes a view opposite that of cue theories. In TDT, cues are ephemeral
and unreliable indicators of deception. Reliance on cues and demeanor pushes
accuracy down toward chance. Only the few transparent liars save cues from
being completely worthless. Improved lie detection, according to TDT, stems
from attention to communication content, not cues.
Details provide a good example of the difference between TDT logic and
cue-theory thinking. When details are viewed as a cue, it does not matter what
the detail is. We just count the number of details provided in a statement. The
fewer the details, the more likely the statement is deceptive. In TDT thinking, in contrast, the number of details is unimportant, except that, as with all
cues, if you count details as a method of lie detection, you will push your accuracy down toward chance. Surely the number of details in a statement rests
on things like the recentness of a recalled event, individual differences in
memory, and a host of other situationally variable factors besides whether or
not the communication is honest or deceptive.3 If you asked about my last sip
of coffee, for example, all I might (honestly) say is that it is no longer hot (providing just one detail). That detail, if believed, tells you about the current state
of my coffee. That I provide just one detail does not help you know whether
I was lying about the temperature of my coffee. In TDT what matters is the
content of the details and whether they are accurate when fact-checked. If we
can’t fact-check, are the details plausible? In my coffee example, good followup questions might involve asking how much time had passed since I poured
my coffee and whether I was engaged in some activity that might have prevented me from getting up for a warm-up.
Recently, the idea of verifiable details has emerged as a cue.4 The idea is

THE TDT PERSPECTIVE

293

that the type of details matters. In this case, the cue-theory logic is that liars
are strategic and avoid providing details that might be fact-checked. Therefore,
if the details in a statement can’t, in theory, be checked, maybe the statement
is deceptive, but if the details can be checked, the person is probably honest.
My friend Steve McCornack would likely counter that, at least in spoken communication, since we produce what we say on the fly considering verifiability
would likely bog down speech production, and this would be true for honest
people too since everyone has an interest in being believed.
The TDT approach is to actually fact-check verifiable details. In my opinion,
some people might be strategic, others less so, but if we want to know the
truth, let’s check what facts we can. TDT’s position is clear: verifiable details
that check out are probably true, and those that don’t merit skepticism. There
is no need to presume that liars use some particular strategy or even that liars
think strategically. People think all kinds of things. We shouldn’t impose high-
level strategic thinking where it might not belong. Much life experience tells
me that even smart people often don’t think many moves ahead.
I have a similar skepticism about the cat-and-mouse depiction offered by
interpersonal deception theory (IDT). IDT, too, presumes that liars are quite
strategic. In IDT both senders and their conversational partners closely monitor
each other for cues indicative of suspicion and deception. Liars are adept at
spotting suspicion cues and adapt on the fly to act more honestly. Deception
and deception detection are depicted as a strategic game of moves and counter
moves. In TDT, in contrast, most communicators operate within the truth-
default, and consequently most communicators are oblivious to suspicion and
deceit most of the time. Thoughts about suspicion and deception just don’t
enter consciousness. Even absent the truth-default, people just don’t have the
meta-communicative skill to act so strategically. In TDT when people do detect lies, it is typically well after the fact and based on either evidence or the
sender confessing the truth.
SAYING NO TO STAKES, LOAD, MEDIA AFFORDANCES,
AND MERE INTERACTIVITY
Because cues don’t really matter much in TDT except to distract and misdirect
us, a host of other things that have long been seen as critical in lie detection
are moot in TDT. In the TDT view, lie stakes, cognitive load, media, and mere
interactivity are all largely irrelevant. Studying such factors in lie detection is
a waste of time, because there is not much there to find. Theories that prioritize such things should be considered falsified or misguided, the stuff of mythology not empirical science.
Ever since Ekman’s first writing on deception, the idea of lie stakes has held

294

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

a prominent place in deception theory. Stakes have to do with the amount of
ill-gotten gain from successful deception and the degree of negative consequences stemming from a failed lie. The idea is that the greater the stakes,
the greater the psychological difference between truth and lie, and the greater
the likelihood that telltale cues will manifest as a consequence. Unfortunately
for cue-theory logic, multiple meta-analyses just don’t support the idea that
stakes make much difference.5
In current legal and criminal psychology circles, the mediating psychological
difference du jour is cognitive load. A critique of cognitive-load thinking was
provided in chapters 5 and 8. For now, let’s just say that TDT rejects the idea
that deception is inherently more effortful than honesty and that from my reading of meta-analytic data, there is even less evidence for load cues than there is
for arousal cues. I think that outside a controlled lab setting, adding cognitive
load during an interrogation risks making honest senders appear deceptive.
TDT does not focus on communication media, either. TDT propositions
apply to text messaging, tweeting, smoke signals, or whatever new or old medium over which some message might be sent. From the cue theory perspective, media is a crucial consideration, because different media have different
affordances that limit the availability of certain cues. Vocal pitch or micro
expressions, for example, are not available as cues in email. But that is not
important in TDT.
The same is true for face-to-face interaction and the degree of interactivity.
These don’t matter much by themselves. There is a big caveat, however, in regard to both media and interactivity. If the medium precludes diagnostic questioning, then two potential paths to improved lie detection are precluded. But
it is not interactivity per se that is important; it is properly exploiting the opportunity to prompt diagnostic information and to persuade a person to be
honest that are critical.
A DIFFERENT UNDERSTANDING OF HUMAN NATURE
The preceding pages have hinted about some things that should be made explicit. TDT just sees us humans in our social world differently than do most
other deception theories.
Many rival theories offer a cynical worldview where deception is everywhere,
where people are hyper-Machiavellian, highly mindful of communicative nuance, and super strategic. Interaction is presumed to involve higher-order
theory of mind, where people mentally represent others’ thoughts about them
and adjust on the fly to address contingencies upon contingencies. Specific
verbal and nonverbal behaviors have specific meaning across individuals and
situations. I, however, find such depictions difficult to reconcile with empirical

THE TDT PERSPECTIVE

295

findings suggesting low rates of deception relative to honest communication,
pervasive truth-bias, and poor real-time truth–lie discrimination.
Putting together the themes raised so far, TDT sees most people as mostly
honest. People lie only on an as-needed basis in situations where honesty won’t
work. When people do deceive others, they can do so convincingly both because most of us learned how to be deceptive as we grew up and also because
those who get duped are not on guard for deception. This second reason is because most people believe most of what is said most of time. This works well
because the passive presumption of honesty turns out to be right most of the
time. Most people just aren’t that Machiavellian most of time. Most of us don’t
approach human interaction with suspiciousness and vigilance. Instead, we
often go through most of our communicative lives on autopilot. What we say
pops out of our mouths without pre-scripting or strategic scheming, and we
accept most of what other people tell us.
MOST LIES ARE DETECTED AFTER THE FACT
In TDT people do detect lies, but usually well after the fact. In cue theories,
lies are detected when we notice behaviors indicative of deception and correctly
conclude that those behaviors are indicative of deception. In TDT people passively believe others regardless of cues. If for some reason people are watching for cues as indicators of deception, then their cue-based judgments are
only slightly-better-than-chance.
According to TDT, people detect most lies when information is later discovered that reveals deception for what it is. This deception-revealing information
is of two basic types: some evidence comes to light that exposes the truth, or
the liar later confesses the truth. Understanding how people actually detect
deception suggests methods of improving lie detection accuracy.
THE FIVE KEYS TO IMPROVING LIE DETECTION
In TDT there are five ways to improve deception detection accuracy. I list them
below and then discuss each. Much more detail is provided in chapter 14.
1. Correspondence of communication content with evidence
2. Content in context (situational familiarity)
3. Assessment of deception motives
4. Diagnostic questioning
5. Persuading honesty
In TDT, evidence-based lie detection is the most-preferred single approach.
Using evidence is the best way to improve the probability of knowing the truth

296

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

of some matter. We compare the content of some communication to the available evidence. To the extent that communication content corresponds with the
evidence (i.e., it checks out), then we can have some confidence that what was
said is indeed true. Content that is contradicted by evidence is suspect and,
depending on the reliability of the evidence, might well be false. Not all false
statements count as deception, but evidence-based lie detection has the advantage of getting at the truth of the matter.
Even absent compelling evidence, paying attention to communication content (i.e., what is said) is still useful when the communication can be understood in context in a situation familiar to the recipient. With an understanding
of the context in which communication occurs, content plausibility becomes
valuable in distinguishing truth from deception. We can ask ourselves, “Does
it make sense?” and “Does it sound right?”
Another important aspect of context that comes with situational familiarity
is the ability to estimate the likelihood of a deceptive motive. In TDT people try
to deceive others only when the truth is a problem. When people have nothing
to gain from deception, deception is improbable. Not all people with a motive
for deception are deceptive, but understanding the motivation of communicators is useful in narrowing the field.
Fourth, in situations where interaction is possible, asking the right questions can dramatically improve deception detection accuracy. The key, however, is asking the right questions, those that make the previous three methods
more useful. We can ask questions for which we know the answer but the interviewee does not know we know. We can ask questions that we can later fact-
check. We can ask questions that better enable us to assess plausibility and
motive. When something strikes us as suspicious, we can follow up.
The final path to improved lie detection is persuasion. We can persuade a
liar to be honest and tell us the truth. This can be done in a variety of ways.
We can bluff about what is already known. There is often little point in lying
when the target already knows the truth. We can appeal to a person’s character and morality. We can appeal to the incentive structure to motivate honesty rather than deceit. Regardless of the approach, however, there is one firm
requirement. The goal must be to seek the truth not just to elicit a confession
(which can be true or false). Seeking confessions as an effective lie detection
strategy works only to the extent that false confessions are avoided.
TWO MYSTERIES SOLVED
Way back in the first chapter, two mysteries regarding prior research findings were described. These included (a) the mystery of normally distributed

THE TDT PERSPECTIVE

297

slightly-better-than-chance accuracy and (b) the mystery of deception accuracy
in research that is not about deception. A viable social scientific theory of deception should be able to make sense of these otherwise odd sets of findings.
Chapter 13 is devoted to providing a nuanced explanation of slightly-better-than-
chance-accuracy in deception detection research. The snarky macro-theoretical
explanation is that reliably poor accuracy is the inevitable consequence of understanding deception detection through cue-theory blinders. Cues are by their
nature ephemeral. Reliance on ephemeral indicators invariably pushes accuracy down toward chance. The more precise solution to the first mystery involves individual differences in senders. Massive variation in sender demeanor
depresses accuracy, while the few transparent liars provide counterforce preventing the nil-null hypothesis of chance accuracy from fully obtaining. The
result is high accuracy for a few people who can’t lie well, chance accuracy for
the majority of senders, and average accuracy that hovers just above chance.
The second mystery involved the discrepancy in findings between experiments investigating deception detection and research that involves deception
but is not about deception. In studies of deception, the typical finding is that
accuracy is better than chance, but not by much. In contrast, much social science research involves deception, and what research using deception finds is
not accuracy just above chance, but instead accuracy near zero. Subjects are
typically fooled by deceptive research designs. For example, in my cheating
experiments, few real subjects suspect that their partner is a research confederate merely posing as a subject. So why the difference in the findings? Why
do deception detection experiments provide such a different picture of deception detection accuracy than findings involving deception but not about deception detection accuracy?
This question was not directly and explicitly answered previously. Nevertheless, people who read chapters 10, 11, and 12 and who understand TDT should
see the answer as obvious. The mystery of deception accuracy in research that
is not about deception is no mystery from the vantage of TDT.
In deception detection experiments, subjects are primed (or even required)
to consider the issue of deception by the very fact that they are in a deception
detection experiment and that as part of the research, they are asked to assess
honesty–deceit in some explicit way. When asked about deception, people are
slightly-better-than-chance at distinguishing truth from lies. But, in research
using deception, the research works only if the subjects are deceived. Researchers want the deception to be successful, so they don’t prime or otherwise alert
research subjects to the possibility of deception. Absent a researcher-induced
trigger, the subject’s truth-default remains intact. The deception is constant

298

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

across subjects, so the base-rate is 100% deceptive, and accuracy for the deception approaches 0%. Mystery no more. It all makes good sense once you
understand TDT.
EXPECTING MORE FROM THEORY
This book is about deception. It is also about social scientific theory. While I
hope the book is successful in providing a new understanding of deception and
deception detection, I also hope it makes a powerful and compelling statement
about theory. The fifteen chapters of this book articulate a new theory of deception. I described where the ideas came from, how they evolved over time, and
how I have sought to test my theory. I hope that TDT is a role model for how to
develop theory and how to do programmatic theoretically important research.
I hope too that TDT exemplifies the value of good theory. I think we need to
expect more from theory, and I sincerely hope that TDT exceeds expectations.
Among many social scientists, theory is seen as the sine qua non of scholarship. Graduate students are typically asked, “What is your theory?” rather
than the usually more appropriate question “Is there a viable theory that fits
your purpose?” Otherwise, good research submitted for academic publication
that lacks sufficient lip service to theory is often summarily rejected. Declarations of “it’s not theoretical” are hurled as insults.
I do not hold a Pollyannaish view of theory, nor do I subscribe to the theory-
is-a-must point of view. Some research objectives simply don’t require theory.
In those situations where theory is needed (or at least would be advantageous),
often the right theory for the job just does not exist. It is my experience that
poor or ill-fitting theory does more harm than good. It is my belief that theory-
for-theory’s-sake cheapens theory.
There are at least three problems with the state of theory in current social
science practices. First, the words “theory” and “theoretical” are used in a wide
variety of ways. For some, anything that is remotely conceptual counts as
theory. Others use the terms narrowly to refer to conceptual frameworks meeting some set of requirements like testable and falsifiable predictions, logical
coherence among propositions, and/or a unifying explanatory mechanism. Because the word is used in so many ways, it is often hard to know what, if anything, is meant by “theory.”
Second, too often theory is seen as a prerequisite for inquiry rather than as
the desirable but not essential outcome or goal of inquiry. I think it is perfectly
fine for research to be driven by intellectual curiosity or by the need to solve a
specific problem. Not all research needs theory to make a contribution. Of the
work that is theoretical, the theory need not come first. Going from curiosity

THE TDT PERSPECTIVE

299

to data to theory has worked well for TDT. If I’d had to start with a theory that
I accepted, TDT could not have been developed.
The third problem is that in many areas of social science there is a real
lack of good, sound theory. Nevertheless, social scientists believe they need a
theory to publish their research or to defend their thesis. So, what social scientists often do is just give mere lip service to theory. That is, they bullshit. Steve
McCornack has long suggested this test: Take the theory out of the article or
research project. Do the argument and research design still make sense? If the
answer is yes, then the theory is just clutter. The superficial or deceptive use
of the word “theory” detracts from the true value of good theory.
All this said, I see good theory as important, a huge asset in research. Obviously, I have invested much effort into developing and disseminating TDT.
I don’t believe I need TDT or some other theory to do meaningful research,
but I think having TDT provides advantages that would be missed without the
theory. To explain my opinion, we need to seriously consider what theory does
for us. What do we get from a good theory that we miss absent theory? What
does expecting more from theory entail?
Let’s just stipulate that accurate prediction and insightful explanation are
obvious functions of good theory. We should not downplay the importance of
prediction and explanation, but let’s instead focus on two other less often recognized functions of theory. I will call these functions (1) focus-prioritization
and (2) generality.
Human cognition and behavior in social environments is undoubtedly complex. There is too much going on for a social observer to take it all in. The
trick is to focus on the important things and not get lost in the minutiae. We
need to prioritize. There are many, many ways to approach any given research
topic, and theory provides much-needed guidance.
Here is an example that I think really illustrates this underappreciated function of theory. The previous chapter describes our expert questioning experiment (TDT experiment fifty-four). We brought federal agents into our lab and
had them question subjects who had just completed the cheating game. Interestingly and unbeknownst to us at the time, IDT researchers Norah Dunbar, Judee Burgoon, and colleagues had previously done an experiment that
was remarkably similar to ours in several ways.6 Like us, they used a trivia-
game cheating experiment where experts were brought in to question potential cheaters. More important for the current point, however, are the differences
between the Dunbar experiment and TDT experiment fifty-four.
The experts in Dunbar’s experiment questioned potential cheaters either
face-to-face or mediated with video conferencing. Modality and interactivity

300

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

are central to IDT, so this design decision follows directly from IDT. This is
not the sort of thing a TDT-guided researcher would think to do. TDT thinking suggests that adding media as a variable is something unlikely to yield
valuable results. As it turned out, modality did not have a big or consistent effect on accuracy.7 Dunbar and colleagues also looked at ratings of interviewee
dominance, involvement, relaxation, activity, and pleasantness. This is something we didn’t bother to do either, because that is the stuff of cue theories,
not TDT thinking.
Dunbar imposed scripted questions on the experts, whereas we did not.
Our idea was that expertise lies in knowing what questions to ask, and we
also wanted to see how the experts approached questioning, not how well they
could do asking the questions we as researchers thought they should ask. Importantly, we scored believed honest confessions as accurate outcomes. Dunbar excluded confessions when scoring accuracy. The bottom line was 59%
accuracy in the Dunbar expert experiment, compared to 98% accuracy in the
TDT experiment.8 The point here is not to brag about our results or to denigrate Dunbar’s experiment. The point is that theories guide research priorities
and research designs. Otherwise similar IDT and TDT experiments focused
on different aspects of deception detection and consequently prioritized different variables and obtained different results. Theories tell us where to look
for findings. This is not trivial, because the path to finding good, strong, reliable results requires knowing to look in the right place.
The second function of good theory is generality. Consumers of research
findings typically want to know whether the findings of research apply beyond the specifics of the research design. If college students were subjects,
we might wonder whether the findings generalize to older adults. If the findings came from a lab experiment, we wonder whether the findings apply to
non-lab settings. If the findings came from a study conducted in the 1970s,
we wonder whether the findings would still hold today. If the study involved a
mock crime, we wonder whether the findings would apply to real crimes. We
want to know how general the findings are. In social science lingo, we want
to know about so-called external validity.
“External validity” is a term introduced by the famed methodologists Donald
Campbell and Julian Stanley.9 Their work had a huge and valuable impact,
but their idea that external validity is achieved by research design was, in my
opinion, horribly misguided. The issue is that all data are finite and that the
types of generalizations research consumers want are not those provided by
either inferential statistics or features of the research design.
Let’s use TDT study one as an example. Study one used a nationally repre-

THE TDT PERSPECTIVE

301

sentative sample from the United States to ask people how often they lie. Presumably, using a large representative sample lets us statistically project our
findings in a way we can’t with smaller samples of college students, right? But
project across what? Presumably, we can generalize to the population, in this
case US adults. But we sampled subjects only, not cultures, methods, or time
frames. What if we had asked the question differently? We did not randomly
sample question wording or question order. What if we had done our survey
on a different day? See my point? We just can’t achieve the generality we want
with method, data, and statistics. Fortunately, there is an alternative.
TDT propositions one and two make generalizations about lie prevalence.
If these two propositions are right, lying is not normally distributed in any human population; most people are mostly honest most of the time, and most
lies are told by a few prolific liars. TDT studies one through five tested these
propositions. What we were doing was using theory to make generalizations
and data to test generalizations.
We should hold theories to a high standard. Are our theories pointing us in
the most fruitful directions? Are our theories leading to important new findings and steering us away from dead ends? Do our theories have the empirical
adequacy and the specifics to help solve the problems of induction and provide us with the ability to generalize beyond our findings?
GOOD FINDINGS REPLICATE; UNRELIABLE FINDINGS DON’T
My first semester in graduate school, I had the good fortune to take a seminar
from James C. McCroskey, who, as many people in my academic field know,
was something of a character. On the syllabus for the class, the attendance
policy simply read: “Good graduate students come to class, former graduate
students don’t.” What a great line. I’ll borrow that line to talk about how I feel
about theory and research findings. Good theory aligns with research findings,
bad theory doesn’t. And good findings replicate, bad findings don’t.
Looking back at TDT research, especially now that it has all been pulled together, I can proudly claim an obsession with replication. I am not obsessive-
compulsive, but a reader might get that impression. In TDT study one, for
example, a large, nationally representative sample wasn’t enough. Study one
was followed by studies two through five. Kim Serota and I hope to do more
cross-cultural replications in the future. Pretty much all the TDT findings reported have been successfully replicated at least once. Most key TDT findings
have been replicated several times.
There are two related points regarding replication. First, I want to restate
the importance of replication in science. Second, I want to emphasize that the

302

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

fact that TDT predictions replicate is a major bragging point for TDT. If empirical adequacy is the bottom in the evaluation of theory, and if replication
is required for confidence in empirical adequacy, then TDT sure looks great.
THE FUTURE OF TDT
Something like ten years ago, I had a mid-academic-career crisis of confidence.
I told Hee Sun Park that I was worried that I was out of good new ideas. Maybe
I had already had my best ideas. I had just had a great run getting my ideas
into one top journal after another. I didn’t know how I was ever going to top
the ideas I had already had. What was I going to do? Anyway, that was just
before TDT came together in my head. This book, I think, proves that back
then I was far from being permanently out of ideas. Back then, even though
I didn’t know it yet, another series of good ideas was just around the corner.
As I wrap up this book, I feel that way again. TDT, the research behind it,
and this book have been a huge undertaking. Maybe this is the best work I will
ever do. If so, I can live with that. Unlike last time, this time around I don’t
find the thought worrisome. Past experience has shown me that I can’t predict what’s next, but there are probably several things to keep me intellectually engaged just around the corner.
I do, however, have a vision for what’s next for TDT. TDT ideas are taking
off and gaining momentum. I can see it in citations of my articles and in the
manuscripts I am reviewing for journals. Up until now, TDT was a guiding
force for me and my small circle of close coauthors. That, I think and hope, is
about to change. Now it is time to see how TDT holds up when tested by others. We will see in what directions others take TDT. Now we will see how TDT
lives, dies, or, most likely, morphs. I don’t know what the future holds for TDT.
That is, as we scientists say, an empirical question. But I can honestly say that
I am quite pleased with how TDT and this book turned out.
