
6
Truth-Default Theory Summarized
This chapter provides an outline of Truth-Default Theory (TDT).1 After a
brief introduction, key concepts and terms are defined. My goal is to provide a
basic glossary for the ideas that populate TDT. Next, each of TDT’s modules is
listed and very briefly summarized. After the annotated modules, the propositions that constitute the key predictions and logical structure of the theory are
listed. The propositions weave together TDT’s modules, showing how they fit
together to create the larger theoretical picture.
Each of the modules, all the propositions, and all of my research providing
evidence for TDT will be more fully described in chapters 9 through 14. This
chapter is an executive summary and an overview of the logic and structure.
Outlining the ideas before I get to the detail will assist readers in seeing the
bigger picture and the flow of the logic as the book progresses. Readers who
find the lists tiresome or tedious can just skip ahead to chapter 7, which returns to the voice and style of the previous chapters. I encourage readers to
come back and reread this chapter after reading through chapter 14. The structure and style of this chapter may then be more appreciated. Chapter 15 provides a retrospective rather than a summary.
Because this chapter diverts in style from the rest of book by providing what
amounts to a series of lists, an explanation is needed. The point of this book
is to provide needed integration. Most of the bullet points in this chapter require a paragraph, a page, or even more of explanation to really unpack. The
rest of the book does this. But what is also needed is a succinct way to bring it
all together in one place. TDT has a flow and a logic that easily get lost among
the details and explication. Seeing the theory in outline, I believe, is the best
way to provide the integration and flow I want to convey. It also helps, I think,
to be clear about the terminology up front.

94

CHAPTER SIX

INTRODUCING TDT
At the core of TDT is the idea of the truth-default. When we humans communicate with other humans, we tend to operate on a default presumption that
what the other person says is honest. This presumption of honesty is highly
adaptive. The truth-default enables efficient communication, and this presumption of honesty makes sense because most communication is honest
most of the time. However, the presumption of honesty makes humans vulnerable to occasional deceit. A key insight of TDT is that this trade-off is more
than worth it. What we gain in terms of efficient communication and social
functioning is far more valuable than the cost of being deceived on occasion.
Further, there are times and situations when people abandon their presumption of honesty. TDT describes when people are expected to suspect a lie, the
conditions under which people conclude that a lie has been told, and the conditions under which people make lie judgments correctly and incorrectly.
TDT Core Concepts and Definitions
The following terms describe the main constructs that populate TDT. Brief
definitions are provided for each term.
• Deception is intentionally, knowingly, or purposefully misleading another person.2
• A lie is a subtype of deception that involves outright falsehood, which
is consciously known to be false by the teller and is not signaled as
false to the message recipient.3
• Honest communication lacks deceptive purpose, intent, or awareness.
Honest communication need not be fully accurate or true, or involve
full disclosure of known information.
• The truth–lie base-rate refers to the proportion of any set of messages
that are honest and deceptive. It is the relative prevalence of deception and nondeception in some defined environment or collection of
communicative acts.
• Truth-bias is the tendency to believe that another person’s communication is honest independent of actual honesty.
• The truth-default involves a passive presumption of honesty due to a
failure to actively consider the possibility of deceit at all or as a fallback cognitive state after a failure to obtain sufficient affirmative
evidence for deception.
• Honesty judgment involves the belief state that a communication is

TRUTH-DEFAULT THEORY SUMMARIZED

•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•
•
•

honest. Honesty judgments can be passive (truth-default), stemming
from a failure to consider the possibility of deceit; a reversion to
truth-default stemming from a failure meet the threshold for a deception judgment; or active decisions based on exculpatory
evidence.
Deception judgment is an inference that a communication is deceptive or a lie. Unlike honesty judgments, most deception judgments
are active and have an evidentiary or reasoned basis.
Demeanor refers to a constellation of intercorrelated behaviors or
cues, which function as a gestalt, relating to how people present
themselves, the image they convey to others, and how they are perceived by others.
Honest demeanor, a subtype of demeanor, is the tendency for a
person to be seen as honest independent of actual honesty. People
vary in the extent to which they have an honest demeanor.
Suspicion is a state of suspended judgment and uncertainty regard
ing the honesty or deceptive nature of a communication. It is an
intermediate cognitive state between the passive truth-default and a
firm judgment of deceit.
Communication content refers to the substance of what is said and
can be contrasted with demeanor, which also involves how something is said.
Communication context refers to the situation in which the communication occurs, the situation(s) relevant to understanding the communication content, and to the communication event as a whole.
Understanding communication content often requires knowledge of
context, and communication content presented without its context
can be misleading or uninformative.
Transparency refers to the extent to which the honest and/or deceptive nature of some communication is apparent to others.
Diagnostically useful information refers to the extent to which information can be used to arrive at a correct inference about the honest
and/or deceptive nature of some communication.
Coherence involves the logical consistency of communication content.
Correspondence involves the consistency between communication
content and external evidence or knowledge.
Deception detection accuracy refers to correctly distinguishing between
honest and deceptive communication.

95

96

CHAPTER SIX

TDT MODULES
TDT is a modular theory. The modules are various minitheories, models, effects, and hypotheses that can stand alone. They can be understood without
reference to larger theory. Empirical support or disconfirmation for one module does not imply support or disconfirmation of another module. The modules discussed in the following chapters are:
• A Few Prolific Liars (or “outliars”; chapter 9)—The prevalence of
lying is not normally or evenly distributed across the population. Instead, most people lie infrequently. Most people are honest most of
time. There are a few people, however, who lie often. Most lies are
told by a few prolific liars.
• Deception Motives (chapter 10)—People lie for a reason, but the
motives behind truthful and deceptive communication are the same.
When the truth is consistent with a person’s goals, he or she will almost always communicate honestly. Deception becomes probable
when the truth makes honest communication difficult or inefficient.
• The Projected Motive Model (chapter 10)—People know that others
lie for a reason and are more likely to suspect deception when they
think a person has a reason to lie.
• The Veracity Effect (chapter 12)—The honesty (i.e., veracity) of communication predicts whether the message will be judged correctly.
Specifically, honest messages produce higher accuracy than lies. The
veracity effect results from truth-bias.
• The Park–Levine Probability Model (chapter 12)—Because honest
messages yield higher accuracy than lies (i.e., the veracity effect),
the proportion of truths and lies (base-rates) affects accuracy. When
people are truth-biased, as the proportion of honest messages increases, so does average detection accuracy. This relationship is
linear and is predicted as the accuracy for truths times the proportion of messages that are true plus the accuracy for lies times the
proportion of messages that are lies.
• A Few Transparent Liars (chapter 13)—The reason that accuracy in
deception detection is above chance in most deception detection experiments is that some small proportion of the population are really
bad liars who usually give themselves away. The reason accuracy is
not higher is that most people are pretty good liars.
• Sender Honest Demeanor (chapter 13)—There are large individual

TRUTH-DEFAULT THEORY SUMMARIZED

•

•

•

•

•

•

97

differences in believability. Some people come off as honest. Other
people are doubted more often. These differences in how honest different people seem to be are a function of a combination of eleven
different behaviors and impressions that function together to create
the BQ (believability quotient). Honest demeanor has little to do
with actual honesty, and this explains poor accuracy in deception
detection experiments.
How People Really Detect Lies (chapter 14)—Outside the deception
lab, in everyday life, most lies are detected after the fact, based on
either confessions or the discovery of some evidence showing that
what was said was false. Few lies are detected in real time based only
on the passive observation of sender nonverbal behavior.
Content in Context (chapter 14)—Understanding communication
requires listening to what is said and taking that in context. Knowing about the context in which the communication occurs can help
detect lies.
Diagnostic Utility (chapter 14)—Some aspects of communication are
more useful than others in detecting deception, and some aspects
of communication can be misleading. Diagnostic utility involves
prompting and using useful information while avoiding useless and
misleading behaviors.
Correspondence and Coherence (chapter 14)—Correspondence and
coherence are two types of consistency information that may be
used in deception detection. Correspondence has to do with compar
ing what is said to known facts and evidence. It is fact-checking. Coherence involves the logical consistency of communication. Generally speaking, correspondence is more useful than coherence in
deception detection.
Question Effects (chapter 14)—Question effects involve asking the
right questions to yield diagnostically useful information that improves deception detection accuracy.
Expert Questioning (chapter 14)—Expertise in deception detection is
highly context dependent and involves knowing how to prompt diagnostically useful information rather than passively observing deception cues.

TDT Propositions
The TDT propositions provide a string of assertions, predictions, and conjectures that weave the constructs and modules together to describe and explain

98

CHAPTER SIX

human deception and deception detection and to provide coherence. That is,
the propositional structure shows how the various modules fit together. The
propositions also provide specific, testable, and falsifiable predictions. The
propositions are numbered one to fourteen and reflect the logical flow of TDT.
• Proposition one. Most communication by most people is honest
most of the time. While deception can and does occur, in compari
son to honest messages, deception is relatively infrequent, and outright lies are more infrequent still. In fact, deception must be infrequent to be effective.
• Proposition two. The prevalence of deception is not normally distributed across the population. Most lies are told by a few prolific liars.
• Proposition three. Most people believe most of what is said by most
other people most of the time. That is, most people can be said to be
truth-biased most of the time. Truth-bias results from, in part, a default cognitive state. The truth-default state is pervasive, but it is not
an inescapable cognitive state. Truth-bias and the truth-default are
adaptive both for the individual and for the species. They enable efficient communication.
• Proposition four. Because of proposition one, the presumption of
honesty specified in proposition three is usually correct. Truth-bias,
however, makes people vulnerable to occasional deception.
• Proposition five. Deception is purposive. Absent psychopathology,
people lie for a reason. Deception, however, is usually not the ultimate goal, but instead a means to some other ends. That is, deception is typically tactical. Specifically, most people are honest unless
the truth thwarts some desired goal or goals. The motives or desired
goals achieved through communication are the same for honest and
deceptive communications, and deception is reserved for situations
where honesty would be ineffectual, inefficient, and/or counterproductive in goal attainment.
• Proposition six. People understand that others’ deception is usually
purposive and are more likely to consider a message as potentially
or actually deceptive under conditions where the truth may be inconsistent with a communicator’s desired outcomes. That is, people
project motive states on others, and this affects suspicion and judgments of honesty and deceit.
• Proposition seven. The truth-default state requires a trigger event to
abandon it. Trigger events include but are not limited to: (a) a pro-

TRUTH-DEFAULT THEORY SUMMARIZED

•

•

•

•

•

•

jected motive for deception, (b) behavioral displays associated with
dishonest demeanor, (c) a lack of coherence in message content, (d)
a lack of correspondence between communication content and some
knowledge of reality, or (e) information from a third party warning
of potential deception.
Proposition eight. If a trigger or set of triggers is sufficiently potent,
a threshold is crossed, suspicion is generated, the truth-default is at
least temporarily abandoned, the communication is scrutinized, and
evidence is cognitively retrieved and/or sought to assess honesty–
deceit.
Proposition nine. Based on information of a variety of types, an evi
dentiary threshold may be crossed, and a message may be actively
judged to be deceptive. The information used to assess honesty and
deceit includes but is not limited to: (a) contextualized communication content and motive, (b) sender demeanor, (c) information from
third parties, (d) communication coherence, and (e) correspondence
information. If the evidentiary threshold for a lie judgment is not
crossed, an individual may continue to harbor suspicion or revert to
the truth-default. If exculpatory evidence emerges, active judgments
of honesty are made.
Proposition ten. Triggers and deception judgments need not occur
at the time of the deception. Many deceptions are suspected and detected well after the fact.
Proposition eleven. With the exception of a few transparent liars, deception is not accurately detected, at the time in which it occurs,
through the passive observation of cues or sender demeanor. Honest-
looking and deceptive-looking communication performances are
largely independent of actual honesty and deceit for most people and
hence usually do not provide diagnostically useful information. Consequently, demeanor-based deception detection is, on average, only
slightly better than chance due to a few transparent liars, but typically not much above chance due to the fallible nature of demeanor-
based judgments.
Proposition twelve. In contrast, deception is most accurately detected
through either (a) subsequent confession by the deceiver or (b) comparison of the contextualized communication content to some external evidence or preexisting knowledge.
Proposition thirteen. Both confessions and diagnostically informative communication content can be produced by effective context-

99

100

CHAPTER SIX

sensitive questioning of a potentially deceptive sender. Ill-conceived
questioning, however, can backfire and produce below-chance
accuracy.
• Proposition fourteen. Expertise in deception detection rests on
knowing how to prompt diagnostically useful information, rather
than on skill in the passive observation of sender behavior.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter provides a rough sketch of Truth-Default Theory (TDT). The truth-
default is that people tend to believe others’ communication, and in conversation (or mediated communication) questions of honesty and deception of
ten do not come to mind, except in specific and relatively unusual situations.
TDT departs from prior theories of deception and deception detection in
several critical ways. The very idea of the truth-default distinguishes TDT from
theories that presume that people typically scrutinize others’ communication
for veracity. TDT is unique in seeing deception as infrequent relative to honesty and in specifying that most deception is perpetrated by a few prolific liars.
The idea that truth-bias is functional and adaptive, and not the result of flawed
thinking, also distinguishes TDT from some rival theories.
Key testable predictions of TDT specify the conditions under which the truth-
default holds and when it is abandoned in favor of scrutinizing communication for veracity. Factors such as third-party prompting, projected motives, and
the logical consistency of communication content, among others, are advanced
as triggers that can kick people out of truth-default.
The final set of predictions specifies conditions under which people accurately detect lies. Unlike many prior theories, TDT holds that observing
nonverbal deception cues hinders accurate deception detection. Instead, TDT
advocates as best paths to improved accuracy a reliance on contextualized communication content and persuading liars to honestly confess their lies.
