
7
Defining Deception
(Beyond BFLs and Conscious Intent)

Sometimes people tell outright lies. People sometimes say things that
they very well know are false with the intent and for the purpose of duping
others. But outright lies are not the only ways people go about deceiving others. In fact, outright lies probably account for only a small proportion of deceptive messages.
Chapters 7 and 8 set the stage for TDT by addressing some issues that have
been skirted so far but are essential to understanding deception and TDT’s
place in deception theory. This chapter explores one fundamental question
in considerable detail: What is deception? Chapter 8 addresses the closely related issue of the various forms deceptive messages can take. Two theories by
my good friend and colleague Steve McCornack (information manipulation
theory, IMT, and information manipulation theory 2, IMT2) addressing deceptive message form, function, and production are presented in chapter 8.
Together, the next two chapters move our understanding of deception beyond
both conscious intent and outright lies.
This chapter is subtitled “Beyond BFLs and Conscious Intent.” Steve McCornack’s ideas of bald-faced lies (BFLs) and bald-faced truths (BFTs) were briefly
mentioned in chapter 5 as a critique of prior theory. Almost all deception
research compares outright lies (BFLs) to unproblematic, unpackaged, easy
truths. Deception, however, is not limited to BFLs, and, if IMT2 is correct, BFLs
are not even the deceptive message of choice in most deception-prompting
situations. BFLs constitute only a small and nonrepresentative minority of
deceptive messages.
Further, and especially relevant to this chapter, most theorists and researchers define deception as an intentional act. In contrast to the conscious intent

102

CHAPTER SEVEN

requirement, IMT, IMT2, and TDT take a more functional approach to defin
ing deception. Steve McCornack and I certainly don’t preclude intent, but we
tend to think that if someone was “deceived,” then there was deception. Our
theories let us talk about messages that function to deceive without knowing
the intention states of the person who is doing the deceiving. In short, this
chapter and the next outline a theoretical stance that moves beyond BFL and
conscious intent.
The relegation of deceptive intent to a lesser role marks a departure for
TDT (and companion theories IMT and IMT2) from the theories of deception reviewed in the previous chapters. Because TDT defines deception differently than its rivals, it makes sense to spend some time working through
various issues in defining deception and discussing the theoretical implications of various definitions.
In this chapter attention is turned to conceptual issues in defining honesty, deception, and lying. My approach to defining these terms is explained.
It might be surprising that a whole chapter is dedicated to defining deception.
It is my opinion, however, that defining deception is not as straightforward
as it might at first seem, and that a new approach to deception and deception
detection is well served by reconsidering what we mean by deception. Good
theory, I believe, requires a solid, well-thought-out conceptual foundation. I
have been thinking about how to define deception for almost three decades,
and this chapter describes that thinking.
DEFINING DECEPTION
In chapter 6, the following definitions of deception, lying, and honest communication were provided without explanation:
• Deception is intentionally, knowingly, or purposefully misleading another person.
• A lie (or bald-faced lie, BFL for short) is a subtype of deception that
involves outright falsehood, which is consciously known to be false
by the teller, and is not signaled as false to the message recipient.
• Honest communication lacks deceptive purpose, intent, or awareness.
Honest communication need not be fully accurate or true, or involve
full disclosure.
Before discussing my definitions,1 let’s take a look at definitions of deception by Ekman, Burgoon, and Vrij for comparison:

DEFINING DECEPTION

103

One person intends to mislead another, doing so deliberately, without prior
notification of this purpose, and without having been explicitly asked to do
so by the target.2
Deception is defined as a message knowingly transmitted by a sender to
foster a false belief or conclusion by the receiver. . . . More specifically, deception occurs when communicators control the information contained
in their messages to convey a meaning that departs from the truth as they
know it.3
A successful or unsuccessful deliberate attempt, without forewarning, to create in another a belief which the communicator considers to be untrue.4
As you can see, the wording is a little different, but there is a general consensus among Ekman, Burgoon, and Vrij on what constitutes deception. Like
the three examples just provided, most definitions of deception these days define it as an intentional or knowing attempt to mislead another person.
It follows from these definitions that speaking the literal truth and being
honest are not the same things. Along the same lines, deception and falsehoods are not synonymous. Deception is not a matter of the truth or falsity
of what is said but an issue of deceptive intent. An “honest mistake,” that is,
saying something that one incorrectly believes to be true, is false but it is not
considered as deception. Further, saying something known to be false is not
deceptive if it is said in such a way that the hearer should know it is false. Sarcasm is an obvious example. If I say “Nice job!” after you make an obvious
mistake, you know not to take me literally. None of these cases involve intent
to mislead. However, saying something that is literally true in a sarcastic way
so that the listener infers something false can be deceptive. In short, what is
literally true can be deceptive and saying something false need not be deceptive. What makes something deceptive is, according to most definitions, the
conscious intent to mislead.
Also, according to prevailing definitions, what matters is the intent, not what
is achieved. Lies that fool no one still count as deception. Focus is placed almost entirely on the intention state of the would-be deceiver. If a sender is trying to deceive, then it’s deception according to most definitions. The Vrij definition above makes this most explicit.
Some cases of deception are clear-cut. When someone says something that
is clearly false, it is clear that the person speaking the falsehood knows that
it is false and intends to deceive the target person, and if the target is indeed

104

CHAPTER SEVEN

misled by the statement, we have a successful bald-faced lie (BFL). The deceptive nature of such lies is uncontroversial and unequivocal. In such cases, the
peculiarities of particular definitions matter not. Successful BFLs are deception according to all academic and nonacademic definitions alike. In the next
chapter, I present some research showing that just about everyone everywhere
sees BFLs as deception. But, evidence will also be presented showing that BFLs
are only one type of deception, and not an especially common type. BFLs are
deception, but most deception is not achieved through BFLs.
BEYOND BFLS AND INTENT
BFLs populate much of the experimental work on deception and deception detection. But deception is not always so simple and clear-cut, especially outside
the lab. I have several situations in mind that muddy the conceptual waters
and pose challenges for the deceptive-intent approach to defining deception.
The considerations discussed here led me, after much thought, to the definitions I provide in this book that move beyond mere intent and outright lies.
I engage these issues with a little more tentativeness than I approach many
issues in the book. I do not believe that one definition is necessarily right and
the rest are wrong. Definitions are not like theories that can be tested against
data and falsified. I am certainly not after a normative definition here. That is,
I am not seeking to define deception in a way that is consistent with common
everyday usage of the term among English speakers. I am not approaching the
task of defining deception as if I am creating an entry in a dictionary. Instead,
I see the issues discussed here as considerations that make some definitions
more or less useful for various theoretical, empirical, and practical purposes.
I seek a definition that works well for the scope of this book, that fits within
the logic of TDT, and that makes the most sense to me as a theoretician seeking a precise understanding of my topic.5
My method here is to offer some thought experiments and then provide
commentary. Let’s start. What if you say something to a friend, you did not set
out to mislead them, but you realize soon after you spoke that they misunderstood you and were misled by your words? Let us further presume that this
misunderstanding is not trivial to the other person. The misunderstanding
may cause that person some harm, and an accurate understanding is in his
or her best interests. But, even though you know they were misled because of
something you said and you know this might have some undesirable consequences for them, for whatever reason you don’t set the record straight. You
don’t correct their misunderstanding. Did you deceive them?
I think the answer is yes. If you know you misled someone and don’t correct

DEFINING DECEPTION

105

that, that is deception even if there was no deceptive forethought, intent to do
so, or at-the-time recognition. Some readers might disagree or think that this is
splitting conceptual hairs. But read on. If Steve McCornack’s IMT2, described
in the next chapter, is right, we sometimes start talking (i.e., the speech production systems are moving forward creating speech) before we consciously
know what we are going say. That is, we are producing on the fly. We are composing our words and forming our ideas as we go. Consequently, misleading
statements that work to our benefit can come out of our mouths without prior
conscious intent, planning, or forethought of deception. Of course, some lies
are deliberate, planned, consciously intended and the like. But I don’t want to
be limited only to deception involving prior intent. As a consequence of considerations like these, I have long favored a definition of deception involving
intent or awareness, such as: “Deception involves knowingly or intentionally misleading another person.”6
The word “knowingly” in my 2010 definition was meant to include even
after-the-fact awareness that someone was misled under the scope of deceit
and thereby moves beyond the conscious-intent requirement.7
FUNCTIONAL DEFINITIONS
I have also long preferred definitions of deception in terms of its effect on
people rather than how it is accomplished. In my view, what makes deceptive
actions deceptive is that someone is deceived (excuse the circularity), not the
specifics of how that deception is accomplished. From my perspective it matters not for the purpose of defining deception whether a person is misled by a
false statement, a mixture of true and false information, a mere omission of a
relevant detail, an equivocal message, an evasive shift in the direction of conversion, etc. Consequently, the words “misleading” or “misled” are critical to
my definitions of deception. When I first began to study deception, it was not
unusual for scholars to try to provide a list of the various ways deception might
be accomplished. Various categories of deceptive messages were offered. Such
lists typically included falsification and omission but missed many other forms
of deceptive messages. As we will see in the next chapter, deceptive messages
just don’t fit neatly into a manageable set of mutually exclusive types. Trying
to define deception by listing all the ways it can be accomplished is misguided.
My preference for a functional definition of deception is not universally
shared. I have a friend who claims to eschew deception almost completely,
and he is quite proud of his honesty, seeing it as a virtue marking moral rectitude. In discussing this virtue with him, I learned that he holds a very narrow definition of deception. Only BFLs, he says, count as dishonest. Strategic

106

CHAPTER SEVEN

omission or ambiguity, he claims, is not dishonesty—only outright intentional
falsehoods matter. As I watched him communicate with others, I saw him
mislead people from time to time, but never with BFLs. He would omit a detail or be vague, or subtly change the subject. Being a skilled communicator,
he didn’t need to lie outright to mislead. From my point of view, the outcome
was the same: people were deceived. But his narrow definition of deception
as strictly limited to BFLs lets him hold the belief that he is an honest person
who fastidiously avoids deception. I once thought his view was idiosyncratic,
but l have since met others with the same view.
If we view deception primarily from an ethical-moral point of view in which
deception is viewed as a bad thing and the goal is to be a good person who
does not do bad things, then a narrow definition of deception is psychologically
useful. Such views let people see themselves as good, moral people while still
being able to function in a social world. But I don’t think such a limited definition of deception provides any comfort to those who are deceived by messages that mislead without being BFLs. All this aside, I think there is much
more to deception than just the ethical-moral question of good–bad, right–
wrong. Don’t get me wrong; I think ethics and integrity are very important
considerations, but that’s not the focus of this book or TDT. In line with the
meta-theoretical stance of my former professor Gerald Miller, I see questions
of definition and questions of value as different sorts of questions that require
different sorts of answers.8
SELF-D ECEPTION
Another issue that clouds things is self-deception. If deception is defined
as a knowing or intentional act, self-deception is precluded, and so is other-
deception that stems from self-deception. If I am self-deluded, my communication reflects my delusions, and you are misled by me into believing that my
delusions are true because of my communication, is this deception? If we define deception as knowingly or intentionally misleading another, then the answer is no. Delusional messages are not deceptive. The sender consciously believes the message to be true, so self-deception is excluded by definition, and
the communication is classified as sincere and honest even though it is false
and misleading to the audience.
This issue has come to the forefront of political news coverage with the
presidency of Donald J. Trump. The Washington Post has a running tally of
Trump’s false and misleading statements. As I write this, Trump’s average
stands at 8.3 falsehoods per day, with a one-day high of 125 on September 7,
2018.9 Can we say that Trump is lying?

DEFINING DECEPTION

107

The more I have thought about this, the more uncomfortable I am with
excluding all other-deception that involves self-deception. The turning point
in my thinking was reading a book by Robert Trivers.10 As a theoretical evolutionary biologist, Trivers was puzzled by self-deception. Wouldn’t accurate
perception better enable survival?11 Trivers’s solution to the puzzle is that self-
deception is adaptive because it makes us better at other-deception. The idea
is, the more sincere I am, the better I can fool you.
I don’t know that I fully accept Trivers’s ideas. But I don’t want to rule out
subconsciously motivated deception. To me, intention implies conscious awareness. Using the word “knowing” in definitions definitely involves conscious
awareness. But I think actions can have function and purpose without conscious awareness. So, I added “or purposefully” to my definition of deception
as a nod to the kind of deception Trivers was thinking about.
Daniel Kahneman popularized the ideas of “system one” and “system two”
thinking.12 For people who have not read Thinking, Fast and Slow, system one
is fast, automatic, and subconscious, while system two is conscious, deliberate,
and calculating. Much work on deception presumes that deception is a system
two activity. If Trivers and McCornack are right, however, deception can also
be the output of system one processes.
Here is a really good example. Let’s consider Mrs. Keech and the Seekers
from the social scientific classic When Prophecy Fails.13 Basically, the Seekers
were a cult that predicted the end of the world. As we all know, the world did
not end in the 1950s. The Seekers’ prophecy proved objectively false. In the
immediate aftermath of the failed prediction, one of the leaders, Mrs. Keech,
received a spiritual message that she shared with the group. The faith of the
group had been so pure that God called off the mass destruction. The Seekers, as you can imagine, rejoiced. They weren’t a loser cult holding objectively
false beliefs that had just been unequivocally proven wrong. Instead, they were
the saviors of the planet (or at least the Great Lakes states)!
For the purpose of discussion, let’s presume that the Seekers’ system of
beliefs really was fantasy, that disaster was not actually averted that Decem
ber night in 1954, and that the messages Mrs. Keech received were fiction of
some sort or another. Fiction or not, however, it is clear from the story’s telling that Mrs. Keech’s messages were accepted with enthusiasm by the Seekers. My question is, Was Mrs. Keech’s salvation message (and other spiritual
messages for that matter) deceptive?
From the standpoint of most definitions of deception, we can’t be sure about
the deceptiveness of Mrs. Keech’s messages, even though we can be reasonably certain about ground truth. According to intent-based definitions, the de-

108

CHAPTER SEVEN

ceptiveness of the messages hinges on whether Mrs. Keech was a conscious
fraud or a sincere but delusional true-believer. Those who believe that it was
all an act will see the messages as deceptive. Those who think Mrs. Keech
was sincere but delusional will see the messages as false but, by definition,
not deceptive. The thing is, if we accept an intent-based definition of deception, we can never know the deceptiveness of the message, because we don’t
know what was inside Mrs. Keech’s head. Maybe she was a conscious fraud.
Maybe she was just crazy.
I find this ambiguity deeply unsatisfying. One really troubling implication
of deceptive-intent definitions of deception is that outside the lab, it is often
the case that we just can’t ever know if something is deceptive, because we
can’t mind-read. Deception researchers often speak about the issue of knowing “ground truth.” That is, to know that a statement is false, we have to know
what is true. In a criminal context, for example, if a suspect claims innocence,
we have to know factual guilt or innocence to establish ground truth. But, from
a definition point of view, when we adopt deceptive intent as the critical issue,
knowing ground truth is not sufficient to settle the issue. It is the communicator’s understanding of the truth that is at issue. Consider the implications
for an eyewitness account. The issue is not what actually happened but what
the witness thought he or she saw.
This is a tough issue, but I think the messages were deceptive regardless of
Mrs. Keech’s intent. The messages functioned deceptively. People were misled.
The communication had deceptive purpose. They served Mrs. Keech and the
group well. By including “or purposefully” in my definition, I get to count examples such as this as deceptive even if we don’t know her intent. We don’t
have to get inside senders’ heads. I prioritize ground truth and deceptive impact and function over deceptive intent.
THEORY OF MIND
At this point in the discussion, it is worth mentioning that intent and awareness play a different role in my thinking about deception than in the various
cue theories discussed in chapters 4 and 5. In the logic that undergirds cue
theories, the leakage, clues, and cues that give away liars are byproducts of psychological differences between liars and honest people. Those psychological
differences that produce cues might not exist without the awareness that one
is deceiving and without the intent to deceive. A person needs to know that
he or she is lying if he or she is to fear detection, experience guilt, or enjoy
duping delight. A person who does not know that would not necessarily be ex-

DEFINING DECEPTION

109

pected to experience heightened arousal as a result of lying, or to exert more
cognitive effort, or to engage extra strategic efforts to appear believable. This
is precisely why Trivers argues that self-deception enhances other-deception.
Without intent and conscious knowledge, the logic of cue theories falters.
Thus, cue thinking ties theorists and researchers to intent-based definitions.
But TDT (and IMT and IMT2) are not cue theories, so the byproducts of
intent and awareness that might bring about leakage and cues are not needed
for theoretical coherence. Nevertheless, intent and awareness play a different,
albeit critical, role. Human and primate deception involves a cognitive ability
that is sometimes called theory of mind.14 It involves thinking about thinking,
in both self and others. It involves understanding mental states such as intentions and beliefs, the realization that both the self and other people have mental
states such as intentions and beliefs, and the insight that our own intentions
and beliefs might be different from others’ intentions and beliefs. Theory of
mind lets us, among other things, take the perspective of others. Theory of
mind allows me to understand that what my wife may want for a gift is not the
same as what I want for myself. I understand that what she wants and what I
want may not always align.
Human deception typically involves theory of mind. In order to effectively
deceive someone, we need to understand that others don’t automatically know
what we know and that we can do and say things that affect others’ belief states.
Consider deception by omission. I’ll give a personal example here. About the
time I started working on this chapter, I was in the process of being recruited
by another university. A university (UAB) contacted me, persuaded me to a pply,
invited me for an interview, and made me an attractive job offer that I accepted
a week before writing this sentence. As I write this, I have not yet told my current employer, and I do not plan to do so until it is near the time to resign. If
my current employer is likely to find out about my new job before I want to
disclose it, it makes sense for me to disclose my new job before it is discovered.
If I don’t and they find out, I look deceptive. Nothing is gained from hiding
known information, and there are potential costs. However, it is probably in
my best interest to postpone my current employer’s knowing about my departure, so that I am not treated differently in the meantime. This will postpone
much awkwardness. The point of this story is that for omission to work deceptively, the deceiver (me) must have some idea what the target person (people
at my current university) already know and don’t know, and have ideas about
how the target person(s) might find about. People need to mentally represent
others’ thoughts for deception to function.

110

CHAPTER SEVEN

My example implied a very conscious consideration of others’ mental states,
but I do not think theory-of-mind cognition is of necessity in conscious awareness. We have much knowledge about others’ knowledge states, but we don’t
keep that information active in working memory all the time. I don’t require
constant active effort and intent to keep from blurting out my secret.
Theory of mind is also critical from the target person’s perspective. If deception requires inferring others’ mental states, so too does deception detection.
As we will see in later chapters, people are more likely to infer that someone
is lying in situations where the person has a motive to lie. My projected motive module of TDT is a special case of theory of mind.
The lack of conscious awareness has interesting implications on the target
person’s end too. If TDT is right, people do not actively and consciously monitor
others for signs of dishonesty. We believe others as a passive default state. But
trigger events can kick us out of our default and into conscious consideration
of honesty.
Theory of mind raises a very important point about deception. It matters
what the target person knows and what a sender thinks the target person
knows. Most people won’t lie if they think the truth is already out of the bag.
If you lie but the target knows the truth, any advantage gained by deception is
not realized, and your own credibility is reduced. It is all downside. Regarding
omission, as I said previously, there is no reason to withhold information that is
already known. This was part of the Scharff technique (named after the WWII
Nazi interrogator) of interrogation. If detainees were fooled into thinking the
information was already known, they need not hide the information: “Scharff
began by asking a prisoner a question he already knew the answer to, informing the prisoner that he already knew everything about him, but his superiors
had given instruction that the prisoner himself had to say it. Scharff continued
asking questions that he would then provide the answers for, each time hoping
to convince his captive that there was nothing he did not already know. When
Scharff eventually got to the piece of information he did not have, prisoners
would frequently give the answer, assuming Scharff already had it in his files
anyway, often saying so as they provided the information.”15
Not only can people be tricked into revealing sensitive information that they
believe is already known, but bluffing about what is known can be used as lie
deterrence. Because there is little deceptive value in lying about something
known, leading a sender to believe you already know the truth (or that you
can and will find out) can prevent a lie. Alternatively, target persons can use
known information as a lie detection tool if they don’t let senders know what
they know. This is done by asking someone a question whose answer you al-

DEFINING DECEPTION

111

ready know. If the person contradicts what you know, this suggests the possibility that he or she is lying.16
This last possibility reminds me of a story involving my wife and two of her
graduate students. My wife teaches her students the importance of reading
original work and of not second-hand citing. Second-hand citing is relying on
some third party’s description of work, but citing the original work as if it had
been read. Back to the story, my wife had read the first student’s thesis draft
and asked the student about some suspicious citations. The student replied
that she had read the original work, having found it in the university library.
My wife knew for a fact that the library’s only copy had been checked out (because she had been the one who checked it out). Just to be sure, she asked the
student some details about the book in question. It was clear that the student
had not read the work in question, although the student tried to bluff her way
through it. The bluff was unsuccessful, but my wife never told the student that
she knew the student was lying. My wife didn’t trust the student after that, and
eventually the student found a new (and more gullible) advisor. The student
was more effective in bluffing her new advisor, but had more difficulty bluffing her way through the life of a young professor.
Not long after that experience, my wife was talking with another of her students. She asked about some citations in the student’s thesis as she had with
the first student. This student too said that she had read the original. It had
been hard to find. The library’s only copy was checked out, so she had to go
through interlibrary loan. The student went on to talk about details of the book
with my wife. To this day, this second student is one of my wife’s favorites. Unlike the first student, she passed the secret integrity test.
A final example of the importance of theory of mind comes from research
on the development of deception and theory of mind in children. In an experiment I find especially informative, three-year-old and five-year-old children selected among desirable and less desirable stickers while interacting with either a good puppet or a bad puppet.17 Children were asked which sticker they
wanted. Good Puppet would take a sticker other than the one the child had indicated, while Bad Puppet would always take the sticker that the child said he
or she wanted. Several trials ensued. Three-year-olds were repeatedly frustrated
by Bad Puppet and often became quite upset. But, when asked which sticker
they wanted, they would point to the desired sticker, only to be thwarted once
again as Bad Puppet took their preferred sticker. The experiment went very differently for most of the five-year-olds. After figuring out that the Bad Puppet
really would take the desired sticker, when asked to their preference, the older
children simply lied. They “picked” a disfavored sticker, which was snatched up

112

CHAPTER SEVEN

by Bad Puppet, leaving the actually favored sticker for the clever child. Thus,
as we can see from these examples, intent, perceptions of others’ intent, and
the broader issue of theory of mind are critical to how deception functions.18
CONVENTIONALLY AND TRANSPARENTLY FALSE STATEMENTS
The next situation to consider is that of conventionally or transparently false
statements. Maybe the best example of a conventionally false statement is when
(presuming Americans in the United States) a person, in passing, casually
asks, “How are you?” and the reply is “Fine.” This exchange is highly routinized and conventional. So is “What’s up?”—“Nothing much.” I don’t consider
“fine” or “nothing much” deceptive even if the factually accurate answerer is
not fine or something really is up. People in the language community understand, or at least should understand, that when we ask routinized, conventional questions in greetings, we get a routinized, conventional answer in return. I once had a socially awkward colleague who used to answer honestly to
such questions. A passing “How are you?” in a hallway yielded an extensive
and graphic reply about current digestive problems. The answer was honest,
but “Fine” would have been a much better answer. Had we not heard about
the digestive problems, we would not have felt deprived or deceived. (Almost)
no one really thinks “fine” means everyone is currently wonderful and good.
It’s just what we say, and we all know it.
It’s not always clear, however, just what is conventional and what is common knowledge that members of a community should have. I, for example,
enjoy online gaming. If I am playing World of Warcraft, and I encounter a female character in the game, I don’t presume that the person playing that character is female. And if I find out that a female character is played by a male, I
would not necessarily feel deceived. It’s role-playing. I don’t presume that the
actors in movies have the personalities of the people they play. I don’t feel deceived that James Bond or Spider-Man are not real or that the actors who play
them don’t really have their powers or abilities. It’s the movies. We know it’s
fiction.19 Similarly, I don’t see role-playing as deception. The whole point of
role-playing is to play a role.
For a while I was playing a female character in an online game similar to
World of Warcraft. During that time, I met another female character online,
and we adventured together in the game world a few nights a week over a few
months. Not that it really mattered to me either way, but I guessed with reasonable confidence that this other person was really female. But we never really
chatted about things outside the game world except for things like “be right
back, taking the dog out” or “early night, got to work in the morning.” Never-

DEFINING DECEPTION

113

theless, I thought she probably knew I was male, just as I had pieced together
that she was an adult female who lived in Colorado. One night I said something that made clear that I was male playing a female character. I could tell
she felt shocked and deceived. I did not think I was deceptive. I never claimed
to really be female, and it was just a role-playing game. But is this an example
of deception?
Situations like these led to a discussion with a colleague, Joe Walther, who
studies computer-mediated communication and who was interested in information on online dating sites. If a female who actually weighs 129 pounds lists
her weight as 120, is she lying? Joe mostly saw the question as issues of deceptive intent and ground truth. Do people actually know their current weight?
Weight can fluctuate. Then there is liberal rounding. Still, I wondered about
convention. What if everyone knocks off five to fifteen pounds, and everyone
knows that everyone does this? If I know that 120 really means 130, it’s not
deception, I argued. Might this be similar to how-are-you-I’m-fine? We actually did a series of experiments to try and sort it out.20 Unfortunately, the results were not entirely clear; they did suggest that a little self-deception might
be at play but also that reports of weight might also be knowingly adjusted
downward. We never really got at the issue of how statements of body weight
are heard and understood in the online dating community.
A related issue is transparently false statements. As a general rule, I don’t
think that obviously false statements are deceptive. People should know better, and the tellers of such tales ought not expect to be believed and taken literally. For example, if I say, “I just looked out the window, it is a clear night,
and I can see all three of Earth’s moons,” you wouldn’t believe that the Earth
had three moons, would you?
But things are murky here too. The title of my theory is truth-default theory,
after all, and sometimes people do believe some pretty unbelievable things.21
I gave some examples in chapter 1. Here is another humorous yet informative example.
Several years ago, when I was a professor of communication at Michigan
State University, there were the beginnings of a strong push by the university administration to encourage faculty to get external grants. In the beginning the pressure was mostly incentive based. To publicize and encourage
grant-getting and to try and create a culture change, the college started naming a researcher of the month.22 Large posters were made and visibly posted
each month naming the awardee, and describing the funded research project.
Much to my initial horror, I was named September’s researcher of the month
for my deception research funded by the National Science Foundation. Profes-

114

CHAPTER SEVEN

sor September with a photo shoot and all. Yikes! But my initial consternation
gave way to much amusement and even appreciation when I saw the poster.
It was truly a gem.
The right column accurately described the research, the grant, and my work
on truth-bias. The left column offered the following biographical sketch, complete with what appeared to be me on the cover of Rolling Stone magazine.
Tim Levine gained his BS in Psychology from Northern Arizona University while leading the Lumberjacks to their first Big Sky Conference
basketball title ever, scoring 34 points in the decisive double-overtime
victory over the University of Montana. Picked 19th overall by the Knicks
in the NBA draft, Tim chose his MA over the big money and hot lights
of pro sports. While earning his Masters in Communication at West Virginia University, Tim was approached by a young coal miner from S
 eattle
named Chris Cornell, who heard Tim jamming on the bass with a Morgantown band in the Wharf District pub. Cornell immediately invited
Tim on tour with his band, a then-little-known quartet called Sound
garden. Thus, Tim’s MA was delayed for ten years, seven international
tours, and five full-length CDs.
The early 90’s found Tim pursuing his PhD at MSU. His thesis, entitled Pinnochio: an in-depth study of deception in 19th-century Italy,
is still required reading for all CIA interrogators. One of Tim’s breakthrough discoveries is elucidated on pages 943–944. . . . Observations
of a carbon-based arboreal subject engaged in purposeful prevarication
showed unmistakable increase in length of the proboscis, at times 300
microns, depending upon the magnitude of the deception. —Bart Moore
(2007).
Despite the obviously outlandish content and the fact that the poster was
about deception research, more than one person approached me and said some
thing like “Wow, I didn’t know you were in Soundgarden,” or, “I can’t believe
you turned down a chance to play in the NBA.” Amusement aside, this was
more evidence that I was on the right theoretical path with TDT. But with particular respect to transparent falsehoods, even the most outlandish things can
fool some people. The implications for defining deception are intriguing.23
FAILED DECEPTIVE ATTEMPTS
The last of my little thought experiments regarding defining deception asks
if deception has to be successful to be deception. I think most people who ac-

DEFINING DECEPTION

115

cept intent-based approaches to defining deception see deceptive intent as sufficient. If a person was trying to deceive someone else, that is still deception,
even if the lie fails and no one was deceived. It’s the thought that counts, so to
speak. In my view, however, someone must actually be misled for deception
to exist. I prefer to call failed attempts at deception “attempted deception,” to
distinguish them from successful deception.
CONCLUSION
To sum up this discussion, I see useful distinctions between conscious intentional deceptions, deceptive attempts, messages perceived as deceptive, and
messages that are functionally deceptive. Intentional deception is meant to deceive, and it achieves this end. The target person is misled by design. In deceptive attempts, someone tries to deceive another person, and there is deceptive
intent, but the target is not actually misled. This situation may be thought of
as failed deception. In perceived deception, the target person attributes deception to a communication regardless of the actual intent or infers intent that
was not there. Finally, messages that are functionally deceptive mislead others regardless of the actual or perceived intent. Functionally deceptive messages lead to the same outcome as deception, without getting into the message source’s head regarding their intention states.
An important implication is that message features like the truth and falsity of specific content, message intent, and message function or impact need
to be distinguished because these things do not map perfectly onto one another. So, someone can say something that is objectively false, omit information, change the subject, and so forth, in a manner that is either intended to
deceive or not. The objective truth or falsity of messages may or may not actually function as deception, and such messages may or may not be perceived
as deception. In short, speaker intent, purpose, and message consequence in
combination define deception, not the objective qualities of messages or information dimensions (discussed in the next chapter). Further, mere speaker
intent is neither sufficient nor necessary in and of itself to define deception.
