
9
Prevalence
It’s time to delve into TDT! Chapters 9 through 14 cover each of the TDT
propositions and modules. My research relevant to each is reviewed in a series of fifty-five numbered experiments.
First up is the issue of lie prevalence, TDT’s first two propositions, and the
Few Prolific Liars module. We investigate the question, How often do people
lie? After our discussion of prevalence, we will move on to when and why
people lie. But that is the next chapter.
Let’s start off with a quiz question. True or False: Most adults in America lie
less frequently than average? Does this seem too easy? Are you wondering if it
is a trick question? Are you thinking that surely the answer must be false, but
I would not be asking if the answer were so obvious? In any case, it is a true
statement. In TDT study one reported in this chapter, 75% percent of people
surveyed were below average. If you missed the quiz question, don’t feel bad.
Most people get it wrong. As we will see, this surprising fact follows from the
logic of TDT. Read on for the details and explanation.
PREVALENCE OF DECEPTION
My research on the prevalence of deception was, in no small part, inspired by
an essay by University of Pennsylvania psychologist Paul Rozin.1 Rozin argued
that psychology research, in the effort to be scientific, tends to jump prematurely into experimental work and statistical hypothesis testing, skipping necessary descriptive research. The main risk in this is that absent a thorough
understanding of the phenomenon under study, experiments and hypothesis
tests may reflect presumptions about the nature of the phenomenon that don’t
actually comport with nature. Social scientists who think that doing science
requires experiments, hypotheses, and significance tests should take a look at

PREVALENCE

135

 iology, which often involves highly descriptive, nonexperimental research, and
b
where hypothesis testing is often eschewed. To see what I mean, search for
biologist Frans De Waal online. But biology is science. In fact, I would argue
that the two most important discoveries/advances in the life sciences, evolution and DNA, bear little resemblance to the experimental hypothesis testing
in the social sciences.
Upon initial reading of the Rozin paper, I was struck by the implications
of his critique for the social scientific study of deception. It fit like a glove. As
noted in previous chapters, most deception research has been built on a shaky
foundation of presumptions that Steve McCornack2 called hopeful myths. A
solid conceptual and descriptive understanding of deception as a social activity
is needed. While there have been important descriptive studies of deception in
the published literature, these are relatively few.3 Worse still, the implications
of these more descriptive and naturalistic studies have, more often than not,
been ignored in both theory and experimental research. I thought to myself
that I had better establish a sound descriptive foundation and a rich naturalistic understanding of the phenomena of deception upon which to build TDT.
There is also a key theoretical motive for looking at prevalence. In fact, the
whole logical structure of TDT actually hinges on the issue of prevalence. Thus,
it is no accident that the first two TDT propositions are about prevalence. It is
a fundamental consideration because the truth-default state has very different
implications depending on whether deception is a low-prevalence occurrence,
a ubiquitous, high-frequency activity, or whether the chances of deception are
the flip-of-a-coin sort of thing that exists in almost all random-assignment deception detection experiments. TDT is unique among deception theories in
focusing on the truth–lie base-rate. It is critical from the TDT perspective to
get a feel for base-rates outside the lab, because base-rates matter so much according to TDT. Claims that the truth-default is adaptive make sense only if
deception is infrequent.
Reaching definite conclusions about the exact prevalence of deception may
be impossible. There is just no way to randomly sample communication across
people and situations,4 and even if that were possible, we could not establish
ground truth or deceptive intent in such a way as to accurately classify communication as honest or deceptive. Fortunately, there are imperfect ways to
try and estimate the prevalence of deception.
Efforts toward estimating the prevalence of deception can be sorted into
three research strategies: self-report surveys, the diary method, and experiments. With surveys, we can just ask people something like “How many times
have you lied in the past twenty-four hours?” The chief advantage of surveys

136

CHAPTER NINE

is that we can get a large and representative sample of people. But the limitations are obvious. The validity of survey methods rests on people’s ability
to be able to answer the questions (do people know how often they lie?) and
their willingness to provide honest answers (people might lie about lying?).
Further, we are sampling people, not units of communication, so we are only
indirectly assessing the issue at hand.
The second option is to have people keep a diary and log their lies. Diaries
overcome the problem of imperfect memory, but there are still concerns about
lazy subjects and honesty of reporting. Still, diaries are probably better than
surveys in these regards. Diary methods are labor intensive and typically involve much smaller and less representative samples, so diary studies are not
a panacea. They nevertheless provide informative data.
The third option of experiments largely overcomes the problems with surveys and diaries but adds a new and maybe even more important limitation.
We can experimentally put people in a situation where they might have a motive to deceive and then see what they do. The limitation, however, is that the
findings are situation specific. Experiments tell us what happens in a specific
controlled situation, not how often people are in that situation. Think of it this
way. Even the biggest liars lie only when there is opportunity to lie. The frequency of deception is a joint function of being in a situation where the truth is
problematic and the probability of deception given that situation. Experiments
just tell us about the latter and thus are likely to radically overestimate dishonesty. Despite the imperfections of the various methods, however, it might be
possible to triangulate across methods to achieve at least an approximate estimation of the prevalence of deception in everyday life.
Before getting into the research, there are two TDT modules that are relevant to when and how often people lie, the Few Prolific Liars module and the
Deception Motives module. Recall from chapter 6:
The Few Prolific Liars module: The prevalence of lying is not normally
or evenly distributed across the population. Instead, more people lie infrequently. Most people are honest most of time. There are a few people,
however, who lie often. Most lies are told by a few prolific liars.
And
The Deception Motives module: People lie for a reason, but the motives
behind truthful and deceptive communication are the same. When the
truth is consistent with a person’s goals, he or she will almost always com-

PREVALENCE

137

municate honestly. Deception becomes probable when the truth makes
honest communication difficult or inefficient.
In combination, the point of these two modules is that deception is not
random, and it varies across both people and situations. As the name of the
Few Prolific Liars module implies, there are a few people who lie with great
frequency, but most people lie infrequently. That is, there are substantial in
dividual differences in honesty and deceptiveness. But there is also a critical
situation component. Absent psychopathology, people deceive only when the
truth is problematic. And, as McCornack pointed out, these two factors are not
independent.5 Different people may be more or less likely to place themselves
in situations where deception is required, and, over time, people who are frequently in deception-provoking situations may, as a result, be more prone to lie,
get better at lying with practice and become less inhibited about dissembling.
TDT’s specific predictions with regard to the prevalence of deception are
contained in the first two propositions. Proposition one holds that, relative to
honest communication, deception is infrequent.
TDT Proposition One: Most communication by most people is honest
most of the time. While deception can and does occur, in comparison
to honest messages, deception is relatively infrequent, and outright lies
are more infrequent still. In fact, deception must be infrequent to be effective.
Proposition two specifies individual differences in how often people lie.
TDT Proposition Two: The prevalence of deception is not normally distributed across the population. Most lies are told by a few prolific liars.
In stark contrast to these two propositions, a casual reading of the deception
literature might make it seem that TDT’s prediction of infrequent deception is
pretty far-fetched or even outright false. A selection of quotes from various authors over the years follows. It is easy to get the impression that deception is
pervasive, frequent, and ubiquitous. Here are a few representative quotations:
Deception is a pervasive, and some would argue a necessary, phenome
non in human communication.6
Okay now, I don’t want to alarm anybody in this room, but it has just
come to my attention that the person to your right is a liar. Also, the

138

CHAPTER NINE

person to your left is a liar. Also, the person sitting in your very seat is
a liar. We are all liars. . . . On a given day, studies show that you may be
lied to anywhere from 10 to 200 times.7
In practice, however, communicators frequently decide that honesty is
not the best policy. Job applicants overstate their qualifications to make
a favorable impression, spouses lie to minimize relational conflict, students claim purchased term papers as their own work, politicians misrepresent their actions to the media, and public officials conceal their true
motives to representatives of foreign governments. In short, deception
and suspected deception arise in at least one quarter of all conversation.8
The one-hundred and thirty respondents recorded a total of 870 statements or replies to others; of those 870 responses, 61.5 percent were
verbal expressions which controlled information. [Only] 38.5 percent of
the actor’s conversational statements were classified as complete disclosure, “what I felt to be a completely honest statement.” . . . Every respondent controlled information at least once in every encounter. . . . On the
other hand, numerous respondents [had] no complete disclosures during the course of the conversation.9
60% of the participants lied during the 10-min conversation, and did so
an average of almost three times.10
Participants discussed paintings they liked and disliked with artists. . . .
There were no conditions under which the artists received totally honest
feedback about the paintings they cared about. As predicted, participants
stonewalled, amassed misleading evidence, and conveyed positive evaluations by implications. They also told some outright lies.11
Research from social psychology suggests that as many as one third of
these typical daily interactions involve some form of deception.12
In 2 diary studies of lying, 77 college students reported telling 2 lies a
day, and 70 community members told 1.13
These quotes suggest that lies and deception are an everyday occurrence
and imply that we are all frequent liars.
But there is also evidence that maybe things are not so bad for honesty after
all. There was a story on the evening news last night that caught my attention.14
According to the report, a growing number of businesses have customers pay
on an honor system. If most people were dishonest, such businesses would

PREVALENCE

139

quickly go under. But, according to the report, 95% of people paid at honor
boxes that were secretively monitored.
The authors of the Turner et al. study of information control quoted above
actually came to a conclusion different from what their above quote might
suggest:
The most obvious and compelling implication of this study is that our
own definition of honesty as “complete disclosure” of all relevant information may be quite inaccurate when placed in the kinds of social situations we have explored. For rather than using this common sense and
rather folklorish definition, our respondents instead seemed to see honesty more as fidelity to the maintenance of some on-going relationship,
and consequently maneuvered information in such a way as not to jeopardize that relationship. Seen in this way, selectively controlling information, rather than being regarded as deceptive, . . . was interpreted as
the right thing to do.15
And
Our respondents also seemed to know the difference between honesty
and frankness. If honesty is frankness, it becomes an extremely easy
virtue to attain, for it turns extreme rudeness into moral superiority.16
BELLA DEPAULO’S EVERYDAY LIES STUDY
The most influential source for claims about the frequency of lying is a diary
study by Bella DePaulo and her colleagues.17 That study is frequently cited as
showing that people lie between one and two times per day, or that people lie
in one of every three to one in five social interactions. From these findings, it
is usually inferred that lying is therefore an everyday activity for most people.
Because the everyday lie diary study has been so influential, and because
its findings are often interpreted as directly refuting TDT proposition one, it
makes sense to take a close look at the study and its findings. My criticism is
directed not at the study or its authors—it was a very important study, I am
a big fan of Bella DePaulo’s research, and her findings have influenced my
thinking in many ways—but instead at how the results have been interpreted
over the years by those citing it as evidence for frequent lying.
There were two sets of subjects, seventy-seven undergraduate students (61%
female) and seventy adults (mostly white, married, and employed, approximately evenly split between men and women). The participants each kept a

140

CHAPTER NINE

communication diary for seven days. They were asked to record and report
on all interactions lasting at least ten minutes and all interactions, regardless
of duration, that included a lie.18 They also rated the interactions and lies on a
number of scales and were also asked things like what the lies were about and
who they were talking to. The amount of information collected was extensive.19
The college student sample reported telling an average of 1.96 lies per day.
One participant reported telling no lies at all over the seven days, while, on the
other extreme, the most frequent liar reported 6.6 lies per day. The median
was lower than the mean at 1.6 lies per day. The number of lies per social interaction was 0.31 (just under one in three, but see footnote 18).
The adults reported telling fewer lies overall than the college students. The
average for adults was 0.97 lies per day, half that of the college students. Six of
seventy (just under 10%) adults reported no lies at all over all seven days. The
greatest number of reported lies was 10.3 per day. The median number of lies
per day was 0.64, showing that more than 50% of the sample reported less than
one lie per day. That is, a majority of people reported days on which they told
no lies at all. The number of lies per social interaction was 0.2 (one in five).
The depiction of one to two lies per day is an accurate description of the
averages in the two samples. However, it is not clear that the average is a good
way to describe the results. TDT proposition two predicts a highly skewed distribution, and the arithmetic mean (commonly thought of as “the average”)
is not a preferred measure of central tendency with highly skewed distributions. The mean tends to be pulled in the direction of extreme scores, and the
difference between the mean and median in the diary data suggests this was
the case, especially in the adult sample. The majority of people told fewer lies
than the “average person.” The “average adult” told nearly one lie per day, but
a majority of the adults told fewer lies than that!
As previously noted in footnote 18, the number of lies per social interaction is surely an overestimate, because honest interactions were counted
only if they lasted at least ten minutes, and interactions containing lies were
counted regardless of duration. Thus, it is an apples-to-oranges comparison.
How many things does the average person say on an average day? Presumably,
people say many things in a day. If just one or two of those are lies, then the
lies are a very small proportion of what is said. I’m not sure if we are talking
one in fifity, one in a hundred, or one in a thousand, but it’s not one-in-three!
DePaulo’s everyday lie diary studies have subsequently been replicated at
least twice.20 Both replications report fewer lies per day than reported in the
original study. Estimates were as low as 0.59 lies per day.

PREVALENCE

141

TDT Study One: The Prevalence of Lying in America
We traded the level of detail offered by a diary for the representative sampling
offered by a survey.21 We contracted with a market research firm to include a
question about how often people had lied in one of their nationwide panels.
We obtained a nationally (US) representative sample (stratified random sampling) of subjects projectable across sex, region of country, age (adults over
eighteen only), race, and income. We asked our research subjects the open-
ended question, How many times have you lied in the past twenty-four hours?
We asked respondents to break down the lies between face-to-face and mediated (writing, phone, internet, etc.) communication and to whom the lie was
told (family, friends, work, acquaintances, and strangers). This was done in
conjunction with market research, and our question on lying was placed between questions on cat-litter products and water softeners.
In terms of the average number of lies reported, our results were very much
in line with the conclusion that people lie once or twice a day. The average
was 1.65 lies per day, and the margin of error was plus or minus 0.28 lies per
day. The standard deviation was 4.45, the mode and median were 0.0,22 and
the number of lies reported ranged from 0 to 134.
Consistent with TDT proposition two, the distribution was very much skewed.
A majority of people, about 60%, reported telling no lies at all.23 Eighty percent
of subjects who did lie (32% of the total sample) told between one and five lies,
while 20% of liars (8% of the total sample) told six lies or more. Almost one
quarter of all reported lies were told by the top 1% (that’s just ten out of the
one thousand people surveyed!), and one half of all the lies were perpetrated
by only 5% of the sample. A few prolific liars, indeed!
The results are visually presented in figures 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3. Figure 9.1
shows that a majority of those surveyed did not lie, and that among those who
did lie, there is a frequency curve showing that the frequency drops, fast at
first, but then leveling out, as the number of lies told increases. Figures 9.2
and 9.3 show that the prevalence curve holds across face-to-face and mediated
lies, and regardless of to whom the lie was told.24
These data provide initial support for TDT propositions one and two. Consistent with proposition one, most people did not report many lies. Consistent
with proposition two, the distribution of lying is highly skewed, with most lies
being told by a few prolific liars. Both of these findings form the Few Prolific
Liars module of TDT.
The strength of the evidence provided by study one is in the sampling. Our

Figure 9.1. The distribution of the numbers of lies per day in the United States.

Figure 9.2. The distribution of the numbers of lies per day in the United States separated by face-to-face
and mediated communication.

Figure 9.3. The distribution of the numbers of lies per day in the United States separated by target person.

PREVALENCE

145

sample was much larger and more representative than the samples used in
prior work. The big, obvious concern is, of course, the accuracy of reporting.
Because the findings involve self-report survey data, we have to worry about
social desirability and under-reporting. But how worried should we be? Common sense tells us that people may lie on surveys, right? But what if TDT
proposition one is right? If most people are mostly honest, this would apply
to completing surveys too.
I am not very worried about social desirability and under-reporting for several reasons. Our research method used standard protections like anonymity,
but this is not the only reason for my confidence. Compared to diary methods,
which are usually considered more reliable, actually more lies were reported.
If our survey method was especially subject to bias, we would expect the opposite. I have even more confidence now, because as shown over the next few
pages, our findings have now been replicated several times, both by my colleagues and me and by others, and not just in the United States.25 One of those
studies included an experimental validation.26 But, even beyond all that, even
if there was some bias, it probably would not meaningfully change the conclusions. It does not matter for TDT if the average number of lies per day is
1.65, 1.99, or even 2.75. What’s important is that (a) lies are infrequent relative to truths, and (b) the distribution of lying is highly skewed.
Consider this: How many unreported lies would it take to change the conclusion that lies are infrequent relative to truths? That depends on how much
people communicate in a day, but the answer is surely a large number. Surveys aren’t biased that much. Further, there is no reason to think that if social desirability bias exists, it would change the shape of distribution of lies.
In short, the average lies per day really isn’t the issue for TDT, and what is at
issue (the shape of the distribution) is not so susceptible to the bias possible
in self-reported data. Still, as with all my claims regarding the empirical merit
of TDT propositions, I sought to replicate and validate the initial findings. A
firm empirical foundation requires much more data.
TDT Study Two: Diary Studies Reexamined
Study two is not a replication per se, but a reanalysis of results from previously published data collected by other researchers.27 We obtained the original
raw student data for the DePaulo diary study and a 2008 two-study replication
by George and Robb. Consistent with TDT proposition two and our own survey data, there were substantial skews in the distributions in the number of
lies reported in all three diary study sets. Most people did not lie much, and

146

CHAPTER NINE

most lies were told by a few prolific liars. Triangulation with diary data was
achieved.
TDT Study Three: A Replication with College Students
Our next study sought to replicate our nationwide survey findings with college
student data.28 Recall that the original DePaulo diary studies found that students reported lying more often than the adult sample. Further, in our nationwide survey data, we found that age was negatively associated with the frequency of lying. Younger people lie more. So, we anticipated that there would
be more lies in college student data than in the representative sample. Nevertheless, we anticipated the few-prolific-liars skew would again be evident as it
was in studies one and two.
We surveyed 229 students at two public universities in Michigan. As we
expected, significantly more lies were reported (mean number of lies in the
past twenty-four hours = 2.34, median = 1.00, mode = 0.00). In the student
data, 29% reported telling no lies in the past twenty-four hours. Despite the
increased numbers of lies, the skew in the distribution was similar to our previous findings.
TDT Study Four: Teens Lie a Lot
I wanted to see if the trend of younger people lying more than older adults
would continue with an even younger sample. My guess was that teens would,
relatively speaking, lie a lot. But I also thought that the same skewed distribution where most people lie relatively infrequently but a few people tell lots of
lies would still hold. Just as in the previous study with college students, I expected the mean to shift but that the distribution would hold its shape.
A serendipitous opportunity presented itself when, out of the blue, two high
school students from New York, Frankie Carey and Doug Messer, sent me
an email. They were in a program where students did research projects with
a university-professor mentor-supervisor. They were interested in deception
and asked if I would help them. I thought it was a great idea, and I said yes.
We did a few projects together, but one involved surveying their fellow
students at their high school about lie frequency.29 We had fifty-eight teens
(aged fourteen to seventeen) complete our survey. The high school students
reported telling an average of 4.1 lies in the past twenty-four hours (median =
3.0, mode = 2.0, range 0.0 to 17.0). This was significantly more than what was
reported in study one with the adult sample or study three with the college
student sample. Despite the increase in lying frequency, however, once again
the few-prolific-liars–skewed distribution was observed.

PREVALENCE

147

TDT Study Five: The Prevalence of Lying in the UK
Another opportunity presented itself shortly after the publication of our initial
studies. The Science Museum of London conducted a survey of 3,042 people
in the United Kingdom, asking about the frequency of lying.30 My coauthor
and friend Kim Serota contacted the museum, and they kindly shared their
data with us. Responses were weighted to allow the findings to be projectable
to the UK population according to their Office for National Statistics. We discarded data from respondents under the age of eighteen to comply with our
universities’ human subjects requirements and to make the sample align with
our own study one. Our reanalysis and findings are based on 2,980 adults.
Unlike our studies, the UK study asked separate questions about white lies
and big lies. For white lies, the average was 1.66, with the median and the mode
being 1.0. For big lies, the average was 0.41, with a median and mode of 0.0.
Seventy-five percent of people reported at least one white lie, while only 21%
of people reported a big lie. When we combined white lies and big lies, the
average was 2.08 lies per day (median = 1, mode = 1). The frequency of white
lies and big lies is graphed in figure 9.4.
Importantly, we checked to see if the distribution of lies in the UK data had
the few-prolific-liars skew. It did. When we graphed the power functions fitting the UK data and plotted it against our original US data, the findings were
nearly identical, as can be seen in figure 9.5.
AMSTERDAM REPLICATIONS
I place much value on replication. To the extent that a knowledge claim has
scientific merit, it should consistently be consistent with the data. Too many
findings in the social sciences, and especially in deception research, are hard
to reproduce consistently. In such cases, it’s hard to know what to think. When
a hypothesis gets “mixed support,” what should we make of that? Is the hypothesis partly right and partly wrong? Does it hold only under some unknown
conditions? Is the hypothesis true and the nonsupportive findings flawed, or
is the hypothesis false and the original supporting evidence faulty?
The problem of replication is compounded, because in deception research,
as in many areas of social science, theories tend to be tested by the authors of
the theory, who clearly have a vested interest in the theory being supported.
While some unscrupulous researchers may actively engage in questionable research practices to artificially enhance findings, unconscious biases are also
possible and probably pose a bigger risk. Confirmation bias (seeking out and
interpreting data consistent with one’s own views)31 is well-documented and
certainly applies to social scientists, who, after all, are people too.

Figure 9.4. The distribution of big lies and small lies in the UK.

Figure 9.5. Curve fitting results of the US and UK lie prevalence data.

PREVALENCE

149

So, while I try to replicate my own findings, I appreciate when others test
my ideas. If my ideas are good and my findings sound, others should find results similar to my own. For this reason, I was especially pleased to read a recent series of studies testing the prevalence of lying in Amsterdam.32
In a first study, over 500 college students at the University of Amsterdam
were surveyed. A Dutch-translated version of our original survey was used. The
average number of lies per day was 2.04 (slightly less than 2.34 in the college
student data in TDT study 3), with 41% reporting no lies in the past twenty-
four hours (compared to 29% in our college student study). Importantly, as in
our studies, the data were highly skewed, with most people lying infrequently
but a few people lying a lot. In the Amsterdam data, 5% of the respondents
told 40% of the lies.
Especially important, the Amsterdam authors did a follow-up laboratory experiment where subjects were given the opportunity to cheat on some experimental tasks for a cash prize. The number of lies reported by individuals in
the survey was substantially predictive of subsequent cheating in the lab. This
validates the survey data and adds confidence to the conclusions beyond mere
replication of survey findings.33
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
TDT departs from most other theories of deception regarding the prevalence
of deception. According to TDT, lying is infrequent relative to the truth. Lying
is not normally distributed across the population but is instead highly skewed,
with most lies coming from a few prolific liars. And, according to TDT, the frequency of lying matters in deception detection.
This chapter discusses TDT predictions regarding the prevalence of lying
and reviews evidence relevant to these TDT predictions. Unlike most TDT research, which tends to be experimental, the evidence reviewed in this chapter was mostly based on survey data. Results were reported from a large representative sample of adults in the US (TDT study one), a large representative
sample of adults in the UK (TDT study five), college students in Michigan
(TDT study three), college students in Amsterdam (Halvey, Shalvi, and Verschuere), high school students in New York (TDT study four), and a reanaly
sis of previous data from well-known and often-cited diary data (TDT study
two). Since I originally wrote this chapter, I have further replicated the findings in data from Japan and Korea. The results of all the studies align neatly
with TDT propositions one and two. Most people are honest most of the time,
and most lies are told by a few prolific liars.
Confidence in the validity of these conclusions is enhanced by several con-

150

CHAPTER NINE

siderations. First, confidence is heightened by the sheer number of replications and the unanimity of the findings. All the studies triangulate on the same
conclusions. Beyond just number of replications, confidence is bolstered by
the generality of the findings across different samples of respondents (high
school students, college students and non-student adults from multiple countries), different methodologies, and different researchers. Confidence is also
enhanced by the experimental validation in the Amsterdam research. The evidence for the first two propositions is scientifically sound, robust, and fully
consistent with TDT.
In TDT prevalence matters for two big, important reasons, one more theoretical and the other more practical. Theoretically, the core ideas are that people
have a truth-default and that the presumption of truth is adaptive. This requires
lying to be infrequent. If lying and deception were pervasive, and if being deceived is undesirable, then pervasive deception would make truth-default and
truth-bias dysfunctional. We would all be frequent victims of deception and
continued truth-bias would ensure ongoing frequent deceit. Alternatively, if as
TDT holds, lying and deception are relatively infrequent, then truth-bias and
the truth-default make much more sense. Believing is adaptive because most
people and most communication is honest.
Pragmatically, since TDT presumes that people are usually truth-biased, the
base-rates of honesty and deception affect deception detection accuracy. How
this works is covered in chapter twelve, but here is a quick preview. In most
deception detection experiments, truth–lie base-rates are fixed by the researchers. But, we might ask, given that truth–lie base-rates affect the results, do the
base-rates in deception detection experiments mirror the base-rates outside the
lab that people encounter in everyday life? The results of the research summarized in this chapter show clearly that lying is much more prevalent in deception detection experiments (where it typically occurs in 50% of all communication) than it is in everyday life, where lying is infrequent and mostly restricted
to a few prolific liars. The practical implications are that maybe accuracy is better than lie detection experiments suggest, and maybe truth-bias actually improves accuracy in the low-prevalence environments that exist outside the lab.
One point of clarification is that although TDT specifies individual differences in the frequency of lying such that most lies are told by a few prolific
liars, it does not follow from TDT that lying is purely an individual difference
variable impervious to situational variability. As we will see in the next chapter, according to TDT (and IMT2), the telling of any particular lie or deceptive
message is largely situational, in that most people lie only when the truth is a

PREVALENCE

151

problem. Lying would be a stable individual difference only to the extent that
prolific liars are chronically in situations where lying is necessary.
There have been some early findings on who the prolific liars are. Our survey data suggested some demographic differences besides age in lying prevalence. The effect sizes for those differences, however, were pretty small, and
I don’t think those findings especially informative.34 The Amsterdam studies
found that lying was correlated with psychopathy. The association was not especially strong, but it was stronger than the demographic predictors.
While I see some utility in thinking about prolific liars as a discrete type of
person different from the majority of the population, who lie less frequently, I
see deception and honesty as a person-in-situation phenomenon. For me, the
question is not so much “Who lies?” as “When and why do people lie?” When
and why people lie is addressed in the next chapter on the deception motives
module and TDT proposition five. TDT studies six through nine are also summarized in the next chapter.
