



45. Remember That It’s Not About You


Why the hell am I so nervous?” I wondered. It was moments before I would get up to speak to an audience of three thousand people in Mexico City at an entrepreneurship conference. But despite the many people who would be hanging on my every word, I wasn’t sure why I was so nervous. Usually, the larger the crowd, the more excited I got, not the more nervous.

Right before I took the stage, my entrepreneur/speaker/author friend Mike Michalowicz, who was up after me, approached me. I thought he could sense my nerves.

“Big crowd, eh?” Mike said. I nodded in agreement, and then Mike shared with me an important lesson that has stuck with me ever since.

“Remember,” he said. “It’s all about them, not you. Inspiring your audience is all about helping them see their own vision, not yours.”

This may seem simplistic, but it’s absolutely critical advice for anyone trying to inspire others, whether it’s from the stage at a large conference; in a meeting with a boss, team, or department; on a client pitch or sales call; or at home with one’s spouse and kids. The bottom line is that like it or not, people don’t really care about you, certainly not the way they care about themselves, their families, and their close friends. Think about it: You’re reading this book so that you can improve your communication and people skills, but you don’t really care about me, Dave, except for how I can help you. And that’s okay!

Whether you’re speaking to an audience of three thousand, three hundred, thirty, or three, if your hope is to inspire them, your material and delivery have to be about them and how they can grow, not about you.





This doesn’t mean you can’t tell stories about yourself, share things you’ve learned, or talk about your products, services, features, and benefits. All those things are fair game and often are very helpful in delivering an inspiring presentation; storytelling in particular is a great way to make a lesson or message come alive. But as you tell stories, do a product demo, or talk about your company, it’s essential that you paint a picture of what your audience’s life looks like now and what they want it to look like in the future. Even more important, it’s essential to show how whatever you’re selling—whether it’s a product, idea, message, or pure inspiration—fits in with their vision of a better future.

People like hearing success stories. But you know what they like more? Their own success stories. If you want to inspire (and perhaps sell something along the way), you’ll want to get people thinking about themselves and their future selves.

It’s easy to get caught in the trap of thinking it’s about you or your product. If you’re a salesperson or an entrepreneur or a leader of any kind, the spotlight is often on you and/or the product you sell. But no matter how much the spotlight is on you, it’s essential to stay humble and keep the conversation about the other person or people in the room, not about you.

This is especially valuable as both a mindset and a tool in creating presentations. For instance, if you’re doing a sales presentation, the slides should remind your audience what their problem is and how your solution will alleviate it. It should help them imagine and even envision life without that problem.

Even if you’re not a public speaker by profession, you’re probably in the business of inspiring someone in one area or another in your work. Certainly, all salespeople and marketers are. Entrepreneurs, engineers, and designers need to inspire with their products. Anyone who’s a manager needs to inspire her team to be more productive. Even parenting is all about inspiring one’s children. Whenever you aim to inspire, it’s helpful to remind yourself that it’s not about you.

When Mike Michalowicz shared that lesson with me, it was perfect timing. I was about to tell my story to three thousand people, and although I’m sure they would have found it interesting, I’m happy he said what he did, because not only did he put me at ease, he helped shape a much better keynote speech. Instead of making it about me, I made the entire speech about my audience, mostly entrepreneurs, and how they could grow their businesses.

Today, whether I’m speaking to thousands of people or just a few, I often say those words to myself right before it’s time to present: “It’s not about you.”


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down the names of the people you want to inspire at work and at home.

2. For all those people, write down what you think their vision of themselves is in six months, one year, and three years. If you’re not sure, ask them.

3. The next time you prepare to speak to them, remind yourself what their vision of themselves is and how whatever you are selling can help them achieve that vision. Then use that to frame your remarks.

4. Every time you speak or present to a new audience, remember that it’s not about you.





46. Be Unoriginal, Part 1: You Can Quote Me on This


I felt speechless.

I was about to address our team at Likeable Media and share some really big news: I was leaving the company to start a new one, Likeable Local, and my wife, Carrie, was going to take over as CEO of Likeable Media. I knew that this news would be seen as a big deal by some of the staff, and I was searching for the perfect way to word it. But I was coming up short.

“What should I say?” I asked my entrepreneur friend Jeff. “I’m really struggling with how to talk about embracing change.”

“Don’t say anything original,” Jeff replied, prompting me to scratch my head in confusion. “Whatever you want to say has been said before better than you can say it and by someone way more successful than you.”

I still felt confused and perhaps a little insulted, but I thought I understood what he meant.

“In other words…” I began to say.

“Exactly,” Jeff said. “In other words. As in, in another’s words. As in, use a quote to open the meeting and help people embrace what it is you want to say.”

I thought this concept was smart and at least worth a little research. I thanked Jeff and dashed to my computer and Googled “inspirational quotes about change.”

I was amazed with the results, of which there were over 32 million. I began to click around and found literally dozens of quotes that inspired me and that I knew could inspire our team to accept the big change I was about to announce. I settled on a quote from Benjamin Franklin and went back to preparing for the meeting.

Later, I got to thinking. Jeff was right that Ben Franklin and many others had said exactly what I wanted to say before and had said it way better than I ever could, not only about change but about pretty much everything. I wasn’t insulted by this. In fact, it made sense: There truly is very little original thought left out there, so why shouldn’t we take advantage of the brilliant minds of the past and borrow the words they used to convey ideas and inspire others? In another person’s words, why reinvent the wheel?

I continued my research and ended up with over four hundred inspirational quotes that I loved on over thirty different topics I cared about: listening, storytelling, authenticity, and gratefulness, to name a few. The quotes came from a wide variety of sources, from presidents to movie stars, authors to business leaders, athletes to poets. What they had in common was how powerfully and effectively they summed up an idea I might want to address or a message I wanted to send. More important, all the quotes inspired me, and so I figured they could inspire others as well. (See Appendix B for some of those quotes.)

I began using quotes in my team meetings at work and in sales meetings as well. I continued to research quotes and became obsessed with the idea of finding the perfect quote to match what I wanted to say at any specific time.

Of course, a quote alone would not suffice; I still had to add some of my own words into the mix. But I found that opening (and sometimes closing) a meeting with an inspirational quote was a great way to inspire my team, get alignment, and prepare people for what was to come. It got easier and easier to find and use quotes, and I ended up using them not only in meetings but in my own social media content. In fact, some of my most popular, retweeted, and reshared content ever has been quotes from other people.

You might think this is lazy or unoriginal. Some might even think it’s unethical. But I believe that as long as you properly credit your source each time you share a quote, it’s not only ethical but powerful, inspirational, and helpful to share quotes both across social media and face-to-face.

People love a little inspiration whether it’s morning, noon, or night. If you can find a quote from someone else who says what you’re thinking or feeling succinctly and powerfully, by all means consider sharing that quote (with credit) with your team and with the world.

That meeting with the Likeable Media team went quite well, and it was the first of many successful meetings I would open and/or close with a quote. My social media following has increased dramatically since I started tweeting and sharing quotes, and though it’s impossible to show causation, it’s easy to show a correlation between when I started sharing quotes and when my social media following took off.



I’ll close with the quote that inspired my team that day and started it all:

When you’re finished changing, you’re finished.

—Benjamin Franklin




FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Review the quotes in Appendix B and note the ones that inspire you and the ones that you may want to share in social media and face-to-face with your team.

2. Research inspirational quotes about the topics you find yourself talking about at work and at home. Collect a list of your own quotes that you can use to inspire others.

3. Experiment with using quotes in social media and to open and/or close meetings at work. Remember always to acknowledge the quote’s source.





47. Homelessness: The Instant Cure for Any Bad Mood


I was going through a very tough week as a leader.

One of my companies had an extremely toxic employee I had had to let go the previous Friday. And throughout the week, I was traveling constantly—from New York to Portland, Maine, on Monday; Boston on Wednesday; and Washington, D.C., on Thursday.

By midday Thursday, I was physically and emotionally exhausted. I was really hungry, too, and so when I had a little extra time before my afternoon meeting in Washington, I looked up the best sushi place in town on Yelp. After walking nearly a mile to get there (the reviews were really good), I arrived at the sushi joint only to find a sign that said “Closed this week for renovations.”

At that point, I lost control of my emotions and actually shed some tears. I was so tired, so hungry, and so stressed. Determined not to be defeated, I began walking toward my next meeting, on the lookout for a place to get a quick bite to eat on the way. That was when a homeless man on the street interrupted my walk, asking, “May I have a quarter to get something to eat?”

Typically, I don’t stop when people ask for money on the street. It’s not that I don’t care; it’s just that I prefer to make donations to organizations that distribute food and provide shelter. But this time, for some reason, I stopped and searched my pants for some change. I couldn’t find any, so I decided to reach for my wallet to grab a dollar instead.

“I swear, I don’t drink or get high, sir,” said the man, perhaps sensing that he was going to get more than just change. “I could really just use a dollar to get a sandwich.”

I didn’t have any one-dollar bills in my wallet and didn’t want to stiff the guy, so I took out a twenty-dollar bill and handed it to the man.

“Oh, Jesus,” he exclaimed. “God bless you! Thank you so much, sir!” he added, and I went on my way.

Then something crazy happened. My bad mood just melted away. I couldn’t believe how much better I felt instantly. I had gone from feeling depressed, exhausted, overwhelmed, and stressed out to feeling blessed, fortunate, happy, and high on life in a matter of seconds and at a remarkably low cost of $20. Although some would argue that giving money to someone on the street is a selfless act, I would argue that I got plenty out of it, too, in terms of how great it made me feel and how incredibly quickly it transformed my mood.

A random act of kindness is an instant cure for any bad mood. You don’t have to give $20 to a man on the street. You can pick up litter. You can call your grandma. You can hold the door for the next ten people to come and go from your office building. You can retweet a bunch of random people trying to promote something.

You can do anything that takes you out of yourself and, if only for a moment, focuses your time and attention completely on someone needier than you in one way or another. This is at once both a selfless act and a selfish one, because no matter what, you’ll feel better after being kind. Then you’ll be more prepared to be the best leader you can be and take on the world and its challenges.

In Chapter 36, I talked about mirror neurons and the power of your mood to affect others. The bottom line is that there will be many times when you’re not in the mood to inspire others. But as a leader, you can’t afford to have too many of those times, and you can’t afford to fake it, either. That’s where this method comes in handy. Whether you give $20 to a homeless person or commit another random act of kindness, you can and will instantly transform your mood and put yourself in a better position to inspire and persuade others.





That day, I went on to have two very productive meetings in Washington, D.C., one of which resulted in landing a big new client, and then returned home feeling refreshed and recommitted to leading two companies. I felt like I could take on the world. And it only cost me twenty bucks.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Make a list of random acts of kindness that can be done near your office or home.

2. The next time you are in a bad mood about something (maybe a rejection, an unkind word from a boss or client, or something personal), take a ten-minute break and go out and perform one act of kindness (or more).

3. Note your mood before and after the act of kindness. Continue experimenting until you find an act of kindness that you can repeat as needed. Think of random acts of kindness as an inexhaustible resource you can tap into anywhere, any time.





48. Don’t Let One Unkind Word Destroy Years of Praise


Nicky, you’re getting lazy,” I chastised. “You used to be our top sales guy, and now you’re barely making quota. Get your act together.”

As soon as I had uttered those words, I realized I had made a grave mistake. Nicky had in fact been the top salesperson at Likeable Local for nearly two years. He had contributed a ton to the company, and as its leader, I had praised him generously and publicly throughout those two years.

But Nicky had been getting lazy lately, and his performance had slowed down a lot. Still, the moment I criticized him in front of his peers, I knew I had erred. To make amends, I privately messaged Nicky and set up a one-on-one meeting at which I walked through his history with the company, reminding him of his many highlights and imploring him to return to his previously solid form. I also apologized profusely for calling him out in front of his coworkers. But it was too late. The damage had been done.

People love praise. You can never praise people too much. When you are leading or inspiring a team, your number one resource is praise, not just for your top people but for anyone and everyone who demonstrates success in any task, no matter how small. Praise makes people feel good. It reverberates across a room. It makes a person singled out feel special and honored and excited and makes everyone else in the room want to emulate that person. Whether you are managing a team at work or children at home, praise is powerful, contagious, and totally inspirational.

Criticism has exactly the opposite effect on people. Criticism, especially public criticism, makes people feel embarrassed, afraid, and even humiliated. It makes the person who is singled out feel bad and everyone else in the room feel sad or scared. Although some leaders, including sales managers, football coaches, and even some parents, still try to motivate or inspire with criticism, that group and that method are dwindling as a mountain of research demonstrates the ill effects of that misguided approach.

Sometimes public criticism does have a seemingly positive short-term impact. Take a sales floor, for instance. If a sales manager barks, “Dave, why aren’t you on the phones selling? Get back on the phones before you lose your job!” the rest of the sales team surely will take notice and probably jump on the phones and be more productive…for the next five or ten minutes. But the longer-term effects are deleterious. How? Dave will feel embarrassed and may start looking for another job in which he won’t feel embarrassed. The others in the room will feel scared and also may start looking for another job in which they won’t feel scared. For a few extra phone calls and maybe a few extra sales, you risk hurting and even losing your team in the long run. Fear, embarrassment, and shame are never inspirational beyond a very short time window.

When I studied teaching, I remember learning about the effects of positive praise on children. I brought that learning into my classroom and was amazed by the results. Instead of telling kids to quiet down or yelling or complaining at the ones who weren’t listening or following directions, I singled out with praise the children who were following directions well (“I like the way Amy is sitting at her desk ready to learn!”). Incredibly, this method nearly always worked. Others wanted my praise, whether consciously or not, and acted accordingly to earn it.

The reality is that sometimes people need constructive criticism to improve. Sometimes people can truly benefit from feedback from you, but it’s important to remember that nobody likes to be criticized. Even people who say they’re good at accepting feedback surely would rather be praised than criticized.

Therefore, it’s essential when you are delivering criticism, whether to an employee, a vendor, a partner, a family member, or anyone else, to do it carefully and thoughtfully. Here’s a quick guide to giving feedback effectively:

1. Never give out criticism in front of other people. It never works. (It only leads to shame and fear.)

2. Instead, set up a time to have a one-on-one private discussion with the person with whom you want to share feedback.

3. Offer up a “praise sandwich”: Start with something you like about the person and/or the job he’s doing, continue with the negative feedback, and close by affirming how much you value the person and how confident you are in him.

4. Make sure to offer positive solutions to the issues at hand and get alignment on the solution of choice.

5. Don’t dwell on the negative, and look for future opportunities to publicly praise the positive about the person as soon and as much as you can.



Giving constructive criticism can be difficult for you, but think of it this way: It’s always more difficult to receive feedback than to give it. However, giving public praise is easy, contagious, fun, and totally inspiring for you, for the person receiving it, and even for the others around you who inevitably will be motivated and energized by it. Even in a tough situation, you can capitalize on just one person doing just one little thing well and quickly and powerfully inspire others.

I taught for only three years, but one year I had a small group of extremely needy students in a class that was labeled 8+. It was for students who were still learning eighth-grade material even though many of them should have been graduated from the eighth grade years earlier. The average eighth-grader is twelve to fourteen years old. That year I had students as old as seventeen in my class. They had gotten involved in gangs or had family issues or other reasons for being truant or unsuccessful. It was a difficult group, to say the least. But I remember fondly one student named Sammy who always tried hard. I did my best to praise Sammy as much as I could in front of as many students as possible (though some days, unfortunately, that was a group as small as two students).

Though I’m not sure how many others in that 8+ class I reached, Sammy did appreciate my praise. I know this because he reached out to me on Facebook years later, thanked me for everything I had done, and told me I had inspired him to go on to finish high school and start college. That certainly felt good, and I learned a valuable lesson from it.

I only wish I had remembered that lesson on the day I publicly criticized Nicky. Unfortunately, despite my best efforts, after my public “laziness” comment, things went from bad to worse with Nicky. Someone who had been my best, most successful salesperson ended up leaving the company. Although obviously part of that was his doing, I know how wrong it was to criticize him publicly, and I will always blame myself for Nicky’s undoing.

The bottom line: Praise, praise, praise, and praise some more. There is simply no downside to positive, authentic praise. If and when you feel the need to criticize, do it privately. Then go right back out and continue to praise.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Make a list of five kind, authentic things you can say about each person you manage and/or encounter on a regular basis.

2. Practice doling out praise publicly and increase the praise you give out each day. Remember, it’s free and it’s powerful.

3. When you do have to deliver criticism, do it privately and try doing it with a praise sandwich: praise, criticism, and then more deep praise.


