
6. Wear Orange Shoes: The Simple Keys to Networking That Nobody Talks About


Frustrated, annoyed, and nearly ready to give up.

That was how I felt as I wandered around during the happy hour at the end of the Founders start-up event. I had attended in part to learn, and I had indeed learned a lot at the sessions all day. But my primary reason had been to meet people, including potential investors in my start-up.

In that objective I had come up short. There were dozens of investors in the room, but their time had been hoarded by other start-ups, and the one I managed to meet had brushed me off without really considering my pitch. But that was okay, because there was really only one person I’d come to see: Dave McClure.

Dave McClure was the founding partner of 500 Startups, a well-respected start-up fund based in Silicon Valley with offices all over the world. I recently had received an all-important email introduction to Dave through Victoria Ransom, the cofounder of the Wildfire app (sold to Google) and a mutual friend, but thus far my email had gone unanswered. I knew Dave was at the event, because he had been one of the speakers that afternoon. This was my chance to connect with him in the flesh.

I stood in a room filled with entrepreneurs and investors, hoping to get the attention of just one. I was contemplating whether to get a drink from the bar, when all of a sudden I heard, “I have got to talk to the man wearing those fucking shoes!”

I looked up, and there was Dave McClure. Of the three hundred people in the room, the one I wanted to talk to the most was actually stopping me to chat. Why? He had noticed my bright orange sneakers, and in a room filled with people dying to talk to him, my sneakers were the reason he had decided to initiate a conversation with me. This was my chance, and I wasn’t going to waste it.

“Hope they’re bright enough for you, Dave,” I replied jokingly, and proceeded to take the opportunity to remind him about the recent email introduction and tell him a bit more about our business. Within fifteen minutes he had introduced me to his New York partner, Shai Goldman, and we had set up a time for a follow-up meeting. A few weeks later, 500 Startups became a key investor in our tech start-up, Likeable Local.

Were my orange shoes the reason I secured an investment? Of course not. But they were the reason I got into a conversation in the first place. In a room full of people trying to get busy people’s attention, that was all it took to stand out in the crowd.

The orange shoes I wore that day were the twenty-first pair I’ve owned, and I’m now up to twenty-nine pairs of orange sneakers and shoes. Not a day goes by that I don’t wear orange shoes. And it’s not just conferences where they make me stand out and create more opportunities to meet people. It’s in ordinary moments: on the train to and from work, at coffee shops, and in building lobbies. People walk up to me nearly every day, comment on the shoes, and begin a conversation. Some of those conversations lead to nothing, but others lead to exciting opportunities, real relationships, and connections with people who can add value to my life in some way. Without those shoes, I might have never met those people.

Of course, this doesn’t mean you should go out and purchase twenty-nine pairs of orange shoes (or any color shoes, for that matter; shoes are expensive). But you have an opportunity to create a signature style that will help you stand out at conferences and elsewhere and give you an opportunity to meet more people.

Orange shoes are my thing, but yours can be anything; the only two criteria are that it be attention-grabbing and that it feel authentic to you. If it’s not shoes, is it a scarf? Earrings? A noticeable briefcase or tie? A watch, a hat, or a bracelet, perhaps? What can your signature style be at conferences and beyond? How can you become more noticeable and not only stand out in a crowd but actually attract people to you?

Some people may dismiss this idea as silly. Some may not want to stand out like a sore thumb in a crowd. To them I say the following: You don’t need to look foolish to have a signature style. Even if your signature style doesn’t include bright, noticeable colors, if you’re consistent in your style, you’ll be much more likely to be remembered by the people you meet. Think about it this way: Why not gain any edge you can over everyone else in the room?


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down a list of three to five possible accessories, colors, and/or items you can adopt as your signature stand-out style.

2. Ask three people you know and trust about your list. Which do they think is the most winning style?

3. Purchase the item or items necessary to create your signature style and begin rocking the new look at the next event you attend.





7. How to Meet Just About Anyone


You can’t possibly get a meeting with her,” my colleague said of Sallie Krawcheck, the tough-as-nails former CEO of Merrill Lynch, known as the most powerful woman on Wall Street. I had always admired Sallie’s transparency and persistence and her reputation as an incredibly smart leader.

“Why not?” I asked, sensing a challenge and therefore an opportunity. I recently had read a thought-provoking article by Sallie and had decided I wanted to meet her. I wasn’t sure how or why exactly, but hearing from a colleague that I couldn’t do something was the best way to ensure that I’d do it or at least go down trying.

I turned to the online social network that already had connected me to dozens of leaders throughout the world. No, I didn’t turn to Facebook, the world’s largest social network. Nor did I turn to Twitter, the world’s most open social network. Instead, I turned to the network built exclusively for the world’s professionals: LinkedIn.

A quick search for mutual connections uncovered three dozen, and I chose one, a friend named Sergio who worked as a high-ranking executive at General Electric at that time, to seek an introduction. I had done a free workshop for Sergio years before, and I knew he’d remember me fondly from that day and be eager to return the favor. When looking for an introduction through mutual connections on LinkedIn, I always look for people whom I’ve done favors for and who are likely to have influence with the person I want to meet. I quickly typed out an introduction request to Sergio and went on with my day.

A few hours later, I got an email saying I was connected to Sallie on LinkedIn, and so I reached out to Sallie, saying I was a big fan and suggesting we could both benefit from a meeting. A week later we were sitting across from each other over cups of coffee.

Sallie and I talked about business, about leadership, and about LinkedIn, among other things. Since that first meeting, I’ve seen Sallie several more times; spoken in front of employees at a new company she owns, Ellevate Network; and introduced her to my wife, whose podcast she’s appeared on. I’m still not sure what will come of our professional relationship, but that’s not the point.

The point is that I admired her, wanted to meet her, and, thanks to the right request to the right person and a few clicks on Linked In, did just that. I’ve also connected in this way to Brad Smith, the CEO of the Fortune 500 payroll company Intuit; Doug Conant, the chairman of Avon; Claire Diaz-Ortiz, the early Twitter employee who got the Pope and Hillary Clinton on Twitter; and thousands more business leaders, authors, and highly motivated professionals. I’m never sure exactly how I can benefit people when I connect to them or how they can benefit me, but I’m confident that by connecting to lots of smart, interesting, well-connected people, I’ll best position myself to meet the people I need to meet in the future to get what I want. With over 15,000 connections, 500,000 followers, and 10 million second-degree connections on LinkedIn, I know there are very few people I can’t connect with and meet with just a few clicks.

Here’s the blueprint for success on the world’s more important social network:

1. Create a full profile, with attention given to every school you’ve been to, organization you’ve worked at, and professional group you’ve been in. The more you put in your profile, the more you’ll potentially have in common with the people you want to connect with, and there are few better ways to open an introductory email than by mentioning some experience or affiliation that you share.

2. Connect with all of the people you went to school with and have worked with. This will give you more connections, but more important, it will optimize the number of second-degree connections you have on the network.

3. Any time you want to meet someone, look that person up on LinkedIn, find a mutual connection, and write to the mutual connection asking for an introduction. If you don’t share a first-degree connection, you probably share a second-degree connection; that makes this process a bit more difficult but still quite possible.

4. Once you get connected, set up a meeting with your new connection.



If this process sounds simple, that’s because it really is. Although it doesn’t always work (Bill Gates has yet to get back to me, for instance), it’s a powerful way to meet just about anyone in the world you want to meet. I can honestly say that the people I’ve connected with and met through LinkedIn collectively have changed my life. Whom could you meet who would change yours?


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down a list of three to five professionals who could change your life whom you’d love to connect with.

2. Follow the steps listed above to optimize your LinkedIn profile. Include photos, links, videos, and SlideShare presentations wherever possible.

3. Solicit intros to your dream pros of choice. Remember to take into account the influence your mutual connection is likely to have and the amount of social capital (have you done favors for this person in the past?) you’ve earned before asking for an introduction.





8. Create Your Own Advisory Board


It’s not fair,” I complained. “Why can’t I have a mentor? Just because I’m the boss, that doesn’t mean there aren’t lots of people I can learn from in our industry.”

I was chatting with my friend Andy, a fellow entrepreneur, and lamenting the fact that I had just set up a formal mentoring program at our company. However, because I was the person at the top, there was nobody to mentor me.

“Don’t be silly,” replied Andy. “You’re an entrepreneur, for God’s sake. Think of a creative solution to the problem. Why not set up an advisory board?”

My first reaction was shock. Advisory boards were for large, established companies with lots of resources. How could I create an advisory board for my little venture? But I was sufficiently intrigued. “Why shouldn’t I have the same opportunities big-company CEOs have?” I wondered. “I should! Let me take matters into my own hands.”

The hard part was figuring out how.

I researched advisory boards: their structures, their purposes, their typical size and shape, and how to form them. Over the course of my research, I learned that a key distinction between boards of directors and advisory boards is that whereas boards of directors are formal legal entities that in fact govern organizations, advisory boards can be totally informal and can be anything we want them to be for any purpose we choose.

The first step, I decided, was to figure out what the purpose of my advisory board would be. I decided it would be to help run my wife’s and my social media agency and potentially help us launch a software company. I then began thinking about all the people I knew who potentially could help in either way, tracked them down, and made the asks. Since I was asking very busy people to make a commitment to me, I vowed to provide all my advisers with something of value in return. First, I’d pay them: their choice annually of a small cash stipend or a small piece of equity in our company. But that alone felt too impersonal, so I didn’t stop there. Since I was asking each adviser to attend four quarterly board meetings, I promised to offer a leadership training exercise and buy dinner at each one. I also told them I hoped I could offer them networking opportunities to one another as well. In exchange, at each meeting, I’d share one or two challenges I was going through and ask for everyone’s relevant experience and advice in tackling similar situations.

I was hoping for an advisory board of five to seven people, and so I ended up asking eleven people to serve, assuming that about half would turn me down. I used my large network to find people across different disciplines and backgrounds, people I had met socially through the years, people I had worked for and with, and people I didn’t know at all except through other people.

Much to my astonishment, all the people I asked said yes, and so I ended up with a much larger advisory board than I’d planned. Aside from the challenge of scheduling eleven people four times a year, it’s been an amazing experience. Currently, my advisory board is made up of people such as Ed Zuckerberg, Mark’s dad and a supersuccessful business owner in his own right; Nihal Mehta, four-time serial entrepreneur turned venture capitalist; and Chris McCann, president of 1-800-Flowers.com, among other terrific finance, legal, and brand-marketing minds. Each quarter, we’ve gotten together in a conference room at our office and sat for two or three hours talking. Usually we begin with a twenty-minute icebreaker, team-building exercise, or leadership training activity, followed by a business and financial update and a question-and-answer period. Then I share one or two of my challenges, after which we go around the room and everyone weighs in with his or her thoughts, experiences, and counsel. The members of my advisory board have been game changers in helping me tackle problems I’ve really needed help with and achieve things I’ve really wanted, including launching that software company. Three years ago, I found my own mentoring program, and I haven’t looked back since.

This might make a lot of sense to you if you’re an entrepreneur or small-business owner. But what if you’re not? Remember my research, which found that anyone can set up an advisory board for any purpose. A year ago, I was talking to my friend Dorie Clark, bestselling author and personal branding consultant, and she agreed completely: “I recommend that everyone form their own personal advisory board,” she told me.

Whether you’re a stay-at-home mom trying to figure out what to do next with your life, a young gun quickly climbing the corporate ladder, or a fifty-five-year-old teacher thinking about a career change, you, too, deserve an advisory board. No matter who you are and what you do for a living, a well-constructed advisory board can help you take the next steps to grow personally and professionally. The board can help challenge you, guide you, and teach you. Although I recommend working as I did to provide value to each adviser at each meeting, I learned that it’s been my success that has made my advisers feel most rewarded.

The most important things to keep in mind in creating and maintaining a successful advisory board are to choose your advisers carefully and to build and keep a solid structure for the meetings. The more seriously you take this endeavor, the more seriously your advisers will. If you call up a couple of friends spontaneously and ask them to meet you at the local diner for coffee to talk over an issue you’re having, that’s not an advisory board. But if you carefully select people you admire and respect—people whom you’ve met over the years or whom you might have access to through someone you already know (see Chapter 7)—and gather them three to six times a year for scheduled meetings in a quiet room with an agenda that you stick to, well, that’s an advisory board.

I’ve found that the best thing about having an advisory board is the multiplier effect. It’s great to have even one smart person thinking about how to help you, but when you have multiple smart people in the same room at the same time trying to help you, the results are powerful. People think of new ideas and form connections that they wouldn’t have thought of otherwise, and everyone ends up benefiting. If you’re doing this well, you’ll be providing so much value for your advisory board that you might not even need to compensate them financially (this is important if they’re a personal advisory board and not a business one).

Remember, you can form an advisory board for any purpose, duration, or idea that you choose. The key is to find and recruit smart, experienced people in whatever area you’d like to focus on. Looking to start a business? Build an advisory board of successful entrepreneurs. Looking to make senior partner at a law firm? Build an advisory board of senior attorneys and relevant clients. Looking to figure out what you want to do in the next chapter of your life? Build an advisory board of people with lots of varied experience who really know you.

Everybody deserves mentors, and everyone can have them. It’s up to you to take matters into your own hands and make an advisory board happen.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down two or three goals for what an advisory board could help you with over time.

2. Brainstorm a list of seven to eleven people who could serve on your advisory board and help you with those goals. At least half of them should be people you’ve met, and at least two should be people you’ve never met but could perhaps meet through connections.

3. Determine your preferred meeting format, structure, frequency, and location as well as the compensation you plan to offer, if any.

4. Start contacting people and invite them to be on your advisory board.





9. Hire Slow and Fire Fast—at Work and in Life


Dave,” my general manager, Sam, said over the phone to me, “you’re going to want to sit down for this one.”

“Okay,” I replied, sitting down in my home office. I had been working there that day because one of my daughters was home sick from school, and I wasn’t looking forward to what I was about to hear.

“We found cocaine in the men’s room. We think it’s Payton’s. We have a witness. I’m really sorry to be the messenger.”

Upon hearing this I quickly went through a series of emotions: shock (How could this happen at my office?), followed by denial (This can’t be happening), followed by anger (How dare he do this at our office?), followed by sadness (I can’t believe I’ve let this toxic culture develop). I had waited too long, but I wasn’t going to wait a moment longer.

Payton (the name has been changed to protect the guilty) was a sales manager. Like many new hires, he started off very promisingly, full of energy, passion, and commitment. But I had quickly realized that something wasn’t right. He was too salesy, too over the top, just too much. Rumors developed that he had a drug problem. More rumors developed that he was getting drunk with people who reported to him, and there were reports about inappropriate remarks he had made to members of the opposite sex. Some of the early customers Payton and his team sold to had canceled recently, saying they were overpromised.

I knew we had a major problem pretty early. But I’m embarrassed to admit that I didn’t act on that knowledge nearly as quickly as I should have. I wanted to give Payton the benefit of the doubt; I wanted it to work out, wanted to believe I had made a good hire. Therefore, under the pretense of coaching him to success, I kept Payton on.

But once I heard about the cocaine in the men’s room, I realized things had gone too far. I called a neighbor to come look after my sneezing child and hopped onto the next train into the city to go to our office. After a quick meeting with Payton and someone from human resources, he was gone from our company, and from my life, forever.

This is probably the most dramatic case of my not firing someone fast enough, but far from the only one. There have been many times I’ve brought on someone I was excited about, only to quickly learn, once he was on the job, that he was not right. Sometimes the employee can simply move seats to another role and thrive there. But usually if it feels like it’s not a fit, there’s a reason for that and it’s best for both parties if they agree to part ways.

“Hire slow, fire fast” is a popular adage in business circles because great leaders realize that the wrong employee in the wrong seat can be truly toxic to an organization. That’s why you’ve got to work hard to find the right people and absolutely take your time to hire, but as soon as you know in your gut that it’s not going to work out, it’s time to cut bait.

This isn’t true only in business, however. It’s equally true outside of business, in all relationships.

Think about it: How many times have you kept at it in a relationship, kept giving the other person a chance, hoping he or she would change, only to give up on the relationship eventually and move on, all the while kicking yourself for waiting so long?

We humans hate admitting when we’ve made a mistake. In my situation with Payton, I wanted to believe I had made a good hire. Therefore, despite strong consistent signals to the contrary, I kept him on, kept working on the relationship, kept hoping for change rather than face the brutal facts. This is a mind trick that we have to be aware of, called cognitive dissonance. We want to believe we’ve made good decisions, and so even after receiving data that tell us we haven’t, we tend to refuse to recognize the data or it takes us a long time to do so. That’s obviously a problem, and potentially a toxic one in key relationships in our lives.

It’s especially important to hire slow and fire fast in our lives outside work. What does this mean? Be cautious when getting into relationships—whether romantic, platonic, or otherwise—with people. Don’t completely give away your trust and heart to someone you’ve just met. It’s okay—heck, as someone who’s been in love a few times and is still madly in love with my wife can vouch, even great—eventually to jump full-throttle into a new relationship, to let yourself be completely vulnerable, transparent, and trusting. But that doesn’t mean you should bury your head in the sand. If you start to feel in your gut that the relationship is not right, there’s a reason. Look at the cold hard facts and data and watch out for that little voice that whispers, “Stick with it; you made the right decision.” That’s your cognitive dissonance talking.

I’ve seen people stick around for years in unhealthy relationships with partners or with toxic employees or business partners despite knowing better. Change is hard, and cognitive dissonance is a powerful phenomenon. But the truth is that every minute spent with a toxic friend, partner, or employee or with any other toxic person in your life is a minute you’ll never get back and that you could better spend without that person. Do you have any Paytons in your life right now? Hire slow and fire fast. Every minute counts.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Recall two or three people who are no longer in your life whom you perhaps hired too quickly and kept in your life too long. Write down how long you stayed past the point where you knew in your heart you should cut the cord.

2. Evaluate your current employees, partners, and relationships. Are there any people you’ve met who you know in your gut are not right for you or your organization? If so, begin to make a plan now to fire them as needed.

3. As you think about people you meet, always remember the motto “hire slow, fire fast.” Take your time letting them into your inner circle, but don’t be afraid to toss them out the second it stops feeling right.





10. Blow Off the Right People


He’s running just a few minutes late, but we’ll be right with you,” said a well-dressed receptionist at precisely 10:00 A.M. one morning in the lobby of an investment firm I was visiting.

I was so excited! Finally, I was meeting with Brett, a serial entrepreneur turned investor. He had had enormous success at a very young age and was now an active investor in more than three hundred companies with over $1 billion under management. Boy, was I psyched to meet with him. I wasn’t sure exactly how I could work with him, but I was confident there would be a way, and so I had worked through a mutual connection over a month before to schedule a meeting. And now here it was, about to happen. We had booked a half hour with his assistant, but secretly I was hoping the conversation would go well and end up taking forty-five minutes to an hour.

“Brett will see you now. Here’s a bottle of water; please head on back,” said the same lady to me at 10:04 a.m. I thanked her and headed anxiously into Brett’s office.

“Great to see you,” Brett said warmly but firmly, with his hand out to shake mine. “Tell me a little bit about what you’re up to and how I can help.”

“Well, given that you’re an investor in over three hundred small businesses and we’re a software company serving small businesses that also is currently raising money from investors, I thought there would be ample opportunity to partner on something,” I replied. I proceeded to give him a quick but high-level view of our software and possible partnership opportunities.

“Okay,” Brett said at approximately 10:08 a.m. “You’re not an investment opportunity right now because you don’t fit our revenue requirement, but you might be a possible partner. Email me a one-sheet when you follow up and I’ll have our partnership coordinator take a look. Also, I’m going to introduce you to two people who you should meet who might be mutually beneficial.”

He spoke quickly and with confidence. Moreover, as he spoke, Brett was typing away, actually making the introductions via email simultaneously.

“Thanks for coming and all the best, Dave!” Brett exclaimed enthusiastically, sticking his hand back out to shake mine. (It was 10:12 a.m. at this point.)



As I walked out of that office, I was overcome with thoughts. On the one hand, I was tempted to be annoyed that I had had only an eight-minute meeting with this guy I had booked thirty minutes with. On the other hand, during those eight minutes he had been honest, direct, and, most important, extremely helpful in making those introductions and offering me an opportunity to explore a partnership. How could I possibly not be appreciative?

Soon thereafter, my thoughts turned to the incredible skill I had just witnessed. This guy had totally blown me off. (Wouldn’t you think “eight minutes of thirty booked after a four-minute lateness” constitutes blowing off?) Yet I walked away not angry at all. In fact, I walked away feeling very appreciative for Brett’s time and the value he had provided over that time—all eight minutes of it.

It can be easy to blow people off. You’re too busy, and if you’re not sure how valuable a person will be, why bother giving him any of your time at all? But it can be even easier to give away your precious time to people who ask for it and then want and take more and more. We all want to be liked, and it’s very tempting to give people the time they crave. But if I had had all thirty minutes with Brett, would it really have made a difference? He would have lost twenty-two minutes of productivity, and I probably wouldn’t have been any better off. We’ve all had the experience of trying to get off the phone when the other person keeps talking. It’s not fun. You don’t want people to feel hurt or blown off, and so it’s easier sometimes to give them your time.

That might be the easy thing, but is it the best thing? Or is the best thing to blow people off without having them feel blown off? To guard your most precious asset, your time, ferociously and make sure every minute counts when you are spending it with people? To end a meeting or communication with someone quickly yet have her walk away feeling good about the interaction? These things are hard, but they are worth it. Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook, calls it “ruthless prioritization.” Let’s break down what Brett did to me into three simple steps that you can use to blow off people the right way:

1. Physical interaction (handshake) to indicate both the beginning and the end of the conversation

2. Frank, direct, to-the-point conversation

3. Providing value to the other person before ending the conversation



These three things effectively blew me off and turned a potential thirty-plus minutes of mutually wasted time into eight minutes of mutually beneficial time, leaving twenty-two minutes for each of us to live, work, create, and enjoy.

Using these principles will help you shorten meetings with both the right and the wrong people and help you become more productive. It can be relatively easy to use these techniques within the confines of a scheduled meeting or on the home turf of your office. But what about blowing off people who stop you to talk to you in person at unscheduled moments, email you, or text or tweet you? So many people want your time. Some of them are worth it and will help you get what you want; others, frankly, just aren’t. Here’s a quick guide to the successful blowoff in these less controllable circumstances:

1. In person: Keep moving. Once you stop to talk to someone, you start losing valuable time. If you want to keep a conversation short, the best way to do it is to keep walking. You can smile and nod all the way to the elevator, stairs, or wherever it is you’re going.

2. Text/email/tweet: Reply, but as slowly and succinctly as you can. Sometimes it’s hard not to reply right away, but wherever possible, it’s important to give the signal that you have other priorities right now. Don’t ignore anyone. But when you do reply, whether it’s right away or days later, keep your response succinct. I’ve replied with one-word responses to three-hundred-word emails. If you’re positive and helpful, the length of your reply really isn’t that important.



We all want to be seen as nice people, and we all want to be liked. But remember, every minute you spend with someone who isn’t going to help you get what you want is a minute spent away from someone who may help you get what you want. It’s also a minute that person is spending with someone who doesn’t truly want to be spending it with him. Thus, the right thing to do is to learn the art of the blowoff. Like Brett, you can maximize every minute.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down the names of two or three people who typically take up more of your time than you’d like them to at work or in your personal life.

2. Choose one and construct a plan for your next conversation. Plan to quickly define the reason for the conversation, use signals to indicate the start and the end of the conversation, be frank, provide value early on, and end it quickly.

3. Practice artful blowoffs of people who stop you in person to converse as well as people who text, email, and tweet you.



