

11. Stop Waiting to Talk and Start Actually Listening


Dave, are you even listening to me? Hello? What happened? You just decided to stop listening to me halfway through our date?”

We were on our first date, and Robin, a twenty-one-year-old beautiful brunette, was not happy. She was not wrong, either. Well, not completely wrong, anyway. I didn’t actively decide to stop listening to her, but I might as well have, as I had effectively lost my ability to pay attention, a fact that clearly had not escaped her.

This was a first date gone horribly wrong. And when I say first date, I mean it literally. Yes, embarrassing but true, my first date didn’t occur until I was a twenty-one-year-old college senior. Anyway, I finally had gotten the courage to ask this girl from my classes out, and much to my excitement, she had said yes. That Friday night, I was excited to enjoy drinks and dinner with Robin at one of the nicest restaurants on Boylston Street in Boston. I psyched myself up, thought of my best stories to tell, and tried to remember the advice my best friend had given me: Make sure to listen to her.

But once the date actually began, I was way too nervous to follow the playbook I had prepared. At first, I did a great job listening—so great, in fact, that seventeen years later I still recall Robin’s goals and her classes for that semester. But at some point during the date (perhaps after the second drink) I went into storytelling mode. I had so many interesting stories prepared, and I figured surely she would be impressed and entertained by them.

The problem was that as soon as I finished telling a story, I completely tuned out her reply. Not because I didn’t care about what she had to say but because I was preoccupied thinking of the next story I would tell. And thinking about how the date was going. And thinking about what I was going to do to transition the date to its next location after dinner. And all that thinking about what to say next kept me from executing the single most important part of reading people and communicating well: listening.

In this I was not alone. In fact, most of the time people aren’t really listening to you; they’re waiting to talk. They are thinking about what’s next, or what to say, or almost anything else but what the person in front of them is saying. The thing about listening is that it requires a relentless focus that most people don’t have or don’t use.

The Merriam-Webster Dictionary defines listening as “hearing something with thoughtful attention: giving consideration.” In other words, listening is clearly more than just hearing. It is the act of consciously paying attention to someone else in an attempt to understand, to consider. It is the process of thinking about what is important to someone else rather than what may be important to you. It is the act at any given moment of caring more about what someone else has to say than anything else in the world. Listening is hard—a lot harder than you might think.

Before we can learn how to read and understand people, it’s essential to be able to listen to them. In fact, I would go so far as to say that if there’s just one people skill you take away from this book, it should be listening. Dr. Gerald D. Bell, founder and CEO of Bell Leadership Institute and a professor at the University of North Carolina’s Kenan-Flagler Business School, has over forty years of experience working with top business leaders. He has seen firsthand the impact great listening skills have. Says Bell, “When you listen to people, they feel valued, respected, happy, and productive. They feel more motivated, inspired, and eager to solve problems and produce good results.” He also notes the damaging effects of poor listening skills: “When we don’t listen to people, they feel hurt, rejected, demeaned, disrespected, and de-motivated.” Simply put, listening skills can make or break any interaction in business or in personal relationships.

After conducting years of research on the most effective and least effective traits of leaders, Bell advised leaders to “listen like children watch TV.” Think about that. Children sit up straight, slightly leaning in to the TV. Their eyes are glued to the screen. Bell calls it the Achiever Listening position and recommends it as a first step in improving one’s listening skills.

The idea is to imagine you’re glued to the TV screen, except the TV screen is the person in front of you. It helps to lean in and have your arms at your side, and whenever your mind wanders away from what the person is saying (all of our minds wander, so that’s okay), refocus on listening for understanding. Again, you’re not listening with intent to respond, or listening with intent to talk, or listening with intent to do anything but understand what the person is saying and why. The rest will follow.

After Robin called me out for not listening, I snapped back to attention, but it was only momentary. Sadly, I wasn’t ready to be a good listener back then, or a good date for that matter, and that date with Robin was both the first and the last. But I have since learned to do much better by following the simple rules below. Now, you can do better, too. (You can visit the Bell Leadership Institute at BellArtofPeople.com.)


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Practice the Achiever Listening position. Have a conversation with someone during which you are distinctly focused on achieving optimal understanding. Don’t think about what you are going to say next or do next. Just focus solely on what she is saying.

2. Watch someone (preferably a child) watching television. Note his rapt concentration on the screen in front of him. This is what you want when you are listening.

3. Remember that listening is a lifetime activity and that we all can continuously improve this essential skill. Take at least a half hour every month to get completely silent in a meeting and practice active listening.





12. Words Mean Little; Listen with Your Eyes, Not Your Ears


I’ve got it!” I said to my boss, Peggy, who had just trained me in how to be better at listening. I was a salesperson for Disney at the time, and I wanted to learn anything I could to sell more advertising. “I will pay attention to exactly what words come out of the mouths of any prospects I’m meeting with. This is going to be great!”

‘Well, there is one more thing,” Peggy replied. “Actually, there’s something much more important than the words that come out of a prospect’s mouth that you’ve got to pay attention to.”

“What could be more important than what they’re saying?” I asked dubiously.

“More important than what they’re saying is how they’re saying it,” Peggy answered.

As it turns out, Peggy was completely correct: Way more important than listening to the words people are saying is listening to the tone of their voice and reading their so-called body language, or gestures. In fact, research has shown that 93 percent of communication is nonverbal!

According to landmark research conducted by Albert Mehrabian, Susan Ferris, and Morton Wiener in 1967, body language is responsible for 55 percent of what is communicated, tone for 38 percent, and language for only 7 percent. Although some quibble about the numbers and the 55/38/7 formula has been debated, what’s not debated is the overall importance of body language for reading and understanding others.

Thus, when you’re listening to people, it’s not enough just to hear their words; you need to read their body language as well. By this I don’t mean obvious gestures such as a frown or an eye roll. There are many different types of nonverbal communication. Here is a brief guide to the nonverbal signals and cues that people use and what they communicate. In general, the more you practice reading people for understanding, the better you’ll get at it.


Facial expressions

The human face is extremely expressive, able to convey countless emotions without a word being said. Unlike some forms of nonverbal communication, facial expressions are universal. The facial expressions for happiness, sadness, anger, surprise, fear, and disgust are the same across cultures. Look closely at people’s facial expressions as they speak. Are their brows raised to indicate anger or discomfort? Are their faces lit up with enthusiasm or wrinkled with exhaustion? Each little cue gives you a better understanding and a potential advantage.


Body movements and posture

The way people sit, walk, stand, hold their heads, move, and carry themselves communicates a wealth of information to the world. This type of nonverbal communication includes posture, bearing, stance, and subtle movements. Does the person you’re speaking with look comfortable or uncomfortable in her posture? Figuring out the answer to this question goes a long way toward understanding the individual and her circumstances. A comfortable stance could indicate openness and flexibility, whereas a more uncomfortable stance might indicate closed-mindedness or anxiety.


Gestures

Gestures are woven into the fabric of our daily lives. We wave, point, beckon, and use our hands when we’re arguing or speaking animatedly, expressing ourselves with gestures often without thinking about it. However, the meaning of gestures can be very different across cultures and regions, and so it’s important to be careful to avoid misinterpretation. One classic gesture is crossing one’s arms; in most Western cultures, this can mean anger or discomfort. Similarly, in these cultures, constantly touching one’s face while speaking can indicate discomfort or a lie.


Eye contact

Since the visual sense is dominant for most people, eye contact is an especially important type of nonverbal communication. The way someone looks at you can communicate many things, including interest, affection, hostility, and attraction. It is easier to establish rapport with someone who’s willing to make solid eye contact with you. Eye contact is also important in maintaining the flow of conversation and gauging the other person’s response.


Touch

We communicate a great deal through touch. Think about the messages given by the following: a weak handshake, a timid tap on the shoulder, a warm bear hug, a reassuring slap on the back, a patronizing pat on the head, and a controlling grip on the arm. Pay attention to how you’re touched at the beginning of a conversation.


Space

Have you ever felt uncomfortable during a conversation because the other person was standing too close and invading your space? We all have a need for physical space, although that need differs with the culture, the situation, and the closeness of the relationship. You can use physical space to communicate many different nonverbal messages, including signals of intimacy and affection, aggression, or dominance. For example, a “close talker” might have issues of aggression or a lack of self-esteem that is being overcompensated for by the closeness.


Voice

It’s not just what you say, it’s how you say it. When people speak, you can “read” their voices in addition to their body language. Things to pay attention to include timing and pace, how loudly they’re speaking, tone and inflection, and sounds that convey understanding, such as “ahh” and “uh-huh.” Think about how someone’s tone of voice can indicate sarcasm, anger, affection, or confidence.

Ultimately, becoming a better reader of body language is all about paying attention and practicing. By paying attention to facial expressions, posture, gestures, eye contact, touch, space, and voice during conversations, you’ll be able to read people and understand what they’re thinking, feeling, and trying to convey better than you could yesterday. You’ll notice when people have good intentions and when they’re hiding something, when people are nervous and when people are confident, when people are comfortable and when they’re not so comfortable. All of this intelligence will help you to listen to, and persuade, people better.

I took in all this advice from Peggy and in time became not only a better listener but a better people reader as well. After all, up to 93 percent of my ability to listen well depends on it!


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Practice reading people’s body language. Have a conversation with a close friend or family member during which you are distinctly focused on achieving optimal understanding by observing that person’s body language. Note her facial expressions, movements, gestures, and so on, and try to guess what they communicate about her thoughts and intentions.

2. After the conversation, circle back and share your observations and ask the person whether your assumptions were correct. Check to see how well you read that person.

3. Remember that as much as 93 percent of listening consists of paying attention to body language and tone. Paying attention to the words is just a start to becoming a better listener.





13. Always Accept the Glass of Water


Oh, no thanks,” I said to Sue, the marketing director for a major bank in Boston I was about to pitch on a sales call, in response to her offer of coffee or water. “I don’t want to be a bother,” I thought to myself. I was running a couple of minutes late, and I wanted to make the most of our time, so I passed on a cold drink of water that I actually craved.

But I was really thirsty. And that got me to thinking that maybe I should have taken the water. It was hot in that room, I realized. I was nervous about the meeting, too, as it was a big pitch. Nervousness plus the warmth of the room led to some sweat, and now I wanted that glass of water more than ever.

As anyone who’s ever been in sales or ever presented for business knows, once you start sweating, it’s simply a bad, bad situation. Now I was so worried that Sue would notice I was sweating profusely, I lost focus on what I was there to do. As you can imagine, Sue’s meeting with sweaty Dave didn’t go very well, and it all started with my saying no to water to keep from being a bother.

You surely have had the experience of going somewhere for an interview or meeting and being offered water, coffee, tea, or soda. You may have thought the same thing I thought that day: Don’t be a bother.

After that disaster of a meeting with Sue, though, I decided to do an unscientific study. At my next twenty meetings, I alternated between taking the water (or whatever the other party offered) and politely saying no. Then I compared the results of each meeting.

As it turns out, it’s best to be a bother if that means taking the coffee, soda, or water you’re offered. The meetings at which I took the offer went significantly better than did the ones at which I didn’t. I know, small sample size and totally unscientific study, but it makes sense, doesn’t it?

In doing this experiment I learned that there are two reasons taking the drink sets you up for success. First, it puts you at ease and allows you to relax, cool off, or warm up and get ready for the meeting. Second and more important, it puts the other person at ease.

Think about when you have people over to your home. I’m sure you offer them water or a drink or a snack, and typically they take it. When they don’t, it throws you off: “Why won’t this person take my drink or snack?” you think. “Am I a terrible host?” “What’s the deal?” Your mind may wander, and now you’re distracted and maybe even annoyed at your guest for putting you in that situation.

When the tables are turned and you’re offered a drink at the start of a meeting, take it. Even if you’re not thirsty, take the drink. If you’re offered coffee and you don’t drink coffee, politely ask for water instead. This very simple act will make the person you’re meeting with feel like a good host, put him at ease, and prime you to be able to read him well and exert influence as needed.

Remember, being liked is all about making people feel good, and accepting a drink allows the other person to feel good. Two quick caveats about this approach: First, if you’re not offered a beverage, don’t ask for one; that could easily have the opposite effect, making the other person feel bad that she doesn’t have anything to offer. Second, when food is offered, unless you’re actually having a lunch meeting, it’s best to decline politely. Food is simply too distracting when you want to be at your best.

By the way, ever since I completed that study, I always accept a beverage at every meeting. It’s usually water, but I’ve had my share of soda, juice, and even the occasional beer and wine to kick off a meeting. Cheers!


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Commit to accepting a beverage at all your meetings and interviews.

2. Be sure to offer one whenever possible when people are meeting you at your office.

3. When you are waiting for the beverage, use the opportunity to settle in, relax, and set up for success mentally and physically.





14. Bluffing Is Only for Poker


Look, I want to hire you,” Charlie, an older mustached Greek-American, said to me from across the table in his restaurant. “I really do. It’s just that I can’t afford you for $500 a month. If you can’t lower your price, I’m going to have to go with my cousin, who will help me for just a couple hundred dollars a month.”

As he said that last sentence, he scratched his face a couple of times and looked away from me—one of the surest signs of lying or at least discomfort (see Chapter 12)—and I determined that he was bluffing. I was just getting started as a consultant at that time, and though I really wanted the money, most of our clients were paying between $2,000 and $3,000 a month, and so I already was giving Charlie an amazing deal. Sure, I could come down on the price to meet what he was asking for, but I was trying to build a business, and sometimes walking away is the right thing to do in a situation like this.

“Charlie, I would love to work with you, too,” I replied. “I really would. But I’m afraid I just can’t go below $500 a month. I hope you’ll change your mind and work with us, and I think that if you do, you’ll be very happy. But if not, I wish you and your cousin the best of luck in your marketing work.”

It was hard to call his bluff, because I really did want him as a client. But as it turned out, my instinct was the right one.

“You know what, Dave?” Charlie replied. “I’m going to give you a shot. I think you’re expensive, but I think you’re worth it.”

Here’s what I learned from this experience: Everywhere except the poker table, bluffing fails. In poker, the game is designed to give bluffers a chance. You can take a calculated risk, and sometimes it pays off, and your opponent never knows if you were bluffing. But in the game of life, bluffing is simply too risky. On the upside, bluffing can help you persuade people to work for you for less (or more) than you want, or pay more money for something you have to offer, or help you achieve another goal. I could have given in to Charlie’s bluff, for instance, and he could have saved a few bucks. But on the downside, bluffing erodes trust. A bluffer is not being authentic in his or her actions, and if he or she is called on it, that becomes apparent and the long-term relationship is damaged. After that one interaction, I never could take Charlie’s words at face value, because I always wondered if he was bluffing again.

However, the fact is that just because you and I know that bluffing works only in poker, that doesn’t mean that everyone you do business with knows it. In fact, bluffs are pretty common in business, and a key skill for reading and understanding people is learning to detect them.

The best poker players in the world are masters at reading body language and tone. They know how to interpret even the slightest differences in gestures, and as soon as they can sense discomfort (in poker it’s called a tell), they know how and when to pounce and call the bluff.

Even if you’re not a card player, you can use the same techniques to your advantage. Watch closely when you’re having a conversation that involves a negotiation or sale. The first thing to read and understand is your conversation partner’s baseline: how he acts when not under pressure. Then, as the conversation gets deeper and the moment of truth arrives (“So, are you able to move forward now at this price?”), look for shifts in appearance or tone as he’s talking.

Scratching his face? Could be bluffing.

Fidgeting more than before? Could be bluffing.

Speeding up the pace of talking? Could be bluffing.

Now, of course, this person might not be bluffing in these situations. He might just be uncomfortable. But even if you’re not 100 percent or even 50 percent sure he’s bluffing, you should still call him on it, because if he is bluffing and you call it successfully, you’ll not only save that much more time, money, and peace of mind, you’ll gain valuable information about how trustworthy this person is and in turn how valuable he is to you as a client, a colleague, or a business partner.

Charlie and I went on to work together for over a year at $500 a month until I fired him as a client and moved on. I told him at the time that I had to charge him $1,000 a month or I couldn’t afford to service him anymore. He thought I was bluffing. I wasn’t. But that’s another story.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Practice reading people to determine whether they’re bluffing. It’s great to have a partner to do this with and even a deck of cards. Obviously, poker is one way to practice, but even if you don’t play poker, simply have your partner hold up a card so that you can’t see it, tell you what that card is, and have you predict whether she’s telling the truth. Over time, you’ll get better at reading your partner’s tells and body language and get more accurate at calling bluffs.

2. Begin to notice body language and possible tells in the people you interact with on a regular basis at work and at home.

3. Don’t bluff yourself! Authenticity and transparency are more powerful and persuasive than any bluff.





15. The One Trick That Seems Ridiculous but Works Every Time


This is stupid and a total waste of my time!”

I didn’t say that, but boy, was I thinking it. I had taken an entire day off from work for this group I had just joined called the Entrepreneurs’ Organization. I was excited to join this forum of seven to nine CEOs whom I’d meet with on a monthly basis, but I had to be trained first. So here I was attending “Forum Training” with seven other entrepreneurs, where I had just been taught about something called mirroring.

Mirroring, we were told, means repeating back exactly something that someone else in the forum said, word for word, preceded by “I hear you saying” or “I heard you say.” For example, if I heard a forum member say, “I’m feeling worried about losing our biggest client,” I would mirror that person by replying: “I hear you saying you’re feeling worried about losing your biggest client.”

In those few minutes after we were taught how to mirror and began practicing it, I was cynical. I had just spent thousands of dollars to join this organization and had taken an entire precious day off from work to attend this training, and I felt like I was back in kindergarten. What good could saying the exact words back to someone possibly do? It seemed frivolous, fake, and, well, stupid.

Then it was my turn to be mirrored, and everything changed.

I talked for several minutes about pretty deep stuff from my past—my father’s mental illness, my unrequited love for a married woman, my struggles with weight—and the feelings associated with those issues. Afterward, we went around the table, and each person mirrored me by repeating one thing he or she heard me say:

“I heard you say you’ve struggled all of your life with weight and that it feels like a constant battle.”

“I heard you saying you’ve had to deal with your dad’s bipolar disorder for over twenty years and that sometimes it feels really lonely.”

“I heard you say you were in love with a married woman and that felt impossible at the time but that eventually you let her go, and then you ended up together, and that felt amazing.”

“Wow,” I thought. I felt heard. I felt listened to. I felt that they really cared about me. I had just met these people that morning, and I felt so close to them. It was the power of mirroring, and it felt amazing. My feelings about mirroring changed forever.

As it turns out, mirroring is a massively powerful concept that allows you to connect deeply to people. It’s easier said than done, however. Simply repeating back what you’re hearing can help you forge a bond with other people and win their trust, but it also can be interpreted as insincere and inauthentic. There’s only one very simple solution to this: You have to actually care about what you’re mirroring.

If you repeat back out loud what you’re hearing in a robotic monotone, people are not going to believe you actually care about what they are saying. But if you repeat it back with emotion, with an emphasis on the important words and feelings that were just spoken, you give it meaning. You help the other person feel heard and listened to. You demonstrate that you care.

People in general don’t want advice even when they ask for it. They just want to feel heard. As you practice and get good at mirroring, you will help people feel heard, and they will love you for it. Focus on really emphasizing the “feeling words” you hear as well; mirroring feelings is much more valuable than mirroring thoughts.





Of course, the greater the emotional depth of the conversation is, the more powerful the mirroring can be. If someone says, “I’m feeling okay. Took the kids to school and did some laundry,” simply mirroring back “I hear you say you’re feeling okay after taking the kids to school and doing some laundry” won’t make as big an impact as mirroring a deeper statement would. Even so, as ridiculous as it seemed to me at first and as ridiculous as you may think it is, mirroring is an incredible tool for connecting with others.

One caveat: Don’t bungle their words. Remember, the reason mirroring is so powerful is that the person being mirrored feels totally heard. If she says, “I’m upset over the work that you did; it’s sloppy,” and you reply with “I hear you; you’re angry with me over poorly done work,” it’s not quite the same, and rather than feeling heard, she will feel that you weren’t listening carefully. Therefore, it’s essential to keep practicing those listening skills in order to mirror well.

One more caveat: Never use the word but after a mirroring statement. Imagine you’re angry because your husband said he would take out the garbage and forgot to do it. Then imagine saying to him, “I’m angry because you said you’d take the garbage out and you didn’t,” and him replying, “I hear you. You’re angry that I said I would take the garbage out and didn’t.” Now imagine that he adds, “But I’ve been really busy with work stuff, and it just slipped my mind.” His attempt at mirroring has been ruined by just one word. No buts.

Five years after that forum training, I still meet with my EO forum every single month, and we share updates on our lives and mirror one another. My seven forum mates have become my closest friends in the world, and I owe a great debt of gratitude to that “stupid” training in mirroring.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Practice mirroring with a trusted friend or close colleague. Sit face-to-face and have your partner share how he’s doing, including his highs and lows of recent weeks and the feelings associated with those events. After a few minutes, share a couple of mirroring statements that are based on what you heard. Ask your partner how well you did. Then switch roles. It feels great to be mirrored, too.

2. Experiment with using mirroring in situations in which someone is upset. At work, this might include customer service, sales, or any disagreement. At home, this might mean an argument with your boyfriend or wife. Remember to focus on repeating back the feelings and what you heard word for word.

3. As you get better at mirroring, you’ll find that people respond to you more and more. You’ll sharpen your listening skills and help everyone in your life feel heard. They’ll all remember you as the one who gets them, the one who really cares.


