





16. Validate, Validate, Validate


Boy, was I angry! I had just been on hold for over forty-five minutes on the phone with my cable TV company to fix a billing error, and a minute into the conversation, after I had waited so long to talk to a human being, the call had been disconnected. Now I was waiting for another thirty minutes in a new queue to talk to a human being. I was angry, I was frustrated, I was fed up! Finally, someone answered.

Afraid of getting disconnected and kicked back to the end of the line again, I responded to the representative’s greeting with “Hi, this is Dave. I’ve been waiting for over an hour on two separate calls. Got disconnected, so if we get disconnected again, please please please call me back at 617-905-XXXX. In the meantime, I need your help, please, because my bill is over $250 more than it should be!” I was trying to stay calm, but my voice betrayed that I was angry.

“Wow,” the lady on the other end of the phone said in disbelief.

“I hear you saying you’ve been waiting for over an hour to talk with us,” she continued, “and that your bill is over $250 more than it should be. You must be so angry and frustrated!”

I could actually hear her on the other end of the line getting angry with her own company and with what was happening to me.

“Yeah, I’m angry and frustrated,” I replied with enthusiasm.

“Man, I would be so angry if that happened to me,” she continued. “I’ll tell you what; let me get all of your information and let’s see if we can get this sorted out. And if we get disconnected for any reason, I’ll call you right back, that’s for sure. Boy, I hate when these problems happen to me, and I’m a customer, too. My name is Maureen, by the way, Dave.”

Then a very curious thing happened. Almost immediately, I wasn’t that angry anymore. It was as if my anger and frustration had lifted in a cloud of understanding and camaraderie. I felt heard. I felt surprised. I felt vindicated. And she hadn’t even fixed my problem yet!

The next few minutes were nothing short of delightful. I took Maureen through the billing error, which was in fact the company’s fault. Maureen then credited the entire $256-plus discrepancy back to my account and, to put icing on the cake, credited my account an additional $100 to “make up for your troubles.”

“Thank you so much, Maureen,” I said sincerely. I had gotten a much better, faster resolution than I’d expected and had only her to thank.

“Well, you’re welcome,” Maureen replied. “It feels good to have something frustrating like this resolved quickly and to your liking, doesn’t it?”

It was the best customer service I’d ever had, and as I hung up the phone, I realized my mood had shifted from fury and frustration to feeling good about life. I was even feeling positive about the dreaded cable company.

Why had my mood shifted so fast and so dramatically? Obviously, the fact that my billing issue was (eventually) solved quickly was a contributing factor. But it was more than that. I had had my feelings validated by Maureen; that validation was what made me feel so much better. It was as if I could no longer be angry with her because now she was on my team. Maureen not only had heard me, she’d actually felt me. She had put herself in my shoes and had shown me that she totally understood how I felt by feeling my emotions with me. It was empathy. It was mirroring. It was validation. It was great!

Mirroring is a great way to help people feel heard, but validation takes mirroring to a whole new level. The idea is to put yourself in the other person’s shoes and, in addition to repeating back exactly what she has said, say something to suggest you understand how she probably is feeling. You can even try to feel those emotions yourself, as Maureen did that day. If this is done well, the effect of validation is extremely powerful: You can diffuse negative emotions, get harmony around positive emotions, and build strong, long-lasting connections in just a few short minutes, as Maureen did with me.

Just one caveat: There is a major risk to validation that doesn’t exist with mirroring. In mirroring, you’re saying exactly what you heard. Listen well and you can’t go wrong. In validating, you’re interpreting the feelings you think you’re hearing. Interpret wrong and you can totally miss and have the opposite effect to what you want: Instead of deeply connecting, you are confusing the situation.

The solution is that if you’re unsure of the feeling associated with what you’re hearing, keep listening and asking questions. You can validate more tentatively as well, taking cues from the other person’s reactions. For instance, if you think the emotion you’re hearing is anger, you might say, “Sounds like you’re pretty angry, eh?” as a question. You’ll get either “Yeah, I’m angry!” as a reply or “Not really. More like frustrated.” Either way, you’ll have the clarification you need to get it right.

Validation is the single most powerful way of connecting with other people. Sure, it can be difficult to validate if you don’t agree with the person you’re validating or if you feel differently. But remember, validation is not agreement; it’s not giving in, giving up, or admitting you’re wrong. It’s just showing the other person that you understand where she’s coming from and genuinely care. Even if there is a disagreement, instead of getting defensive (which is what most people do), you’ll have a much better chance of a happy resolution if you validate the other person’s feelings and have her feel more connected to you.

Sadly, most customer-service calls to utility companies don’t go the way my call with Maureen did, but imagine if they did!


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Listen for “feeling” words and expressions as you have conversations. Pay attention to body language and tone as well when you are face-to-face. Practice replying with a validation statement such as “You must feel…”

2. Practice validation with a friend who knows what you’re doing. Ask if your validation statements were accurate reflections of how he was in fact feeling and whether they made a difference in the way he feels.

3. One of the challenges of validation is that with more practice and as you get better at it, it can appear less genuine. Remember to be sincere in all your validation statements. That sincerity (or insincerity) does show.





17. The Most Important Question You’ll Ever Ask in a First Meeting


So what’s your question?”

Two years ago, Michael Kislin, a financial adviser I had met at an event I had spoken at, met with me for the first time in my offices. I get solicited a lot for meetings with financial advisers and commercial real estate professionals, and so my guard is always up when they ask to meet with me. But Michael seemed like a nice enough guy and promised that he wouldn’t take more than fifteen minutes, that he had just one real question for me, and that he wouldn’t try to sell me anything. It seemed like an offer I couldn’t refuse.

Still, when it came time to meet and he sat down in front of me, I was nervous. Would he somehow try to sneakily sell me? What did he want from me? And what was this mysterious one question he wanted to ask me? We exchanged small talk, and he told me a little about his business. He was establishing a niche as a financial adviser to tech start-up entrepreneurs. Although many of his clients weren’t wealthy yet, his idea was to build relationships with them all now so that as some of them did succeed and amass wealth, he’d be there to help them (and make money, of course). Then the moment of truth came. I asked Michael what his one big question was, and he replied: “How can I help you?”

Frankly, I wasn’t sure at first how he could help me. But then I had an idea. I told him about my latest start-up venture, Likeable Local, and said I could use some introductions to early-stage technology investors. He asked me a bunch of questions to learn more about the specifics of whom I was looking to reach. Then we wrapped up the conversation, and he said he’d be in touch, but only if it was with something that could be helpful. No sales pitch. No gimmicks. Michael just sincerely promised to follow up if and only if he could actually help me. And that he did.

The next week, Michael introduced me via email to three different early-stage tech investors he thought I would want to meet. Although I didn’t end up taking investment money from any of those three individuals, I did genuinely feel very grateful to Michael. As a result, when I called to thank him, I asked him to tell me more about what he did. As he told me about his business, it dawned on me that I did have a need for a financial adviser. I soon became a client of Michael’s, and my wife and I have been working with him ever since. He didn’t try to sell me, he didn’t try to persuade me, and he didn’t try to trick me. The idea to hire him had not been his but mine. All because of one question.

My father-in-law, the Honorable Steven Fisher, always taught me to “show your friendship first.” What he meant by that is that you should show the other party you’re there to help him, that you care, before you even consider asking something of him in return. There’s no better way to show that you care about the person you’re meeting with than to genuinely, authentically ask her what you can do to help.

There are two possibilities for what can happen when you ask, “How can I help you?”:

1. The person will tell you, giving you an opportunity to help, after which he will feel indebted to you, connected to you, and appreciative of you, and will eventually feel compelled to return the favor and help you one day.

2. The person will decline politely, probably because she doesn’t know how you can help her, but will feel that you care and feel connected to you and be much more emotionally invested in helping you eventually, even if you never have to lift a finger for her.



Either way, by establishing that you care and that you’re there to help, you’ll gain trust and eventually influence. So, the most important question you’ll ever ask is: “How can I help you?”





If it seems simple, that’s because it is. It doesn’t matter whether it’s a customer, a prospect, or a colleague you’re meeting with: We all like to be cared about, and we all can use some help. Just make sure you’re genuine and never contrived or inauthentic when you ask, and of course be sure to follow through on anything you promise or commit to. Also, ideally, make sure the other person knows a little about you and your network, expertise, and sphere of influence so that when you ask him how you can help, you are fully equipped with the tools to provide any help he asks for. You also should do your research about the other party so that you know, going in, various ways you could help. One of the greatest ways to help people is to introduce them to other people (more on that later).

The best part about “How can I help you?” is the long-lasting effects of that one simple question. Case in point: Not only am I still a happy client of Michael Kislin’s, I appreciate his ability to show his friendship first so much that I’ve introduced him to several people who have become his clients. I hope that’s just the beginning of the ways I can help him.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Practice asking “How can I help you?” with a friend before trying it out on a new person in your life. Get comfortable describing your sphere of influence and expertise and then practice asking the question sincerely.

2. Try this out with a new person you meet with in a professional setting. Make sure your offer to help is authentic, and agree to do only things on which you can actually deliver.

3. Go to people you already know and set up meetings to offer to help them as well. You’ll be surprised how much more deeply and better you’ll connect with people when you do this.





18. Who You Are Online Is Who You Are in Life


The birth of our company may have been a dream, but there were days, weeks, and even months early on that felt more like a nightmare. We couldn’t get a loan from a bank. We couldn’t hire the right people. We couldn’t manage our cash flow very well. We nearly missed payroll several times. We brought arguments from home to work, and we brought arguments from work to home.”

When I wrote those words in a blog post and shared it on LinkedIn, Twitter, and Facebook, it was four years into the start of our first company. We had a growing staff of about twenty employees, and I remember one of our management team members approaching me just after I published the post. She said, “Dave, don’t you think the post is a little, well, raw? Do you really want potential clients seeing how close we were to going under? Don’t you think it might turn people off to share so personally about your business?”

I thought about it a bit and then replied, “You could very well be right. Let’s call them up and ask them.”

We called a few of our larger clients, sent them the post, and asked for their feedback. I was getting nervous. Although intuitively I believed that we’d be fine, my employee’s concern had me increasingly worried. Then an email from our largest client came in.

“Wow, this is great,” it read. “Do you mind if I share the article with other people?”

“Of course!” I replied. “That’s what it’s there for. Feel free to share, and thanks for your feedback.”

The positive feedback continued as more and more emails began to roll in. It seemed that our current clients didn’t have any problem with my candid description of the company’s rocky start. But then something happened that really surprised me.

We got a referral. A new, major client.

“I’d like to set up a call to talk about a new project we’d like your help on,” the email read. “I appreciated your honesty and vulnerability in the article your client Elana forwarded to me. Look forward to talking.”

Unbelievable! Not only had we not upset our clients with that honest, vulnerable piece, we actually had attracted a new client. I went back to the employee who had shown concern that the post would have the opposite effect.

“Thank you for being honest with me about your concern,” I said. “So what do you think ended up working about the piece?”

“It was risky,” she replied. “But that’s the whole thing. By taking a risk and sharing your true thoughts and feelings, you connected with people at a deeper level, and that’s exactly what worked. Authenticity. Even vulnerability,” she concluded.

She was right. As it turns out, as scary and impersonal as the Internet and blogging may feel, it’s your ability to be your honest, vulnerable, unique self that provides the biggest opportunity to stand out. There are over 100 million blogs in the world, but there’s just one that has the distinct, unique voice that you have: yours.

Could it have gone the other way? Could people have been turned off by that blog post and chosen not to do business with us? Of course. (Heck, that may have happened. I’ll never know.)

But the bottom line is that that post reflected the real me for better or for worse, and I probably wouldn’t have wanted to work with customers who couldn’t appreciate me for who I was, anyway.

That brings me to the larger point: Who you are online is who you are in life and vice versa. There is no need to have a different writing style for your professional blog, a different voice for your professional Twitter feed, or separate social media profiles for your personal life and your professional life. Why? Because “business you” and “personal you” are the exact same person. Or they can be. Otherwise, you’re going to find yourself trying to manage split personalities and double lives, which is tiring, unnecessary, and ineffective. Imagine logging in and out of different Facebook profiles all day, for instance, to keep up a Chinese wall between personal friends and work friends. Or every time you feel like sending a tweet having to double-check which account you’re tweeting from. Too difficult, I say. It’s much easier to be the authentic you all the time.

Some people have two very public personalities; others prefer to keep semiprivate online identities, carefully curating their digital selves and handpicking who sees what. But those aren’t their actual identities; those are masks they wear, and they aren’t fooling anyone.

Most business books and career counselors will advise you to guard tightly anything personal about yourself online for fear that it will be seen by potential employers or recruiters and harm your professional prospects. But let’s be serious: We all have our lives outside work, and if I’m hiring someone, I want to see that he’s a real person, with friends and family and a personal life; otherwise the only two conclusions are that that person is a robot or that she has something to hide. I’d go so far as to say that if two equally qualified job applicants were placed in front of me, one with a completely open Facebook profile with drunk photos displayed for the whole world to see and the other with a blocked account, I would choose the open one. The type of person I want working for me is the type of person who is willing to share her true self with others.

That means people like Aliza Licht, author and longtime senior vice president of global communications at Donna Karan New York, who is exactly the same online as she is in real life. With hundreds of thousands of Twitter followers, she still considers each member of her audience a friend, reading all tweets and responding to most consistently in her own voice. Her Twitter feed offers an honest glimpse into her life and career, sharing photos from shoots, personal anecdotes, and thoughtful advice. And she doesn’t draw the line between her career and her personal life. This practice has allowed her to rise to the top of the public relations industry and gained DKNY a winning reputation for its connectedness to its customers and the customers’ brand loyalty.

Social media provide a great opportunity to display authenticity and gain credibility, particularly for business leaders. In fact, in a recent survey, 82 percent of the respondents reported that they are more likely to trust a brand when the senior leadership and CEO are using social media. Today’s connected consumers look to social media to determine who companies are and what they stand for. But just being on social media isn’t enough; you must use those channels correctly, and that starts with being authentically who you are.

Dennis Crowley, cofounder and CEO of the location-based social network Foursquare, is a prime example. An employee of mine once checked into Foursquare from her favorite trivia night bar on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, and in her tweet to @Dens (his Twitter handle) gave Crowley a shout-out for fixing the Foursquare servers, which had been down earlier that day. Not only did Crowley respond to her personally, he mentioned that he lived in the area, recommended a few other bars for her trivia team to check out, and even gave her his address (around Eighth Street and Avenue B in case you’re curious). Although I’m certainly not recommending that you tweet your Social Security number, Crowley’s demonstration of trust and openness holds a valuable lesson: When you reveal personal information, you instantly become personable.

As you develop your online persona, be sure to convey your in-real-life self in your digital presence. Rather than trying to create boundaries between personal and professional and online and offline, learn to harmonize them. Find and share your authentic voice.

Years later, I still write about and share the good times and the bad online. It may not always be pretty, but it’s always real, and the world will always appreciate the real you.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down a list of your online social profiles: social networks, blogs, anywhere you appear online. Do an “authenticity audit”: Look at each profile and determine how authentic and vulnerable you’re being on it.

2. Think about how you can increase your authenticity and experiment with sharing more of your real self online.

3. Write down a story about a mistake you once made and the lesson you learned from it. Consider posting it on your Facebook wall, your blog, or LinkedIn.





19. Crying Is for Winners


Crying is for losers,” Jamaal teased. Sixth grade was a tough school year for me. As a member of what the bullies called the nerd herd, I often was teased for being unpopular or for being overweight. In this particular incident, I was being socially tortured because word had gotten out that I had a crush on a girl named Deirdre and that when Deirdre found out, she said, “That’s disgusting. I wouldn’t kiss David if he were the last boy on earth.”

Naturally I was crushed by this news, as any twelve-year-old boy would be, but it got worse when I was made fun of for crying by the cool kids, led by Jamaal. “Loser,” he said. “Only a fat loser would cry about a girl. Crying is for losers.”

That incident stayed with me for many years, as did my belief in his words.

But at our first management retreat, six years ago, my attitude changed overnight. I had gathered five members of the Likeable Media executive team at Foxwoods, a resort and casino in Connecticut, between our New York and Boston offices. The retreat was our first opportunity to get away from the office and plan the company’s strategy for the future. I also saw it as an opportunity to connect more deeply with our leadership team. With my wife as our chief operating officer at the time, I obviously was connected on a very deep level with her. But how connected could the rest of our small leadership team get? I wasn’t sure what to expect, but I hoped to facilitate a two-day session that would bring us all closer together.

To that end, after setting the tone by asking for confidentiality, I began the first evening session with a quick two minutes of silence to help us focus. Then I asked all the participants to share the most difficult experiences they’d ever had and what they had learned from them. I said that I would set an example for what I expected by going first.

I began to talk about my dad’s mental illness when I was a kid and how profoundly it had affected me. I talked about ambulances, shaved heads, and running and screaming in the street. The details of that story aren’t important here. What is important is that as I began to share my profound sadness about how my father’s chronic condition shaped my childhood, I began to cry. As I started crying, the inner voice in my head told me, “Crying is for losers.” But I couldn’t stop. I felt embarrassed and even a little ashamed for crying in front of our entire executive team, but the tears just kept coming.

But then a curious thing happened. As we went around the room, as each person shared the most difficult experience of his or her life and spoke with intense emotional depth and vulnerability, I was suddenly not the only one crying. In fact, three of the five people in our group besides me cried as well. By the end of the session, though our faces were wet and we were emotionally exhausted, we were superconnected as a group. It was downright amazing. One executive even said to me, “This is crazy. I feel closer to you guys right now than I feel to almost all of my friends I’ve known for years!”

Growing up, we’re often encouraged to “buck up” and blink back our tears. People especially encourage boys to be strong and not cry. What’s the most common response to the sight of a child crying? “Don’t cry!” For many if not most people, this leads to associations of embarrassment and even shame with crying, especially if the crying occurs in public or in front of anyone other than a cherished, loved significant other.

However, though we’re all told early and often not to cry, as it turns out, sincerely powerful emotions—especially those powerful enough to cause tears—are quite influential in connecting with other people. If you can get yourself to experience a level of vulnerability with someone to the point where you’re moved to tears, you will be able to relate to that person—and he or she can relate to you—on a much deeper level.

This doesn’t mean you should walk around the office crying all the time, of course. What it does mean is that you should create a safe atmosphere with the people around you at work and at home and get to a place of trust and vulnerability with them so that if tears do come, you can embrace them and celebrate the fact that the tears will bring you closer together.

Though two of the executives I cried with that day are no longer with our company, years later I still feel as connected with them as I do with nearly anyone else on the planet. I’ll be there for them when they need me, and I’m sure they’ll be there for me if I need them.

As it turns out, crying, in fact, is for winners.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down an inventory of your ability to get in touch with your emotions and cry. When were the last five times you cried, and what were the circumstances of each incident?

2. Find a partner (or two) to experiment with, ideally someone you’re not too close with already but whom you trust and who trusts you. Create an opportunity to be vulnerable with each other in a safe place. Think about what it would take for you to feel comfortable crying in this space and in front of this person and then try to replicate those conditions elsewhere.

3. As you continue to encounter people, don’t be afraid to be vulnerable, and if the urge to shed tears overtakes you, don’t fight it or blink it away. That sincere vulnerability connects you to others in a powerful way.





20. The Platinum Rule Always Trumps the Golden Rule


Dave, why in the hell did you do that? Just because you thought you were helping the situation doesn’t mean you were. In fact, you ruined everything!”

I could envision the irate man on the other end of the phone, steam coming out of his ears as he yelled at me. The crazy thing is that I really did think I was helping the situation. As it turns out, though, what I’d actually done was piss off a major business partner.

We had been business partners for over a year, and it was that company’s responsibility to drive sales for our firm. But lately its sales force hadn’t been delivering results. I was frustrated and disappointed, and I wanted to help. In essence, I had my own sales force start offering the product this man’s team had been selling. I truly thought he would be thrilled to have more support selling the product. After all, I reasoned, if one of my partners added more manpower to a joint venture, I would be very happy. If it would make me happy, I figured, it surely would make him happy as well.

The Golden Rule, right? Wrong. He wasn’t happy. In fact, he was furious: angry that I didn’t tell him about my plans in advance, upset that he might be wasting his own resources, and generally disappointed in me and the partnership.

When I thought about it from his perspective, I realized how I might not have been helping but instead might have been seen as meddling or distrusting or just wrong. He had a job to do, and I was interfering with it in his eyes. I didn’t agree with that perspective, of course. Then I realized something even more important: It didn’t matter whether I agreed with it; his perspective was what counted, not mine.

We all grow up learning about the simplicity and power of the Golden Rule: Do unto others as you would want done to you. It’s a splendid concept except for one thing: Everyone is different, and the truth is that in many cases what you’d want done to you is different from what your partner, employee, customer, investor, wife, or child would want done to him or her.

With that in mind, I came up with the Platinum Rule: Do unto others as they would want done to them.

The Platinum Rule is decidedly more difficult than the Golden Rule. It’s easy to know what you want, but it’s much harder to put yourself in another person’s shoes, walk around in them, and understand that person’s perspective.

But although it’s harder to do that, it’s much more powerful in business and in life. The Golden Rule, as great as it is, has limitations, since all people and all situations are different. When you follow the Platinum Rule, however, you can be sure you’re actually doing what the other person wants done and assure yourself of a better outcome.

In the business classic How to Win Friends and Influence People, Dale Carnegie shares the following parable, which I think gets at the heart of what I talk about when I talk about the Platinum Rule:

Personally I am very fond of strawberries and cream, but I have found that for some strange reason, fish prefer worms. So when I went fishing, I didn’t think about what I wanted. I thought about what they wanted. I didn’t bait the hook with strawberries and cream. Rather, I dangled a worm or grasshopper in front of the fish and said: “Wouldn’t you like to have that?”



Why not use the same common sense when you are fishing for people?





If I had dangled a worm or a grasshopper in the business relationship I described, I certainly would have talked to our business partner about my proposed plan and avoided an unfortunate outcome. But I didn’t. I failed to realize the important adage: Platinum trumps gold.

If you’re doing a great job listening, mirroring, and validating, and if you’re being your authentic, vulnerable present self, you should be able to see the other person’s perspective and apply the Platinum Rule without a problem. But even if you’re having trouble figuring out exactly what the other person wants, the beautiful thing is that if you’re in doubt, you can just ask. We all know the adage about what happens when you ASS-ume something, so rather than assuming, simply ask by saying something such as “If I were you, I’d really want X to happen. What do you want to happen?”

Their reply will give you your answer. And then you, too, can go platinum.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down a description of a conflict you’ve had with another person. The entire description should be from the other person’s point of view. Get inside that person’s head and imagine walking in his shoes to accomplish this.

2. When faced with your next decision involving another person, ask yourself, What would she want done? Use the answer to inform your decision.

3. Practice the Platinum Rule. When in doubt about the other person’s perspective, simply ask that person.


