


21. Help People Come Up with Your Idea


I don’t like your idea,” my client said dismissively from across the table. “It’s too risky. Legal would never approve it. It’ll never fly. Sorry.”

Those words, uttered at me from across a basement mall management office, cut like a knife, because I knew I had a great idea for this client, the owner of a shopping mall in Queens, New York. It was in the middle of the recession in 2008, and our idea was to “stimulate the economy” by giving out cash to random people on the streets of New York City with a call to action to come to the mall to win even more cash.

Of course, the idea was that once they got to the mall, whether they won more money or not, they’d shop, and I was confident that giving cash away on the streets of New York would create quite the buzz. Heck, it might even win some awards for being such a clever marketing stunt. But none of that would matter if our client didn’t like the idea enough to green-light it. I felt dejected. Defeated. Demoralized.

Luckily, the next day, I accidentally discovered a key principle in the art of people when I was summoned again into my client’s basement office.

“I have a great idea, Dave,” the client said. “What if we gave out stickers along with the cash? The stickers would have an explicit call to action to visit the mall and also have the address for a website where people could visit to see all of the official rules and regulations. What do you think?”

“I think you have a great idea,” I replied. “So can we make it happen?”

“Well, now that we agree on my idea,” the client responded optimistically, “I think we can get it all approved by legal and upper management. I’ll get back to you quickly on this promotion. I’m really excited about it.”

This client had gone from superpessimistic about my idea to superexcited in less than twenty-four hours. Why? Because somehow in those twenty-four hours she had come to see the whole idea as hers. I simply let her believe that, and the rest was history.

How can you apply this principle to influence others? Though I stumbled upon it in this situation, you can increase the likelihood that someone else will take credit for your idea easily:

1. Never say, “I have an idea” (or “I have a great idea” or any kind of idea) despite my lucky success in this case. Take the pronoun out of the equation.

2. Instead, paint a picture of the broad brushstrokes of your idea or the results of that idea. Let the person you’re trying to influence color within the lines and visualize the rest herself.

3. Alternatively, paint a picture of the converse of your idea. What are the negative implications of not embracing it? In this situation, the other person will envision the downside of not adopting your idea and then come up with a solution to prevent it from happening.

4. When the other person says anything close to your idea, fully embrace it and enthusiastically praise her for her idea.

5. If what she’s proposing is not quite what you want, subtly suggest additions or deletions to her idea, reminding her along the way that she has such a great idea and this might make it even better.



Let’s examine how this could work in two real-life situations. First, imagine you want an associate at work to help you take on a project. If you suggest that he take on the project, he may not jump at the chance excitedly. Instead, you can say, “That project is going to have quite the spotlight on it. I bet our CEO is going to handsomely reward whoever delivers it.” Then sit back and enjoy it when your associate comes up with the idea to help you with it. Alternatively, if you’d prefer to go the negative route, you can say, “I hope I can get this project done by myself. If I can’t, I think the CEO is going to be mighty disappointed and blame our whole team.”

“I have an idea,” your associate will then say. “I can help with the project!”

Perhaps at home you want your husband to do the dishes but don’t want to nag him. “I’ve been thinking,” you might say. “What if we decided to get all paper plates and cups and utensils? It would be a lot more expensive, but we wouldn’t have to do so many dishes anymore.” If instead you wanted to go positive, you might say, “After all our chores are done, let’s snuggle up and order a movie.”

Pretty soon, either way, you might hear from your husband, “I have an idea. Let me go do the dishes.”

I’m sure you’d be okay with that even if it wasn’t your idea.

By the way, we did execute that promotion for the mall. It generated over a million dollars’ worth of earned media for our client and earned our agency its first award, all because of one idea. The question is: Whose idea was it?


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down an idea you have for something that involves another decision maker. Ideally this should be something you haven’t asked for yet or often.

2. Write down the vision you can paint (both positive and negative options) to help the other person come up with your idea.





22. Passion Is Nothing Without Persistence


Dave from Radio Disney! Are you ever going to stop calling me and singing to me?” asked the voice on the other end of the phone, but in a playful, upbeat way.

I was in shock that Brenda Fuentes actually had picked up the phone. Our history quickly flashed back in my head before I knew how to respond.

Brenda Fuentes was a regional marketing manager for Burger King at the time, and I was a local sales rep for Radio Disney Boston. I had been assigned the Burger King account as a target, and my goal had been to get hold of Brenda, gain an understanding of Burger King’s marketing needs in the Boston area, and ultimately try to sell her radio advertising and promotion.

But getting hold of Brenda Fuentes had proved difficult, to say the least. She worked from home, and the first three times I had called, I had gotten her voicemail. I didn’t have her email address and this was the early days of the Internet (2001), and so the only way I could reach her was by phone.

I was determined to get hold of Brenda. Even if she was going to say no to my sales pitch, I wanted to know I had given it my all. I knew how many other salespeople must have been calling her and leaving her voicemails: other radio salespeople, local TV sales reps, print ad reps, and early Internet advertising reps, to name just a few categories of salespeople. With all this competition, how would I ever get her to take my call? Then I thought about the one thing I had that none of those other reps had, and that was Radio Disney.

For me Radio Disney wasn’t just a job; I loved the station and its bubble-gum pop music. It was both fun to listen to and safe for the whole family, including little kids. I decided to get creative in my persistence. I would continue to call Brenda, but I would leave only one voicemail per week. Each time I left a voicemail message, however, I would sing a parody of a Radio Disney hit song into the phone. Eventually, I figured, this creative strategy of leaving her messages to the tunes of popular songs would get her attention and help me stand out from the countless other phone calls and voicemails I assumed she got.

For instance, one week I sang to the tune of an N-SYNC hit, “Call me back, please, won’t you give us a try? Bye Bye Bye.” The next week I left a message to the tune of a popular Britney Spears song, saying, “Oops, I got your voicemail again. Please call me back soon; I can’t wait to talk then.” I called every day and left voicemails every week for seven full weeks, and she never did call me back. Then, finally, in week 8, on call number 37, Brenda Fuentes finally picked up the phone, giving me a chance to sell her.

As it turns out, one of the biggest differentiators between those who successfully influence others and those who don’t is persistence. Many people talk about passion, and of course passion for one’s idea, product, or belief is important, but many people have passion. Far more people have passion than have persistence. This is true for salespeople, for entrepreneurs, and for anyone chasing anything or anyone else whom many are pursuing. When it comes to the art of people, persistence is what makes the difference.

Persistence is defined as “firm or obstinate continuance in a course of action in spite of difficulty or opposition.” In other words, when the going gets tough, you keep trying.

But persistence isn’t trying things twice or three times or even four times. Persistence is trying until you get what you want or go down swinging. Persistence is continuing until you are certain beyond a shadow of a doubt that it’s time to move on and collect the lessons from the failure. Persistence is trying until you drop. Persistence is thirty-seven phone calls.





I had refused to give up on Brenda Fuentes and Burger King. Sure, along the way there were days when I felt dejected and demoralized. I was made fun of by colleagues for my silly songs. There were moments when not only did I begin to doubt that passion and persistence would get me results, I began to worry that all they were getting me was a lot of wasted time and embarrassment.

And then, on call number 37, Brenda Fuentes answered the phone. But this wasn’t your average opening sales call. After all, she already knew me pretty well from all those voicemails. Now at last it was my opportunity to get to know her better by asking good questions, listening, validating, and letting her come up with my great ideas to help Burger King market itself.

Forty-five minutes later, we had a follow-up plan for me to present a proposal for Radio Disney advertising and promotions around twelve upcoming Burger King grand openings. One week later, I had signed an agreement for over $50,000 in revenue, which would generate over $10,000 in commissions for me. Even more interesting is that fourteen years later, I still have a great working relationship with Brenda Fuentes.

All from seven singing voicemails and thirty-seven phone calls. If I had called only thirty-six times, it probably never would have happened. But I persisted until there were thirty-seven, and everything changed.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down something that you really want from someone but that won’t be easy to get. (Who would you like to meet more than anyone? What client would you like to land? What business idol would you like to have lunch with?)

2. Use your passion and creativity to come up with a plan to pursue this person doggedly in an inventive, original way.

3. Put your plan into action and be persistent. Make as many attempts as it takes to make this vision a reality.





23. Don’t Sell It, Storytell It


My whole family of twenty-one people was sitting down to eat Thanksgiving dinner. It was one of the most stressful moments of my life, but the stress wasn’t coming from getting together with my extended family.

You see, I had been bidding for the URL storytellit.com, and the auction was literally about to expire: The auction’s end date and time was Thanksgiving Day at 4:30 P.M. My company had developed an app to help small businesses tell stories across the social Web, and I had spent the previous month trying to secure a domain name on the Web for it.

This project was harder than it sounds. We originally had called the app Storyteller, but when I called the owners of Storyteller.com, they told me the name wasn’t for sale even though it wasn’t being used. Thinking, “Everything’s for sale at one price or another,” I asked the owner, “What if I hypothetically offered $100 million for the domain name?”

“Not for sale,” he replied, and hung up on me. Thus, I had to conclude that our app would not be called Storyteller.

Next, I went to the owners of Storytell.com, a lovely older couple who told us we could buy their domain for $100,000. That was a huge bargain compared with $100 million, but for a start-up it was a price that was too high to pay.

We next turned to storytellit.com, where it turned out there was an auction taking place for the domain name. Excited, I put in a bid of $12, only to be immediately bettered at $17. I didn’t want to start a bidding war, so I resolved to bide my time and then put in my best bid and try to win the domain right at the end of the auction.

The only problem was that the end of the auction was literally the same time as the start of my Thanksgiving dinner. I couldn’t leave something this important to anyone else, and so at 4:15 P.M. on Thanksgiving Day 2013, I sat in front of a computer while ten feet away my family members began to sit down to a mouthwatering feast.

I thought we had the winning bid at a mere $22 until one minute before the end of the auction, when someone swooped in and bid $27. That bid also apparently extended the auction for five minutes. “No problem,” I thought. I proceeded to bid against this other person while my turkey proceeded to get cold.

Bids of $32, $50, $100, and $150 immediately followed, and I was beginning to wonder whether we’d ever have a domain name for our new app. Meanwhile, my family was beginning to wonder if I’d ever join them at the dinner table. It was a tense situation, to say the least, as each time a higher bid was made, it extended the auction another five minutes.

Then, magically, my bid went unanswered. For $165 we became the proud owners of storytellit.com. But the lesson here isn’t about how to win an auction. It’s about why I wanted that URL so badly in the first place. The lesson is about the power of stories.

Nobody likes to be sold to, but everybody likes a good story. Storytelling persuades, storytelling compels, and storytelling conveys emotion to people in a way that nothing else can.

Storytelling is a much better communication tool than selling.

Storytelling actually sells products, services, and ideas better than selling can.

Luckily, in today’s online world, you don’t have to be a Hollywood producer or a published author or have a podium to sell a story. You can be a salesperson sharing an ebook on LinkedIn. You can be a blogger sharing your story on Tumblr or Medium. You can be a dentist sharing a photo of a smiling patient on Facebook. You can be a jewelry store owner sharing a picture of an engagement ring that a customer just bought on Twitter.

Everyone can use social media to tell stories.



Moreover, social media allows you to tell stories at scale, potentially reaching exponentially more people than ever before. But even if you’re one-on-one with someone or in front of four to six people in a boardroom, telling stories captivates people in a way that no other kind of talking does.

Whether it’s online or offline, storytelling influences others. By the way, that story about storytellit worked, too: I told it on my blog as part of the launch plan for the product storytellit. The article generated 50,000 views and thousands of downloads and performed far better than any ad would have in selling our product.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down something you want to sell someone. If you are not a salesperson, think of an idea you want to get someone to adopt (e.g., getting your child to make her bed).

2. Think of a personal story that’s relevant to the idea you want to convey. Write down the story: beginning, middle, and end, characters, emotions, and all the rest.

3. Practice telling the story to another person (not selling).

4. When you’re ready, try sharing the story with the person you want to sell and/or writing the story publicly on a blog.





24. The Paradox of Persuasion: Shut Up


Dave, look, I like your passion and excitement for Dunkin’ Donuts, and it sounds like you have a lot of really interesting, exciting things to offer with Radio Disney,” said Shannon, a longtime marketing lead for the Dunkin’ Donuts brand who was based in Massachusetts. “But I can barely get a word in here. How can you learn about our specific marketing needs if you do all the talking in this conversation?”

I was so embarrassed when I heard this. I had worked really hard as a persistent salesperson for Disney by incessantly calling both Shannon and her gatekeeper assistant, Betty, to get this face-to-face opportunity, and now I was blowing it by talking too much.

That was a mistake I made often early in my sales career, and it’s one I still occasionally make as an entrepreneur and CEO. There is no question that many of the best salespeople and the best leaders are filled with passion, positivity, ideas, and enthusiasm. Those qualities serve us well in many cases. Our passion and enthusiasm are contagious, for instance, and as a result many people want to be around us.

But these strengths sometimes come with a nasty side effect. Often, precisely because we get so passionate and excited about an idea, an opportunity, or a product, we can’t seem to stop running our mouths about it. The result is that once the people who wanted to be around us so badly are actually around us, they pretty quickly start wishing we’d just shut up and listen. As Dale Carnegie wisely explained:

If you want to know how to make people shun you and laugh at you behind your back and even despise you, here is the recipe: Never listen to anyone for long. Talk incessantly about yourself. If you have an idea while the other person is talking, don’t wait for him or her to finish: bust right in and interrupt in the middle of a sentence.



The point is that to influence others, you have to know when to shut up and listen.

It may sound like the ultimate paradox that listening to others is the key to influencing them, but for those who are not yet convinced, here is a recap of all the reasons listening is so much more powerful than talking:

1. Listening allows you to understand the person you want to influence so that you can tap into his unique goals, dreams, needs, and wants.

2. Listening gives the other person an opportunity to feel heard, which often leads to feeling appreciated and respected and even liked or loved. It is much easier to influence someone who’s feeling this way.

3. Listening gives you an opportunity to think. We can listen three times faster than we can talk, and so listening gives us extra time to think, prepare, and reframe what we want on the basis of what we’re hearing.

4. Listening, along with mirroring and validation, helps lonely people feel connected and great. This is even more contagious and powerful than feeling great around a positive, high-energy talker.

5. Listening increases the chances that the other person will talk about her pain or her organization’s pain, that is, the problem that you can try to solve.



No matter what you have to say, offer, sell, or convince someone of, it is always more effective to demonstrate genuine, authentic interest in the other person by listening and asking questions and then listening some more than it is to talk at that person. Of course, eventually you have to talk to share your idea or product or otherwise make your case, but if you’ve laid the groundwork by listening, that part is actually surprisingly easy.

Recently, I was selling our latest company’s software product, Likeable Local, over the phone to Mike, the brother of a dentist who happened to be a retired police officer. The software was made for small businesses, especially dentists, which at the time was the only vertical on which we were focused.

I had an online demo of the software ready to show and had booked thirty minutes with the officer, who I had been told helped do the marketing for his brother’s dental practice. After a brief introduction to let him know who I was and how the product had come about, I began asking questions. I was genuinely interested in how a retired police officer could end up doing the marketing for a dental practice, and so I asked questions about it, got more curious, and asked more questions, all the while sitting back and listening instead of selling.

Twenty-five minutes in, I heard the following from Mike: “You know what, I’m running out of time, but this has been great. Let’s get started with this software. I can’t wait to really dig in and see what it’s all about. Just let me know how billing works.”

I hadn’t even had to demo the product, and the deal was done.

It sounds crazy to say that all you have to do is shut up and listen and you’ll be able to influence people to do what you want. But just as I persuaded Mike to purchase my software without even showing him what he’d be buying, thousands of decisions to buy are made every day by people who don’t realize how they’ve been influenced to make that decision. Often they’ve been influenced by the people around them, who are simply listening quietly and asking good questions.

Thankfully, that day with Shannon, I reacted quickly and positively to the embarrassment of being called out. I recovered, asked questions, shut up and listened, and soon afterward enjoyed closing the largest contract I had ever sold at that time.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down something you want to sell someone. If you are not a salesperson, think of an idea you want to get someone to adopt (e.g., getting your child to clean her room).

2. Plan to spend thirty minutes with the person you want to sell, focusing solely on listening, asking questions, and getting that person to talk about her pain and problems.

3. Set up the time and spend it listening to the other person (not selling).

4. Note the results. How can you become a better listener?





25. Walk into Every Room Like You Own It


Okay, Dave, here’s your ticket. Just look straight at the security guard, make eye contact, give a nod, and walk straight in.”

Those were the tips given to me by Gary N, my short-time business manager, just seconds before I walked into the 2003 American Music Awards in Los Angeles, California. I could not have been more excited. I recently had fashioned myself a D-list celebrity after starring on the reality show Paradise Hotel on Fox, but this was an A-list event. After seeing my show, Gary had reached out to me to help me get a hosting gig and had said he was very well connected in the entertainment industry. Not knowing any better and lured by the prospect of getting famous, I had told Gary he could represent me, and now he was taking me to one of the biggest events in Hollywood.

In we walked, and a few seconds later I heard Gary say, “Paula! How are you?” He was talking to Paula Abdul, who was right beside Randy Jackson, both of American Idol at that time. I was a little starstruck but mostly remained composed when he introduced me.

“So great to meet you guys. Big fan of the show, though I can promise you that’s one reality show you’ll never find me on as a contestant,” I joked, having fun.

“Come with me,” said Gary, and the next thing I knew we were in a celebrity gifting area. I had heard of this practice but didn’t know the details: Essentially, celebrities went from station to station getting free stuff from vendors who wanted them to talk about their products. I walked around and filled a bag with all kinds of great stuff: headphones, cologne, and jewelry, to name a few items. It was incredible!

Then, as I was walking out of the gifting station, I saw her: Standing before me was the most beautiful creature I had ever laid eyes on. It was the actress Jessica Alba, and at that point I finally lost control.

“You…you…you…” I stammered. “You’re so beautiful.”

“Thank you,” she said, and promptly walked away.

“Wow,” I thought. “That was simultaneously both amazing and humiliating.”

“Come on, Dave, let’s go find some empty seats,” said Gary. “The show’s going to start soon.”

I was confused. Find some seats? Weren’t we assigned seats on our tickets?

Little did I know at the time that the ticket I had been handed by Gary wasn’t a valid ticket to the American Music Awards at all. I looked down at the ticket only to see “Crew” stamped on it—and “2002.” Since it was 2003 and we weren’t crew, I was pretty concerned.

“Don’t worry,” Gary said. “We’re already in; that was the hard part. Now we just need to find empty seats. Shouldn’t be a problem. Everyone gets so drunk at this event, they’re barely in their seats at all.”

I hadn’t yet gotten over my shock at seeing Jessica Alba, and now I was even more shocked. How could we get in if the tickets were bogus?

“I told you to make eye contact and nod. I didn’t want you to worry; I wanted you to be confident. You were, and now we’re here. Now let’s go get some seats.”

As we made our way toward “our” seats (we ended up in the nineteenth row for the first half of the show and the sixth row for the rest), I didn’t know whether to be furious or exhilarated. But I knew there was a lesson to be learned from this experience:

Walk with confidence.

My wife and I call it WWC for short. What WWC means is that you walk into a room as if you belong. Make eye contact. Nod your head. Say hello with enthusiasm. When you look the part and act the part, suddenly you are the part.

Some people call this “fake it till you make it,” but I don’t like the idea of inauthenticity. I like the idea of confidence (not cockiness or arrogance, of course, but quiet confidence with your posture, your eyes, and your walk).

Now, obviously I’m not advocating trying to walk with confidence into the American Music Awards, the White House, or the Super Bowl. Heck, if I’d known I didn’t have a valid ticket, there’s no way I would have been able to walk right in like that. But you can use this strategy to own a room. WWC into every event you go to and every meeting you walk into and you’ll be more likely to walk out a winner. Walking with confidence will help you influence gatekeepers whether they’re security guards at award shows or receptionists at offices. Tell yourself you don’t belong and you won’t. Tell yourself you totally belong and you will.

I had a few embarrassing seconds with Jessica Alba that night, but that’s a moment I’ll never forget. And I owe it all to Gary N and a little WWC.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down an environment, event, or location at which you typically feel nervous or out of place.

2. Make a plan to WWC into the room the next time you visit that location. Include your clothes, accessories, posture, and anything else you’ll need to increase your confidence.

3. Walk with confidence into the location. Be sure to make eye contact, hold your head up, and own the room like the rock star you know you are.





26. You Never Get What You Don’t Ask For


So, Dave,” said the frustrated young woman who had been working harder than anyone else on the sales floor and thought she’d been doing everything right. “Why am I not seeing more success in sales?”

Nicole was a good salesperson for our software company, Likeable Local. Good but not great. What made the difference between good and great for her was one very simple thing, the same thing that often makes the difference between successful people and very successful people. It took listening to her on a product demo for me to find that out.

I sat in on a demo Nicole had with John, the owner of a jewelry store in Boca Raton, Florida. He was an older gentleman, uncomfortable in general with social media, and Nicole did an excellent job of building rapport early, listening, mirroring, and validating his concerns. He was wary of doing social media on his own but was not sure how much time or money he had for software like ours. Then Nicole began showing John our product via the Web and did a great job of explaining the key features that answered his concerns.

Everything was going quite well until the end of the call.

“Okay,” said Nicole. “So do you have any questions for me?”

“Nope,” John said. “I’ll think about it and call you back later.”

“Okay, sounds good,” Nicole said. “I’ll call you back tomorrow if I don’t hear from you. Bye.”

She hung up the phone and looked up at me, exasperated at not having made the sale but perhaps clued in to what I was going to say.

“Almost a perfect job, Nicole!” I cheered. “So what did go wrong there?”

“I don’t know,” she replied. “Everything was going so well right up until the end. I guess I’m just struggling with closing sales.”

“Let me ask you something,” I said. “Did you actually ask him for his business?”

“I guess not,” Nicole said. “I mean, I listened and then told him everything I thought he needed to know to make a decision.”

“But did you actually ask him to make a decision, Nicole?” I was getting frustrated at this point but was confident we were getting somewhere.

“Well, I guess I didn’t,” she said.

It may seem obvious, but many people make this mistake.

They don’t actually ask for what they want.

And guess what? You probably won’t get what you want unless you ask for it.

Sure, you still have to do all the legwork in advance. And sure, you’re not always going to get a “yes” when you ask. But you’re much more likely to get a “yes” if you actually ask for it than if you wait for it to materialize out of nowhere.



And no matter what, if you don’t ask for it, you’re not going to get it.

Many people are so afraid to get a “no” that they don’t ask for a “yes.” The ironic thing here is that they’re virtually guaranteeing getting a “no” by not asking for a “yes.”

Embrace the fear of “no.” Then ask for the “yes.”

Nicole was doing an excellent job as a salesperson, but with one major flaw: She wasn’t asking for the “yes.” Once she got some training from her manager, Nicole quickly became one of the top salespeople in the company, doubling her earnings within six months. It turned out that getting the “yes” was simple. She just had to ask for it.

No ask is too crazy.





Here’s another example of how simply asking for something—even something that seems totally crazy and audacious—can get you the “yes” you want. In 2005, shortly after Carrie and I got engaged, we had a problem. I really wanted to have a large wedding, the kind where I could invite everyone I knew to share in our joyous celebration. But Carrie and I didn’t have enough money to host a traditional New York wedding and invite everyone we knew.

Luckily for me, Carrie, a marketer by trade and temperament, had a brilliant out-of-the-box idea: We would partner with a minor league baseball team to create a wedding-themed promotion, sell sponsorships, and get a ballpark wedding paid for—a wedding that we could invite thousands of people to attend. Sponsors could get great value in the promotion, which probably would generate buzz and media attention, and we could get a huge wedding at virtually no cost to us. As a die-hard baseball fan, I thought the idea was perfect, but of course it would require persuading willing partners to sign on to make it work.

We pitched the Brooklyn Cyclones, a minor league affiliate of the New York Mets, whose general manager, Steve Cohen, fortunately liked the idea enough to give it a shot. Next, we successfully pitched 1-800-Flowers.com to sponsor our flowers, Smirnoff to sponsor our alcohol, Entenmann’s to sponsor our desserts, After Hours to sponsor our tuxedos, and several other local and national sponsors, totaling about $100,000 in trade value. That wasn’t all; by also asking sponsors to donate cash to the David Wright Foundation, we were able to raise $20,000 for the National Multiple Sclerosis Society through our wedding.

To most people, asking companies such as 1-800-Flowers.com and Entenmann’s to sponsor a wedding would seem preposterous if it occurred to them at all. After all, these are major corporations that sponsor big-ticket events such as the World Series and the Super Bowl. Why would they be interested in such small potatoes? Yet they were, and although I still can’t be completely certain why they said yes, there is one thing I am sure of: We never would have gotten them to sponsor our dream wedding if we hadn’t asked, because you don’t get what you don’t ask for.

That is how on July 8, 2006, I got married to the love of my life in front of five hundred friends and family members (and five thousand strangers) on a baseball field where instead of walking down the aisle we walked underneath the bats held up by the Cyclones. It was an amazing wedding with an amazing partner.

As it turned out, the wedding was also an amazing marketing and public relations promotion for our vendors and sponsors. It generated about $20 million in earned media through coverage on CBS’s The Early Show, ABC’s World News Tonight, CNBC’s On the Money, the New York Times, and hundreds of blogs. Our vendors were so thrilled with their return on investment, in fact, that a couple of them asked us what we could do for them next. We couldn’t get married again, so we started our first company instead.

You never get what you don’t ask for.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down three things you want from people right now but haven’t been asking for. They can include things as small as a sale from a new customer or as large as a raise from your boss or more attention from your husband.

2. Let go of any fears, embarrassment, or shame you have about asking for things.

3. Set yourself up with opportunities, in person or via a phone or video call, to ask these three things of people. You can do this. Remember, a “no” is better than not asking for what you want.

4. Dream up something big that you want from someone, even if you think he’ll never say yes to the idea. Ask for it. What’s the worst that could happen?


