27. It’s Better to Be Happy Than Right


Why do you always need to be right?” she growled.

My wife, Carrie, was not in a good mood. We had been arguing about childcare, and I was being very stubborn about a baby-sitter I wanted to let go because recently she had been texting constantly on the job, including while she was driving our kids around town. I wanted to fire her immediately, and Carrie wanted to give her a chance to correct the behavior before considering that.

I had been relentless in my argument. “Carrie, it’s not safe for our children,” I had said. “Carrie, we need to do right by them,” I had said. “Carrie, she’s not going to be able to change,” I had said. And though my voice had remained calm, I hadn’t given an inch on what I wanted.

“Dave, let me ask you something,” my wife said. “Is it better to be happy or right?”

“Trick question,” I snarled back. “It’s better to be both happy and right!”

At first I was proud of my clever retort. Then I thought about the situation a bit more. As strongly as I felt about my position, I wasn’t going to change my wife’s mind then and there. It just wasn’t going to happen. This baby-sitter had been with us for over three years and had become very close with us, truly part of our extended family. Although I believe in hiring slow and firing fast, the reality is that it takes time for most people to come to a decision and execute it.

I had to make a decision right then and there: be happy or be right. It’s hard for me to accept not winning any argument, but I chose the former.

“Okay, I understand how you feel,” I said. “She’s become part of our family, and it’s very hard to make a decision to let her go.” I was mirroring Carrie’s argument back at her (we talked about this in Chapter 15). “You must feel so conflicted,” I said, validating her (see Chapter 16).

“You know how I feel, so I don’t need to repeat that,” I continued. “I’ll just say I support you in every way possible, and I’m going to choose to be happy right now.” I smiled, nodded, hugged my wife, and calmly walked away.

It was difficult, because I’m not always perfect at following my own advice when it comes to communicating with my wife. But I pulled it off that time: I walked away, and instead of continuing to try to change Carrie’s mind, I made sure she felt supported even if I disagreed with her. I chose being happy over being right.

Then, the very next afternoon, a funny thing happened. Carrie had been working from home that day while the sitter was there with our kids after school. Apparently, the sitter continued to text incessantly with the children (and my wife!) right in front of her. I received a phone call from my wife minutes later.

“Dave, we’ve got to let the sitter go,” she said. “I’ve seen the texting with my own two eyes now. It’s too much. Let’s make the move now.” I didn’t argue, and we discharged the sitter the next day.

Did I change Carrie’s mind? Maybe. But it’s more likely that she came to the conclusion that I was right on her own. Did I change my own mindset about the situation? Absolutely. The thing is, it’s nearly impossible to change someone’s mind. Dale Carnegie put it this way, and I agree: “A man convinced against his will is of the same opinion still.” I’d even go so far as to say that arguing usually just helps the other person solidify his opposition to you. In contrast, it’s much easier to state your case and then change your own mindset—to choose happiness—and let the other party sit with the situation until she comes around to your position on her own.

To win influence, don’t change the other person’s mind. Just change your own mindset.



Remind me of this the next time I get into an argument with my wife, won’t you?


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down an account of the last time you got into an argument with someone. Did you choose being right or being happy?

2. Prepare to choose happiness the next time you get into an argument with that person. This definitely takes a lot of mental preparation. Be sure to do the mental legwork ahead of time so that you’re ready in the heat of the moment.

3. When the next argument happens, calmly state your case and then say you are choosing to be happy over being right, smile, and politely walk away. You might be surprised to find that you get what you want after all.





28. Always Manage Up


It was 9:05 A.M. when I walked into the Radio Disney office on a cold February day in 2002. I knew I was supposed to be in at nine on the dot, as my new manager, Sam, had recently made explicitly clear. But I still struggled with mornings, and I had had a late night, and there had been traffic on the way into Boston from the northern suburb of Somerville, from which I was commuting. Anyway, forget excuses: Why should it matter if the top salesperson at the company is a few minutes late as long as he can perform?

It mattered to my boss, apparently. As I hustled past his office to my desk, I glanced to my left and saw him at his desk, staring at his watch and shaking his head. I knew I was in trouble.

Moments later, as I was settling in at my desk, there was a knock at my door. “Can I have a minute with you in private, please?” my boss asked.

“When you’re late, it’s a sign of disrespect,” Sam said. “It doesn’t matter whether you’re thirty minutes late or three minutes late. I’ve told you this before: Being on time is very important to me. It’s disrespectful to your colleagues when you’re late. It’s disrespectful to me.”

That was when it hit me. My manager’s obsession with my punctuality wasn’t about me; it was about him. He was a relatively new sales manager and wanted to see the whole sales team respect him, especially his punky young hotshot sales guy. When he saw his top salesperson showing up late, even by just a few minutes, I’m sure he was concerned that the whole team would lose respect for him. Even if this wasn’t conscious or intentional, it was an important dynamic. As soon as it clicked, I knew what I had to do: make it less about me and more about him.

“I hear you,” I said, and then mirrored and validated him. “You must feel awfully disrespected by my showing up late.”

He was nodding, and I could tell I was making progress. “How can I show you more respect?” I asked.

“Well, for one thing, you can be on time!” Sam snapped back. So much for progress.

“I get it,” I replied. “Don’t be late. I will work on that,” I said, and he went on his way.

But I knew that not only did I need to work on my lateness, I needed to work on making him feel more respected by me. I needed to manage up.

The next three weeks, I worked hard to get to work and sales meetings on time. But more important, I worked hard to make sure I was showing respect to Sam and showing others how much I respected him. I listened to him without interruption, told him when I thought he had good ideas, and showed him that I was taking his directions and advice seriously. I managed up.

Then, three weeks later, I asked Sam for a few minutes of his time.

“Sam, I know punctuality is very important to you, right?”

“Yes, Dave. And I have noticed that since the last time I spoke to you, you’ve been very punctual. Thank you for that,” he said.

“My pleasure, Sam,” I said. “I have a lot of respect for you. I’ve been thinking. Is it the punctuality that’s more important or the hours put in in a day?”

“Both are important,” Sam replied. “You set an example for the whole sales team, and when you’re late, it sets a bad example for the whole team. You understand that, right?”

“I do,” I replied. “I totally understand. Say, I’ve been thinking—I’m just not a morning person, Sam. But I have a lot of respect for you and want to do right by you. I’m happy to work late every night, so instead of staying until five, I can stay until six or six-thirty.” I paused.

“Hey, I have an idea,” Sam replied. “What if you started at nine-thirty and worked until six instead of nine to five-thirty? That way you’d never be late!”

“Great idea, Sam,” I answered enthusiastically. “You’re the best!”

From that point, I showed up at the office at nine-fifteen, nine twenty-five, nine-thirty—sometimes I even showed up at nine forty-five—and it still didn’t matter. Incredibly, I had gotten Sam to make a complete reversal in his attitude about what time I showed up at the office. How did that happen?

I took the focus off me and put it on him. I also met his needs (in this case, respect), I managed up, and I let him come up with the idea to solve the problem (see Chapter 21). Those four things combined to create a solution that got my manager off my back about being late and kept both of us happy and productive.

When can you use this technique? It comes in particularly handy whenever someone has a problem with you or something you’re doing, especially if it’s your boss. The key idea is take the focus off you and whatever you’re supposedly doing wrong, figure out what the other person really wants or needs, give that to him, and eventually let him make the correct decision (that is, give you what you want).

Note that managing up doesn’t mean kissing butt or being a yes man. It means having a very solid understanding of what’s important to your boss and the leaders at your organization and then paying attention to delivering on what’s specifically important to them. Think of managing up as the “Platinum Rule” for organizations: Think like your manager and you will reap the benefits of getting your way when you need it most.

I went on to work productively in sales for Sam for another year after that incident. We didn’t always see eye to eye on things, but he always respected me, and he never again looked down at his watch—even the day I showed up to the office at ten-fifteen.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down the name of the person at work you need to manage up to. If you’re the CEO, it might be a partner, an investor, or even a client.

2. Write down the five things that are most important to that person. (If you don’t know these things, ask around.)

3. Make sure that in your day-to-day work you are focused on doing the things most important to your manager. Pay special attention to making sure that both your manager and your peers see you doing those things well.

4. Then go back to your manager and ask for the one thing—whether it’s a raise, a promotion, or permission to come in a little late in the morning—that you most want.





29. Go Beyond the Humblebrag


So excited!!! We won the WOMMIE award for word-of-mouth marketing excellence for the second year in a row!”

That Facebook update from me, unfortunately, was followed quickly by a private message that read: “Enough already, Dave! I know you won an award or two, I know you’re excited about it all, but stop shoving all this self-promotion in our faces!”

This Facebook message in the fall of 2009 from a casual friend stung, probably because there was some truth to it. Our company had just won its second consecutive word-of-mouth marketing award for a campaign I was really proud of, and so I had been sharing the news proudly and liberally on Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn. I guess this person was connected to me on all three networks, had heard the news at least three times, and was sick of hearing from me about the award.

Still, I was upset and confused about the situation. On the one hand, I was genuinely proud of our work and wanted to share the good news. Plus, I’ve always believed in the art of self-promotion, and social media seemed like a great way to put the word out and get attention. On the other hand, I certainly didn’t want to get attention for being an egomaniacal braggart.

I took the feedback to heart and tried to develop a more modest attitude toward posting to social media. In other words, when I had good news to share, I still shared it, but I tried to be humble, grateful, and not overly self-promotional in my social media updates. Meanwhile, unknown to me, the word humblebrag was being added to the Urban Dictionary. I’d never heard that term, but as it turned out, it described exactly what I’d begun doing. For example, when we won the same award for the third consecutive year, I shared it, but this time my social media updates looked like this:

“So honored and humbled to have received the WOMMIE Award for the 3rd year in a row! Thanks to the whole team @Likeable Media!”

On the surface, this seemed a lot better than the more traditional social media brag. I was proud but grateful and appreciative at the same time. The problem with sharing accomplishments on social media (aka bragging), however, is there’s no tone or body language to help convey your meaning, and that means it’s very easy for people to lose the context and not get your intention right. As a result, it’s next to impossible to establish a voice that won’t turn some people off when you share, especially if you are sharing information that could, in the absence of context, be interpreted as bragging.

Thus, I wasn’t that surprised when just three minutes after sharing the news about our third consecutive award, I received a private message from a different friend on Facebook: “Dude, what’s with the humblebrag? Just gloat, man, no need to fake being humble when you are dominating the award circuit!”

I felt exasperated, as if I couldn’t win for losing, and I couldn’t believe that humblebrag was even a thing. It seemed as though no matter what I did, I couldn’t share my joy about accomplishments without offending some people. Did this mean no more sharing such accomplishments? For some, the answer to that question might be yes. For me, it was no, with two key caveats:

1. Be unafraid but as authentic (noncontrived) as possible in sharing accomplishments on social media.

2. Heap lots of authentic praise on others via social media as well.



The first point is simple: You’re going to be judged by people no matter what, so just be your authentic self and stand behind that authenticity no matter what people may say.

The second point is important, too: Be quick to praise others in social media (and face-to-face). Authentic praise and compliments make people feel good, help them feel more comfortable in sharing their accomplishments, and, most important, show the world that you’re not all about yourself and are just as apt to sing another person’s praises as your own.

The art of self-promotion has always been both important and challenging, and social media has made it even more so. It was over eighty years ago that Dale Carnegie wrote that the secret of success is to “speak ill of no man…and speak all the good I know of everybody,” and those words couldn’t be truer today. After all, open up your Facebook, Twitter, or LinkedIn app on any particular day and you’ll see one noisy update after another, with marketers and self-promoters dominating news feeds. It can be tough to cut through all that chatter, let alone do it in a way that feels modest and not too bragging or egotistical. But it can be done by following the two simple steps discussed above.



The challenge for you, then, is to scroll through your social media news feeds looking for opportunities to praise, congratulate, and promote others: your friends, colleagues, and followers. Be generous in retweeting people. Promote the heck out of everyone.

Two great things happen when you do this. First, when you authentically have something of your own to promote, you’ll be much less likely to be judged as a braggart—or, worse, a humblebraggart—by others. Second, you’ll have a line of people excited to promote you and return the favors from all those times you promoted them.

The musician Taylor Swift is my favorite example of someone who promotes herself and her accomplishments authentically while continuing to support and promote others, including her many fans. Here are a couple of her tweets that do just that:





You may not be as famous as Taylor Swift, but you certainly can be as authentic and as generous as she is. And, like her, you can get beyond what others might call bragging or humblebragging and share your own success publicly while changing people’s perception of you for the better.

Tune in to my Twitter feed today and you’ll see me unabashedly sharing my latest work or achievement, but you’ll also see me promote just about anyone who asks. Don’t believe me? Just tweet me (@DaveKerpen) with a link to your latest work or accomplishment with the hashtag #artofpeople, and I’ll gladly retweet you to all my followers.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Take a look at your last twenty social media updates and do a quick audit. How much are you promoting yourself versus promoting others? Ideally, you want to strike a balance of no more than 30 percent promoting yourself and at least 70 percent promoting others.

2. Make a plan to increase both your own authentic self-promotion and your promotion of others in your life.

3. Audit your next twenty social media updates and compare them with the previous twenty. Have you helped people see you as someone willing to praise others and unafraid to share his or her own accomplishments?





30. Make Time Your Friend


I wish you had more time for me.”

Have you ever heard this from someone important to you at home or at work? I have countless times. As it turns out, time is our most precious asset, and although everyone wants your time, you need to protect it fiercely if you are to be successful. For the most part, people always want more of your time than you are able to give.

As a social media entrepreneur and author, I get contacted each week by dozens of people who want my help or want to work with me. In a way this is by design: I put myself out there, and since responsiveness is so important to winning friends and influencing people on social media—as well as being one of my personal core values—I reply to each and every person who asks for my help. Before I got as crazy busy as I am today, I used to meet with anyone and everyone who reached out to me.

Even if you’re not as active in social media as I am, if you’re a leader, you’re probably often solicited by salespeople, asked for help by random colleagues, and presented with many requests—or demands—for your time on a daily basis. If you’re at all like me, you try to be nice—or helpful—and take every call, reply to every email, or even agree to every meeting.

I had a powerful experience a year and a half ago that changed all that. I had attended a conference hosted by the Entrepreneurs’ Organization’s founder, Verne Harnish, on strategic business planning. Verne is a brilliant mentor and trusted friend, and something he said that day really stuck with me: “You can understand your professional strategy with one quick look at your weekly calendar.”

Naturally, I immediately took a look at my weekly calendar on my phone and saw that it was filled up with meetings and phone calls with people I didn’t know who probably would make no difference to my business or my life. Sure, I might be able to help them, but my first priority is my family and my second is my employees, investors, and customers. Why was I sacrificing time with them to take all those meetings with strangers? Not only did the meetings and calls take me away from my focus and from time spent on the things that mattered; thinking about them before and afterward continually distracted me.

After that, I decided to start a program I call “office hours.” Each week, for two hours on Thursdays, I now meet with people who have reached out to ask for help, fitting them into fifteen-minute time slots.

This includes students, former employees, wannabe entrepreneurs, and salespeople. It even includes readers (you can sign up at http://www.ScheduleDave.com). I still reply to and try to help each and every person who comes my way. But once the time slots are full, they are full, and people have to sign up for the following week’s office hours, or the next week’s hours, and so on.

This has made it a lot easier for me to say no to meeting requests or at least say, “Not until my next office hours opening three months from now.” As it turns out, this method not only helps me protect my time but also functions as a terrific filtering system. The people who genuinely want help end up meeting with me when my schedule allows, and the others tend to go away.

You don’t have to create an office hours system and meet with everyone who wants your time, of course. But you do need to figure out a way to prioritize your time, the most precious asset you’ve got, carefully. Whether it’s saying no to people who are less important to you or limiting the time you agree to give them, the reality is that you can prioritize only a limited number of relationships in your life at work and at home. Are you totally happy with the way you’re prioritizing your time today?

With my office hours system, some people may have to wait awhile to chat with me, but if they are willing to wait, they’ll eventually get their shot during those two hours a week. More important, my calendar is now more reflective of my priorities, as 95 percent of my workweek is spent on what matters to my employees, investors, and customers.

Most important, I’ve been able to change my system so that I also have time for the people in my personal life who are the most important to me: my wife, family, and friends. I even have a little open time on my calendar to think and write.

Since my quick creation of office hours and a scheduling system, people have stopped saying “I wish you had more time for me.” Instead, I’ve started hearing “Thanks for prioritizing me.”


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Take a look at your weekly online or offline calendar for the last three weeks (seven days, four hours a day). When you analyze the time you spent with each person and doing each activity, are you happy with how you’re prioritizing your time?

2. Develop a system—feel free to borrow my office hours system or create one of your own—to limit or curb the less important tasks and conversations in your life and increase the time you spend on the more important ones. Check in with the people you want to spend more time with and let them know what you’re doing.

3. One month from now, review how well your new system is going. Check in with the people you wanted to spend more time with and ask them what they think. Recheck your calendar and note any differences in the way you’re prioritizing your time with people.

