31. Be a Model


You’ve got this, Mr. Kerpen,” said Mrs. Mary Ann Wilson, my supervising teacher, to me just before I began my very first math lesson as a student teacher in her first-grade classroom. “Just remember to model it, then model it again, and then let the kids try on their own.”

“Oh, and one more thing, Mr. Kerpen. I’m going to go run a couple of errands. Don’t worry; I’ll still be in the building. Be back in twenty minutes. Break a leg!”

With that, she walked out of the room, leaving me completely alone with twenty-two six-year-olds to whom I was about to teach my first lesson. I was caught off guard and definitely was scared. But I was also determined to do what Mrs. Wilson and I had practiced: modeling.

I gathered the children in the meeting area and began a mini lesson in subtraction. I showed them an example they could relate to (starting with ten cookies and then eating two) and walked through exactly how I solved it. Then I did another problem (ten cookies and eat four) and then another one (ten minus seven).

“That’s a lot of cookies to eat in one sitting!” said Mariah, but she and the rest of the kids were getting it, and I was excited about that. I finished the lesson by sending the children to their seats with ten Oreo cookies for each table to do some subtraction problems with and then eat. By the time Mrs. Wilson got back to the classroom, just about all the students in the class could do basic one-digit subtraction problems as long as they had cookies in hand.

“Looks like you did a nice job, Mr. Kerpen,” she said. “Now finish the lesson by modeling one more problem.”

Even though most of us don’t work as schoolteachers, we all have to take on the role of a teacher every day in one way or another. No matter who your students are, there is an enormous difference between telling them how to do something and showing them how to do it. Thus, when you have something to teach, whether it’s a subtraction lesson to six-year-olds or a task to a colleague at work, the very best way is to do it yourself, showing your students every step along the way. It’s also important to remember that you know how to do it and the other person doesn’t. This seems obvious, but too many people try to teach others something and quickly get frustrated when the students don’t get it right away. As we’ve talked about in other sections of this book, the best thing to do is to put yourself in your student’s shoes. If you weren’t getting something at first, wouldn’t you want to be shown how to do it again (and again) without judgment?



Patience is the key here. The best teachers are often the most patient ones. By modeling each step along the way and simplifying every part of a task, you can teach just about anything to just about anyone. Just imagine that your student is a first-grader.

I never taught first grade again, but I did teach middle school math for three years nearly a decade later, and I’ve had the fortune of getting to teach lots of people a whole lot of things over the course of my career no matter what work I was doing. Each time, I remember the importance of modeling as I learned it from Mrs. Wilson, my model teacher.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down a list of several things you’d like to teach the people in your life, with at least one thing being from work and one being from home.

2. Choose one of the things you’d like to teach and write down the steps in as simple, clear, and concise a way as possible. Think of this as writing a lesson plan.

3. Put your lesson plan into action and teach this task to someone, making sure to model each step along the way yourself. Remember to be patient.





32. Soar with Your Strengths—and Theirs


What’s wrong with him? What’s wrong with me?” I asked my wife rhetorically.

I was absolutely exasperated about the situation. One of the earliest employees at our first company, Chris, was really struggling. He was the nicest guy: smart, dedicated, and loyal. He was a great observer of people and had a strong if soft-spoken presence.

But as an early employee of a small, fast-growing company, Chris had to wear a lot of hats. The latest one that we needed him to wear was that of office manager, and Chris was struggling to pick up the required skills.

It couldn’t have been his fault, though, I reasoned, because he was too talented and passionate. It had to be mine. I just wasn’t teaching him well enough.

I went to my wife and business partner, Carrie, then the chief operating officer, to ask for help. It was really my first time in a role in which I was managing people, and she had managed a radio sales team successfully before, so I knew she could help.

“Hmm,” said Carrie. “I think I have a book for you.”

She went into her office and pulled a book from her shelf: Soar with Your Strengths. The big idea in the book, she told me, was to understand your strengths and then use them to teach others. Furthermore, the idea was to help others identify their strengths and teach and manage to those strengths as well. Rather than looking at Chris’s weaknesses and trying to teach around or fix them, she said, I could better understand his natural strengths and teach him to be even better at those things.

I liked those concepts a lot, and so I read the book and then began to put the principles to work. First, I quickly realized that office managing (and operational work in general) was not a natural strength of mine. If we needed Chris to learn to be a better office manager, I wasn’t the best person to do the teaching. That was okay; I had to soar with my strengths.

Then, more important, we realized that in teaching Chris how to be a better office manager, we weren’t soaring with Chris’s strengths, either. Chris simply wasn’t a desk-and-paperwork kind of person; he liked to be out and about among people. Chris was always a great reader of people and a fine judge of character. We didn’t want to waste his skills, and so I ended up teaching him how to do something that tapped into these strengths: recruiting. He soon became our first human resources manager and recruiter, going to college fairs and job fairs and helping secure the best talent we could find.

The office manager work? We found someone else to do it: Maria, who was detail-oriented and a much better fit. More important, I didn’t train Maria. Carrie, a better person for the job, did that.

Everything changed as soon as we changed our point of view about what to teach and who would do the teaching. It’s about soaring with strengths.

How often do you have to teach something to a reluctant student? How often are you a reluctant teacher because you don’t feel completely confident and competent in what you are supposed to teach? It won’t help anyone if you’re not the right teacher or your student isn’t the right person for the skills or tasks. Sure, there are times when all people must learn something they are reluctant to learn. But there are also times when you can find someone more appropriate to do the teaching or learning and allow your original student and yourself to better soar with their strengths.

Remember, you can’t fit a square peg in a round hole. All people can learn and be successful at something as long as they soar with their strengths.





By the way, after two solid years of recruiting for us, Chris realized that his passion and proclivity for being out and about and observing others, and his desire to be away from an office job, were so strong that he ended up leaving the company for another field entirely. He’s been a happy and successful police officer ever since.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down a list of several things you’ve been trying to teach others that aren’t your greatest strengths. Determine whether anyone else at work or at home could take on the teaching of these skills or tasks.

2. Examine one colleague or friend and think about one thing you would like to teach that person. Write down her strengths and how you will teach in the context of those strengths.

3. Put your plan into action and teach this one thing to the person by playing into her strengths. How can you take an area your colleague or friend is already good at and make her even better?





33. Don’t Be a Teacher (or a Manager); Be a Coach (and a Student)


She’s not a teacher; she’s a monster!”

That was what I said to my friend Kev about our eighth-grade social studies teacher, Ms. Macusor. She had just thrown me out of the class for talking after I had been three minutes late and was asking Kev what I had missed. I ended up having to go to the principal’s office even though I really hadn’t done anything wrong.

This was just one day of the many in which I struggled with Ms. Macusor. It wasn’t like I was a bad student; I got good grades in all my other eighth-grade classes. But Ms. Macusor was, well, consistently mean, and not just to me. She yelled at the class a lot. She often didn’t allow students into her classroom if they were even thirty seconds late. Instead of helping kids who were struggling, she was very critical of students who “didn’t do their work right.” My friends and I felt that she was always trying to get us. I’m sure she had a good reason for the way she acted, but it didn’t change the results.

Many of us have had at least one experience with a teacher like Ms. Macusor. If you haven’t, you may have had an experience with a manager or leader like her, someone who is seemingly always angry or upset at something, tries to tell you what to do but offers little help or support, and is generally a negative person.

Ms. Macusor didn’t inspire, lead, or even teach very much. The only thing she inspired was fear. She’s an extreme example, of course, but too many people who are teachers or managers have elements of Ms. Macusor in their personality, attitude, and behavior.

Contrast her with Doc Rubenstein, my tenth-grade chemistry teacher, who taught me one of the most important lessons I’ve ever learned about leadership.

“It’s not my job to teach you. It’s your job to learn. I’m just here to coach you along the way,” Doc would say to us on a typical day. He was one part teacher, one part coach, and one part cheerleader—always positive, helpful, and encouraging.

Each day, Doc would greet us with a smile and get us started on a chemistry lesson or experiment. We did most of the learning on our own or in small groups, and he would go around the room to see how each of us was doing. He told a lot of jokes, had a lot of one-on-one conversations, and had a lot of fun with us. He probably did less formal teaching than any teacher I’ve ever had, yet he was one of the best.

A close second, though, might have been Mr. Boyle, my twelfth-grade psychology teacher. Mr. Boyle would always tell us, “I’m a student, just like you. I’ve just been learning this stuff a little bit longer than you’ve been.”

I thought that was quite profound, and it stuck with me. Mr. Boyle didn’t think he was better than us. He didn’t try to pull rank on us. He didn’t tell us what to do. He considered himself one of us—a student on the path to learning and betterment—and his actions matched that attitude. Mr. Boyle was another one of my favorite teachers, even if he preferred the label of student.

In the workplace, many of us end up in manager or teacher roles without sufficient training. However unintentionally, it’s easy to end up like Ms. Macusor when one is put in a situation like this: trying to control, micromanaging, and being overly critical. Of course, not only did we hate Ms. Macusor, we didn’t learn from her. It’s important to avoid adopting a managerial style like Ms. Macusor’s, not only because you don’t want your teams and employees to hate you but because it won’t work!

Instead of embracing the manager or teacher title, embrace the title of coach. Good coaches are cheerleaders while still teaching. Coaches are there to help us win, to help us succeed, and to be supportive. These are the traits that not only will make everyone happier but will help you teach and manage better, as well.

Bad coaches, by the way, do lead through fear. There are sports coaches who yell at their players and are every bit as intimidating as Ms. Macusor was. But the good coaches don’t do that. They’re more like Doc: supportive but holding their players accountable. Good coaches embrace teaching when necessary but also embrace hand-holding when necessary. Good coaches are there with the players from start to finish, and the players succeed as a result.

If you can layer in an element of Mr. Boyle’s style and be part student, that’s even better. The truth is (and the best coaches and managers understand this), no matter how much you know, no matter how much experience you have, and no matter what position of authority you’re in, you, too, have a lot to learn. If you embrace this idea, your humility will shine through and your students (or direct reports) will respond.

Fear-based management and teaching can work temporarily. People may be scared of the consequences of not listening to you, and so they may pay attention, listen to you, and even perform for you. But study after study shows that this is just temporary. Over time, when you lead with fear and micromanagement, when you make yourself as a teacher instead of your students the center of attention, the results get weaker. It’s also so much less fun!

Embrace the adventure of learning with your students or direct reports and coaching them along the way to mutual success. Everyone wins, and nobody goes to the principal’s office.

By the way, the last I heard, Ms. Macusor had left teaching and become a cashier at a department store in New York. Here’s hoping she’s not mean to her customers.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. If you’re a manager, make a list of the people who report directly to you. If you are not, consider which people you influence as a teacher (kids, friends, colleagues) and write down at least three names.

2. Write down the names of three of your favorite and best schoolteachers from your youth. How did their ability to coach you and/or their willingness to learn from you affect your performance and your choice to listen to them?

3. Reflect on and write down how you can become a better manager and/or teacher at work or at home by better embracing your role as coach or student the way your favorite teachers did.





34. Don’t Hold Yourself Accountable


Why do we keep missing our goals?” Ben asked my eight-person entrepreneurs group. “Because we’ve been missing one key ingredient. That all changes, right now.”

For the previous year, our group, which meets monthly, had been working on goal achievement. Eight driven, successful entrepreneurs were determined to grow as individuals, and the goals activity was bound to help. At the beginning of the year, we had each set metrics-driven personal and professional goals that we could come back to and report on to the group. At each monthly meeting, among other things, we all reviewed our progress on our goals.

There was only one problem: We weren’t making any progress. Each month we were honestly reporting on how well we’d done that month, and each month we were coming up short.

I began to wonder if perhaps we had set goals that were too difficult to achieve. My goal, for instance, was to exercise at least thirty minutes a day at least four times a week, and I just wasn’t hitting it on a consistent basis. I was trying to lose weight, and I knew that consistent exercise (or lack thereof) was an important part of the equation.

“Bullshit,” said Ben. “We’re not hitting our goals because we’re not accountable enough. Starting today, we’ll each have a goal accountability partner. You are to check in with your partner at least once a week. First up, reassess all goals together and make sure they’re SMART goals (simple, measureable, attainable, realistic, and time-bound). Then, instead of you updating the group at our monthly meeting with your progress, your partner will update the group on how well you’re doing and you will update the group on how well your partner is doing.”

Ben was a man on a mission, and although there was definitely some pushback and hesitation among the group, we collectively decided to embrace the new plan. Andy would be my personal accountability partner, and I would be his. The meeting ended, and the new era of goals work began.

A funny thing happened over the next several months. We all went from missing our goals to hitting them! Encouraged by this success, I began to get very competitive, and not just for myself but also for my accountability partner, Andy. I wanted him to be able to report that I’d hit my goals each month, and so I worked harder than I had before to hit them. At the same time, I was thrilled to report that Andy was hitting his goal of performing and tracking random acts of kindness. The rest of the group was doing great, too.

The only thing that had changed from one year to the next was that we all had and were accountability partners for one another. And we had gone from failing miserably to achieving success!

There are a million business books claiming that we should all hold ourselves accountable for our actions and our performance both at work and outside it. But in reality, we should be letting others hold us accountable for our successes and failures. Why? Because when you’re accountable to another human being you trust and respect, it makes you want to work harder to achieve the goals you set. Plus, it helps you stop rationalizing and making weak excuses. For example, even if “I can’t go to the gym this morning because it’s raining” sounds perfectly reasonable in your head, the simple act of saying it out loud to another person helps you see how lame an excuse it actually is. However, when you’re accountable to too many people, it’s like being accountable to no one. Thus, the best scenario is to find one accountability partner who can help you and whom you can help.

Whether you are a manager or not, teaching people about the power of goals and accountability partners, finding accountability partners for them, and helping facilitate the coaching and reporting process will have an enormous dual effect. First, you’ll find that your people will become more accomplished and confident. Second, and more important, you will become more accomplished and confident as well.

The three keys to making this work are as follows:

1. Assigning accountability partners who trust and respect each other

2. Setting SMART goals together

3. Checking in at least once a week, ideally twice a week, with one another



If you can teach this process to yourself and others, you will find that everyone will get more things done faster.

In the year that followed Ben’s proclamation, I ended up developing much better exercise habits, and thanks to that and to eating well, I lost nearly fifty pounds. I owed the credit to my partner and to the process of accountability we set. Since then, I’ve implemented the system with nearly a hundred employees. Of course, not everyone is successful all the time. But my people report much better success with their goals, with an accountability partner standing proudly by their side.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. If you’re a manager, use a list of the people who report directly to you to create a set of accountability partners. Include yourself. If you are not a manager, think about who you’d like to be an accountability partner of yours and approach that person.

2. Ask each of the accountability partners to set one SMART goal together. It’s always best to start with just one goal. Decide how often you will check in on each other and report progress.

3. Carry out the process for at least three months and compare the success you and your people experience with accountability partners with what you achieved in the past. You’ll never go back to holding only yourself accountable again.

