










35. There’s No I in Team, but There Is an I in Leadership


Are you kidding me, Dave? There may be no I in team, but there sure as hell is an I in leadership. Now quit farting around and step up and become a leader!”

I had just been admonished by a mentor of mine, and it hurt. Robb High was a senior consultant who had worked miracles for thousands of agencies and brands since leading his own agency to great success many years earlier. We had been having a conversation fairly early on in my first business, which happened to be an agency, and I had been telling him about how I believed in everyone being equal, working together as a team, and supporting one another.

“That’s all fine, Dave,” he had said. “I’m all for teamwork. But every team needs a leader.”

Robb was right. In an effort to have everyone feel that his or her voice was heard and that everyone was important, I had failed to become an effective leader. Robb had a blunt, direct, and powerful way of saying things, and I understood what he meant right away. But the problem was that I had no specific idea how to become a leader.

Very few people take leadership classes in school, yet so many are called on to become leaders. Chances are, you have chosen to become or have been asked to be a leader at some point in your life. But what does leadership mean? Does it mean leading by example? Yes. Does it mean inspiring others? Absolutely. Does it mean doing the right thing (after figuring out what the right thing is)? Yes. Leadership includes all these things. In fact, leadership can mean many different things to many different people, and that is both a good thing and a bad thing.





I didn’t have a succinct definition of leadership until I met Verne Harnish, who in time would become a great mentor, friend, and investor for me. Verne is the founder of the Entrepreneurs’ Organization (EO), a global network of ten thousand CEOs, as well as a longtime leader, CEO, and author. I joined EO soon after Robb had admonished me to become a stronger leader. Then I read Verne’s excellent book Mastering the Rockefeller Habits, and soon thereafter I met Verne.

He told me there were three and only three things on which great leaders have to focus:

1. Setting and communicating the overall vision for your team

2. Making sure you have the right people in the right seats on the team

3. Making sure you have enough resources and money to help the team succeed



“If you do those three things well, everything else will fall into place,” Verne told me.

The interesting thing is that this framework can work whether you’re a leader of one person, ten people, a hundred people, or a thousand people. No matter the size, scope, or mission of your team, and whether you’re a CEO of a small business or a manager of a team of two people in a Fortune 500 organization, if you can get these three things right, you can be an excellent leader. My wife and I have even applied this methodology to leading our family of five.

Here’s how you can apply this simple framework within your team or organization. First, set and communicate the vision. This is most important but often is overlooked. What is your grand mission? Your purpose? Your overall vision for how things will be? It’s important to develop this, because everything else can fall into place once you have it. If you don’t have a clear vision for your team or project, it’s worth taking the time to develop one now. It’s never too late to get the train on track! Once the vision and mission are established, it is essential to overcommunicate it! Talk about it with your team, email it, share it as much as possible. Some companies literally put it up on their office walls.

The next job of a great leader is to make sure to have the right people in the right seats. This is true whether you’re the CEO of a Fortune 500 company or the CEO of your home, and it starts with you. Are you the right person to accomplish the vision in light of the current size and scope of the team? Ideally, you are, but if you’re not, a great leader will recognize this and find someone more appropriate to lead. For instance, often a great entrepreneur/founder isn’t the best person to run his or her own company after it has achieved a certain scale, and ends up stepping aside in favor of a more seasoned CEO.

Beyond you, it’s essential to make sure you have the most talented, most appropriate people surrounding and leading the way beside you and that they, too, are in the right seats. There are really only two questions to consider in making this determination about your people: How capable are they of doing their jobs? and How aligned are they with your vision and values? These two questions are critical in finding the best person for any essential position, whether at work or in your personal life.

When we recently hired a nanny and household manager for our family, we interviewed over twenty people before choosing one. Some were very qualified for the job, but we weren’t convinced about their alignment with our values. Others shared our vision and values, but we weren’t convinced of their capabilities. Ultimately, we found and chose a rock star, Joyce, to join our family. Joyce has a great attitude, great skills with babies, and a terrific résumé and came with impeccable recommendations. I consider the decision to choose Joyce to work with our three children in our home one of the most important leadership decisions I’ve ever made, period.

The final thing a leader must do is make sure she has enough resources and money to help the team succeed. Whether this means applying for more funding, getting creative, or somehow figuring it out MacGyver-style, it’s your job to make sure the team has everything it needs to succeed so that the team members don’t need to worry about it. In other words, you worry about getting all the money and resources so that they can focus on doing their jobs and making the magic happen.

I once had a senior executive at Likeable Local who was excellent at his job but was always nervous about our cash flow. We were an early-stage start-up that was not profitable yet and were raising money from investors to stay afloat and grow. I was taking care of making sure we had enough money in the bank, but he was still nervous about us running out of money, and it affected his ability to do his job. I’m not sure whether it was his fault or mine—probably a little of both—but the situation didn’t work, and we had to part ways. That experience solidified how important I believe it is for leaders to make sure there is always enough money in the bank. It’s simply essential to make sure your team doesn’t have to worry at all so that instead of focusing on pinching pennies, the team members can focus on what you hired them for.

I’m so thankful to Verne Harnish, who taught me these three things to always remember as a leader, and to Robb High, who taught me about the I in leadership. Thanks to both of these mentors and many others, I’ve been able to become a better leader.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down what makes you a leader, or, to put it another way, write down who looks to you for direction and guidance. (Remember, regardless of the size and scope of your organization, you can consider yourself a leader.)

2. Audit how well you are doing in setting and communicating vision. Ask people in the group you just defined if they know what your grand mission is. If you don’t have a mission, it’s time to come up with one. Then work on communicating that vision clearly and consistently.

3. Ask yourself if everyone in the group you lead is in the right seat. Are there people with talents that are being underutilized? Is there someone who has been promoted above her level of competency and expertise? If you find instances like this, shift people’s job descriptions and responsibilities to better reflect what they are best suited to bring to the team.





36. Mirror Neurons, and How a Good Mood Goes a Long Way


I was having a real bummer of a day. I had received word that morning that a major investor who I thought was going to give us $500,000 had pulled out. Worse, I got news that my dad, who was living in a nursing home, had lost his teeth. Finally, I looked at our sales numbers and saw that we were way down on the month against our forecast.

I was about to lead our weekly team meeting, but luckily, I had an interview for our Likeable podcast first. The interview was with John Bates, a fellow author and speaker and an expert on public speaking. He started the interview by asking me if I had ever had a bad audience as a public speaker. I replied, “Sure, I’ve had some horrible audiences. They were nonresponsive, didn’t laugh at my jokes, didn’t interact on Twitter the way I wanted, and overall they sucked.”

“I’ve got good news and bad news,” John said. “The bad news is, it’s probably you that sucked, not them. The good news is, for all the great audiences you’ve had, and I’m sure you’ve had some good audiences, it was probably because you were on that day and didn’t suck.”

“Whoa,” I thought while continuing this live interview. “I can’t believe he just totally blamed me for my bad audiences.”

John went on: “The reason I say this is it’s backed by real science. You see, we all have mirror neurons that ‘mirror’ the emotions of the person who’s speaking to us. A mirror neuron is a neuron that fires both when an animal acts and when the animal observes the same action performed by another animal. Thus, the neuron ‘mirrors’ the behavior of the other, as though the observer were itself acting. So if you’re a public speaker and you take the stage in a bad mood, your audience will likely sense it and become a ‘bad’ audience. If, on the other hand, you take the stage in a great mood, your audience’s mirror neurons will sense that, too, and they will become a great audience.”

“Wow,” I said, and wrapped up the interview. Intuitively, it made sense to me. I knew that when I was in a bad mood, people could sense it, and when I was in a great mood, people could sense that, too. But I had never heard of the science of mirror neurons before, and so I hadn’t realized how powerful this phenomenon is. While John Bates was giving his explanation of mirror neurons to address the power of mood and intention in public speaking, I realized that this lesson was equally applicable to leadership.

Every time I speak at my company, our employees are listening, and their mirror neurons are in action. When I am in a bad mood, I’m sure the team members can sense it and potentially end up in a bad mood themselves, and there’s no way they’ll perform as well as I want them to while they’re in a bad mood. I realized that no matter what mood I was in, it was my job—no, my obligation—to brush it off and get myself to a positive, inspirational place no matter what.

That’s obviously easier said than done in many circumstances. We all have good days and bad. Heck, we all have good moments and bad in every day that goes by. But if we want to persuade or inspire the people we’re speaking to, we need to check that at the door. Whether you’re a public speaker in front of a thousand people, a CEO in front of ten managers, or a manager in front of one team member, you have a choice each and every time. You can choose to stay in a bad mood and risk having that mood rub off on your followers, or you can get yourself to a positive place and transfer that positive energy.

How? In Chapter 35, I talked about the importance of setting and communicating a vision. Well, I believe the best way to get to a superpositive place quickly when speaking to another person or a roomful of people is to (re)focus on that vision and then communicate it. People love to hear about where they’re going, and they love a strong, bold vision—no matter what. Of course, you need to have a strong, bold vision to do this, but once you do, you can get positive and share that vision no matter what.

That day had begun as a really terrible, horrible, no-good, very bad day. But thankfully, it took a more positive turn—just when I needed it most—after my interview with John Bates and his lesson about mirror neurons. I was determined to put my learning into action immediately at our companywide weekly meeting later that day.

I went to the bathroom, looked in the mirror, thought about our vision, and got myself psyched up for the team meeting. Once I felt sufficiently positive, I went back out, began the team meeting, and in front of forty employees said: “Imagine five years from now. All of us are at the NASDAQ, about to ring the opening bell in honor of our IPO. We’ve got a hundred thousand happy small-business customers at the time, and our hard work has finally paid off. You won’t need to imagine this, because if we all work hard and focus on the mission, we will all get there together.”

I might have had a terrible day leading up to that meeting, but thanks to my lesson from John, I ended the day and that team meeting strong. Nobody in our company knew how bad my day had been, and people walked away feeling excited and inspired and determined.

I’m not saying you should lie—I’m as much for transparency as anyone—but your job as a leader is to get the most out of your followers, and sometimes that means sweeping your bad mood under the rug. Now that you know about mirror neurons, you know how powerful an influencer your mood is. Each and every time you speak to your team, consider how you can keep a superpositive attitude and focus on the vision and the big picture.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down an experience in which you were in a bad mood and addressed your team. What was that like? How about an experience in which you were in a terrific mood and addressed your team? What was that like?

2. Make a plan for the next time you’re having a bad day and need to talk to your team (or anyone, for that matter). How can you quickly snap out of it and focus on the big picture or vision?

3. The next time you are in a bad mood and need to speak, put your plan into action and get those mirror neurons working with you, not against you.





37. How to Get Everyone to Want to Be Around You, with One Word (Maybe Two)


I was annoyed at having to take the day off from teaching to attend a United Federation of Teachers conference, and so far the conference, to be honest, had been quite a bore. It was 2004, and I was both a teacher and a union chapter leader and was spending the day away from school to get some professional development. So far I had been majorly disappointed, but that was about to change with a session that would change my life forever. I sat down in the front row in an effort to stay attentive and got ready for the session to begin.

A tall, good-looking older man took the stage.

“How are you doing today?” he asked the audience.

I figured it was a rhetorical question, but I found myself nonetheless answering quietly in my seat, “Fine.”

“Most of you are thinking ‘Fine,’ ” he conjectured. “Some of you might be thinking ‘Good’ or ‘Great’ or ‘Lousy.’ These days, some of you might be thinking of the word Busy, too.”

I was amazed at how he knew what I’d been thinking, and from the nods around me in the crowd, I think everyone else was, too.

He continued: “I’m going to let you in on a secret. I’m going to tell you the word I always use when people ask me how I’m doing. It’s an extremely powerful word, and it begins with the letter F.”

“This is getting good, finally!” I thought. I waited with eager anticipation for him to reveal the F word.

“Someone ask me how I’m doing,” he insisted. I immediately called out from the front row, “How are you doing!?” to which he replied: “Fantastic!”

“Fantastic,” he said. This was the word he always used when people asked him how he was doing and the word that he recommended that others use. He claimed that by using this word, you’ll attract whoever you’re talking to and make that person want to be around you, because no matter how anyone else is feeling, fantastic is probably better, and who wouldn’t want to feel fantastic? Plus, he argued, by saying “I’m fantastic!” with a big smile, you can actually put yourself in a better mood, which is contagious as well.

He went on to talk about other principles of leadership and influence, but frankly, I don’t remember much else of what he said. What I do remember eleven years later is his contagious positive energy and the word fantastic.

Soon thereafter, I put his concept to the test with staggering results. As it turns out, most times people ask “How are you?” they’re expecting either the word fine or a similarly lukewarm response. When people hear “I’m fantastic!” instead, heads turn. Over the seven years or so that I’ve put this simple principle into action, I’ve come to the undeniable conclusion that this is a powerful statement that makes you irresistible to others. Some of my favorite replies to “I’m fantastic!” include the following:

1. “Oh, my God, what are you on?”

2. “I’ll have what you’re having.”

3. “Sign me up!”



It’s amazing how one simple word can draw people in and get them pumped to be around you. In the years that have followed, I’ve added one more word to this repertoire that I have found to be equally powerful. This is a word that I got from the effervescent, superpositive consultant Sam Horn: Imagine.

Imagine is a powerful word because it gets people dreaming and thinking about what could be. Everyone loves to imagine at least a little bit, so when we give people permission to imagine by using the word, they appreciate it. Try it and you’ll see how excited people get at the very thought of using their imaginations.





I’ve put these two words, fantastic and imagine, into my regular vocabulary, and I’ve been blessed and amazed by how responsive people have been through the years. Of course, you need to be authentic in your use of those words; I wouldn’t advocate telling people you are doing fantastic on the day your dog dies. But really, even if you’re not feeling great, you can always take a step back, remind yourself to be grateful for how good you’ve got it relative to so many others, and realize that life is pretty fantastic after all. Imagine that.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down five things that are fantastic about your life and five things you can imagine for your team and/or family.

2. The next time someone asks you how you’re doing, consider answering, “I’m fantastic!” Note how the other person responds when you say that.

3. The next time you address your team, consider using the word imagine to paint a picture of what might be. Note your team’s reaction to that word.





38. Always Be the One to Give the Bad News


I’ve got a problem,” I told Verne Harnish, a business mentor of mine, in September 2009. “I believe in always staying positive, but looking at our numbers, we have some real challenges.”

I was getting ready for our quarterly managers’ meeting for Likeable Media and just didn’t feel right about putting a positive spin on things. We had missed our numbers and almost definitely would have to lay some people off. I knew that I had to stay positive, but I didn’t want to avoid reality. “What can I do?” I asked Verne.

I had to share “the brutal facts, the brutal truth,” he said. Paraphrasing the great business author Jim Collins, he continued, “As important as it is for you to remain positive, it’s even more important for you to make sure that you and your team address the brutal facts and reality of your situation at all times. Only then can you fix it.”

That made sense to me, but I was still nervous. My senior executives were used to seeing me as a superpositive, vision-focused leader, and I didn’t want to be a bummer at our quarterly retreat. But I trusted Verne—and Jim Collins—and so I knew I had to be transparent. I took a deep breath and began to plan my opening remarks for the meeting.

The next day, I began with the brutal facts: “Look, team, the reality is, we’ve missed our numbers and we are going to have to make layoffs. This isn’t going to be pretty, or good, or fun. But if we all address the realities head-on, we can get through this together, and imagine how strong we’ll be when we come out of it all.”

As promised, the next two days weren’t easy, but an interesting thing happened. My executive team appreciated how transparent I had been with them. In fact, in our semiannual assessment of our core values, we decided as a team to add the core value of transparency, as we believed that being straight with our team, with our clients, and with the world would lead to greater trust. We ended up having a very productive two-day management session as we all addressed the brutal facts of our situation and made plans to emerge stronger than ever before.

Still, after the session the task of delivering the bad news to a wider audience—the company—remained. At that time there were thirty-eight employees, and we knew we’d have to cut five, a significant number. Letting people go is by far the toughest part of being a leader, and it was extremely difficult to execute this plan. But sure enough, the team understood and even appreciated how transparent we were throughout the process and how determined we were to remain transparent from then on.

In fact, we promised to put our business plan up on the walls of the office, and just days later we did just that. Now, six years and two companies later, we still have all company business plans up on the walls of our offices for employees, visitors, and even the janitors to see. I have come to believe that as important as positivity is, transparency builds trust, and trust is an essential asset for any team.





This advice to always share bad news might seem to contradict the advice I gave in the chapters about spreading positivity, but in reality these two ideas go hand in hand. Why? Well, people like to be around you when times are good, but for you to truly wield influence, you need people to want to be around you when times are not so good. No matter how positive and fantastic you are, there surely will be some bad times to weather. When you’re going through those times, you’ll need your team by your side. If you can be transparent with them, they’ll know that what they see is what they get, and they’ll trust you and continue to fight the good fight with you.

Delivering the brutal facts and laying off five employees at Likeable Media was extremely difficult. Fully embracing transparency wasn’t much easier. But I know today that the trust built from the transparency was vital in growing the team and the company. In the end, we straightened the ship, doubled in size, and continued to grow, and that felt simply fantastic.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Do an inventory of how transparent you are with your direct reports and colleagues at work and your family at home.

2. Write down three brutal facts that you can share with your team or family in the spirit of transparency to help engender trust.

3. Deliver the transparent truth, but remain positive and steadfast in your determination to accomplish your vision.





39. Get High Before Every Meeting


Why am I always so negative?” Andy wondered aloud to me.

I was coaching Andy for a presentation to our Entrepreneurs’ Organization forum, and he was very upset. Andy is a fantastic real estate entrepreneur, a great father, and one of my closest friends. But he was right: He was often a negative thinker. We weren’t sure exactly why he could be such a downer, but we were both determined to help him become more positive. Then Andy came up with an excellent idea.

“I read that gratitude is a powerful way of changing your mindset,” he said, and it turns out that many great leaders have discovered the benefits of actively practicing gratitude: Cary Chessick, the founder and former CEO of Restaurant.com, used to motivate himself by writing out five things he was grateful for each day. Shawn Achor, a speaker and the author of the bestseller The Happiness Advantage, practices acts of gratitude every day to help train his brain to see the world in a more positive frame. Sheldon Yellen, the CEO of the billion-dollar company BELFOR, wrote of his habit of sending multiple thank-you/birthday cards to his employees every day. Srikumar Rao, “the happiness guru,” author, and Columbia Business School professor, has written about the joy of having thoughts of gratitude each night before going to bed.

“These supersuccessful guys must be doing something right,” Andy said. Thus began our work in helping Andy become more grateful in order to become more positive at work and in life. Over the course of the next several weeks, Andy developed a routine to incorporate acts of gratitude and kindness into his life. Using me as his accountability partner, he began writing down and emailing me who and what he was grateful for, as well as random acts of kindness he had performed each day.

At first my role in Andy’s self-improvement project was that of coach, someone to guide him and keep him accountable, but a funny thing happened: As Andy’s gratitude was quickly making him a happier and more positive person, I began to get awfully jealous. Now, to be honest, I’ve never really suffered from negative thinking, as so many people around me have. But nonetheless, I was envious of what Andy was getting out of the practice of gratitude. At the same time, I was inspired.

Under the pretense of supporting my friend Andy in his mission, I began to practice gratitude. I started by writing handwritten thank you cards, first one a week, then one a day, and then three per day, in the morning on my commute to work. I soon found that if I was in a bad mood, the act of feeling grateful made me feel better. I found that if I was already in a good mood, the act of gratitude made me feel great. And I found that if I was in a great mood, the act of experiencing gratitude made me feel ecstatic. I was feeling better than I had in ages and wanted more, and so I decided that my whole family would share each night at the dinner table one person we were grateful for that day. This, too, felt great and, as if I were an addict searching for a better and better high, left me wanting even more. Finally, I adopted Srikumar’s practice of thinking grateful thoughts each night in bed just before I went to sleep.



I’ll let you in on a little secret: For better or for worse, I’ve never done drugs. (To be clear, I’m no angel; it’s just that drinking and gambling were my vices of choice in my wayward youth.) However, although I don’t know what it feels like to be high on hard drugs, I do know that the high I get from gratitude is amazing. It’s so good that I now choose to take a hit whenever it’s convenient. If I’m about to give an important speech to my team, I’ll write a thank you card. If I’ve got a huge meeting with investors coming up, I’ll list four or five things I’m grateful for. If I had a particularly rough day, I’ll be sure to go to sleep feeling as grateful as possible.

Remember those mirror neurons from Chapter 36? Your gratefulness affects your mood in a positive way, which in turn affects the people you’re leading and the people around you. As you go about your day, each meeting and even each interaction you have can be a positive one, filled with vision and hope and contagious gratitude, if you embrace it as such.

Thanks to the leaders I’ve mentioned—Cary Chessick, Shawn Achor, Sheldon Yellen, and Srikumar Rao—and thanks to Andy Cohen and the coaching work I did with him, I literally get high on gratitude every day. And for that I’m grateful.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Choose one of the gratitude activities in this chapter and write down your plan for making it happen in your life.

2. Put your gratitude plan into action. Start small and work your way up, as making any habit routine is challenging. The good news is that if it’s as addictive for you as it’s been for me, you’ll be practicing more gratitude in no time.

3. The next time you’re feeling down about something, try putting it aside for a moment and writing a thank you card to someone. It might transform your mood in an instant.





40. Everybody Wants to Be a Leader


Now, David, you can be a leader no matter what. Make the right choice.”

When I was in first grade, I always wanted to be the class line leader. I would fuss and sometimes even get into mischief when I wasn’t. But then my teacher, Mrs. Flayton, at Public School 230 in Brooklyn, New York, would say to me, as she often said to the whole class, “David, you can be a leader no matter what.”

What she meant was that even if we weren’t the line leader that day, we could all set a good example for others and guide them to do the right thing, and those things were what made a true leader—regardless of who had been chosen that day to walk at the head of the line. Mrs. Flayton didn’t just speak those words; she drilled them into us all: You can be a leader no matter what. She did such an excellent job of imparting that lesson that eventually everyone in our first-grade class came to believe that in one way or another we could all become leaders.

It was a powerful, moving thought: Who wouldn’t want to consider himself a leader, after all? Given the choice between being a leader and being a follower, I think we’d all choose to be a leader, at least in our own heads.

Thirty years later, after having led two companies and, more important, a family, and after writing about leadership in several books and magazines, I find that those words from Mrs. Flayton resonate with me as much as ever. The truth, I’ve realized, is that not only can everybody become a leader, most people, if not all people, want to be thought of as a leader in one way or another. And as I learned way back in the first grade, those who think of themselves as a leader are more likely to behave like one.

As a leader yourself, you have an opportunity to inspire leadership of all kinds in your team. As always, your team doesn’t have to mean your company, and you don’t have to be a CEO. It can mean your small project team at work or even your family at home. How can you inspire leadership from the ranks, so to speak? Assign as many leaders as possible. Be generous with praise for their leadership abilities and, to the extent possible, hold up each leadership position as honorable and desirable.

For example, at home, my wife and I used this tactic to get our daughter, Charlotte, to take her chores more seriously. Instead of ordering (or begging) her to clear the table, we appointed her “president of table clearing” and gave her the distinction and honor of such a duty. From then on she happily and proudly cleared the table every single night. I’ve also implemented more or less the same strategy at our companies, where we’ve been generous with titles and subsequently probably have more vice presidents than most companies of a similar size. But so what? Leadership titles are free to give out and make people feel good. Why shouldn’t you be blessed with as many leaders as possible on your team?

If everybody wants to feel like a leader, surely you can find a way to make that happen.

Mrs. Flayton sure did. Back in first grade we didn’t just have line leaders. We also had homework leaders, bathroom pass leaders, activity leaders, and chalkboard leaders. Everybody felt ownership of something, responsibility for something, and pride in something. She assigned leadership roles for every chore that had to get done in class, and in the same way you can create as many leaders as you want for the various tasks that need to get done. This will give people a greater sense of ownership, responsibility, pride, and commitment, making them more likely to deliver the results that you want.

I feel blessed to have written one of the most popular leadership articles ever on LinkedIn, “11 Simple Concepts to Become a Better Leader.” To date, nearly three million people have chosen to read this article, indicating to me just how many people want to become better leaders no matter what their role is today. I am certain that as social media continues to make the world more transparent, the hierarchical barrier of leadership will fade away. These days, anyone can be a leader, whether the group you’re leading is your company, your team, your department, or your family. You can be a leader even if you have no official leadership role and are simply setting a good example for the people around you. I am certain as ever that as Mrs. Flayton told a bunch of five- and six-year-olds, You can be a leader no matter what.

And you can develop many leaders on your team as well.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Make a list of the people on your team and possible leadership roles for each one. Think of creative ways to describe their leadership roles.

2. Assign new leadership roles for the people on your team. If it’s feasible, consider new titles for people as well.

3. As you grow in your own role as a leader, consider the ways in which everyone wants to be a leader and give everyone a chance to be one.


