


41. If You’re There to Help, You’re There to Win


I’ve been maced, I’ve been maced!” I shouted from the second-floor hallway of my high school.

I was scared and confused and pretty angry. What had begun as an innocent dispute with my friend Al Fins over our simulated baseball dice game in the spring of my junior year at Hunter College High School had deteriorated into a terrible situation. Al and I had trusted in the strength of our friendship and had chosen to share control of one team in this game we played, which is called Pursue the Pennant. (For the uninitiated, imagine the role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons meets fantasy baseball.)

Anyway, it turned out that this faith had not been entirely warranted. Al and I had gotten into a disagreement that prompted him to seize the “team” from me (i.e., he took the twenty-five playing cards that made up the team and refused to share them with me). Now, I have never been a bully or even aggressive in any way, but I happened to be one of the biggest, tallest people in the eleventh grade at Hunter, and Al happened to be one of the smallest. When I approached Al in the hallway to get back my team, he must have felt quite threatened. He also must have been prepared, because before I could get near him, he whipped out a can of Mace and sprayed me in the face.

Moments later I was screaming and didn’t know what to do. A friend suggested that I go to the school nurse, and I did. The nurse flushed my eyes out with water and cleared me to go back to class.

Unfortunately, before I could do that, I had to make a mandatory stop at the vice principal’s office, where Ms. Gemmola and Al Fins, the Mace perpetrator, were waiting for me. Even though I thought I had been the victim, I knew that I wasn’t completely innocent, and I certainly didn’t want to get in trouble, and so when I walked into Ms. Gemmola’s office, I was fully prepared and expected to have to defend myself.

You can imagine how startled I was when Ms. Gemmola began the conversation: “Now, boys, please know one thing. I’m here to help you. Whether or not you walk out of this room with suspension or other consequences, please know that above all else, I am here to help.”

In a strange way, that statement put me at ease. On one hand, I was nervous about her use of the word suspension. I had never been suspended from school, and I certainly didn’t want the first time to be on the same day I’d been maced.

On the other hand, Ms. Gemmola had said (twice even) that she was there to help. If I trusted her, I should feel safe. After all, I was just trying to resolve a conflict with Al about our PtP baseball team, and things had escalated out of control. Obviously we needed some help to resolve our disagreement.

Still, I was a sixteen-year-old kid and not as seasoned as I am today, and so I replied: “Help me? I’ve been maced!”

“Well, I’m sure there was a reason Al felt so threatened by you,” Ms Gemmola responded. “Let’s do this. I’d love to hear both sides of the story, and then, as I said, once I’ve listened thoroughly to both of you, I’ll help you come to a resolution. Of course, as a representative of the school, I need to help come up with a fair resolution as well.”

Al gave his side of the story first and in fact did say he thought I was going to attack him and thought the only way he could protect himself was with Mace. I then admitted that I might have been physically imposing but said (truthfully) that I had never intended to lay a hand on Al: I just wanted my team back.

In the end, Ms. Gemmola brokered a deal that left everyone as happy as possible. I agreed not to get Al in trouble for macing me, and in exchange he would give my team cards back and agree to let me finish the season on my own. Neither of us would be suspended or otherwise punished for the incident, said Ms. Gemmola, but it would be noted, and if either of us had any more issues with each other or anyone else, we would definitely face a suspension from school. It was a win-win outcome for both of us.

As a school administrator, Ms. Gemmola truly was there to help us, and it showed. Resolving conflicts with others is no easy task. But the moral of this story is that if you take the attitude of being there to help, you can always find a way for all parties to win.

In Chapter 17, we talked about how the most important question in starting a new relationship with someone is “How can I help you?” In resolving conflicts with others, the most important question to ask is “How can I help resolve this in a way that leaves all parties happy?” Although it’s true that finding the answer to the second question often will involve some give-and-take and compromise, it’s much easier if you take the attitude of “How can I help?” versus “How can I punish?” or “How can I be right?” or “How can I show them?” Part of “How can I help?” is always “How can I help you feel heard?” and as you’ll remember from earlier chapters, few things are more effective in gaining respect and influence than making others feel heard.

Your attitude toward resolving a conflict, whether it’s a conflict between you and someone else or a conflict between two other people, makes all the difference. Going in looking to help people puts both parties at ease to the greatest extent possible. It also sets up a journey toward an outcome that everyone can live with: In any conflict, all we want is to feel heard and be helped and have the issue resolved.

When Al and I calmed down that day, we realized that this was actually a great solution for everyone involved, and we were thankful for the outcome. I finished our season on my own, and though I lost, I appreciated Ms. Gemmola for being there to help.

Twenty years later, I’m still playing the Pursue the Pennant role-playing baseball game with my friends. It’s probably my favorite hobby outside of family and work. Who knows if I’d still be playing if Ms. Gemmola hadn’t helped me get my cards back from Al Fins that day?


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Describe a recent conflict you’ve had. Imagine how you might have resolved the conflict better if you had taken the approach of “How can I help both parties?”

2. Write down an action plan for how you will deal with the next conflict with that person with more of an eye to helping the other party feel heard and resolved.

3. Put the action plan into effect the next time you have a conflict. Remember, if you’re there to help, you’re there to win.





42. Let Cooler Heads Prevail


NOOOOOOOO!” I screamed, and slammed the door on my way out. I was angry at my wife and felt so out of control. I just wanted a little space, and so I left the house in anger.

It had all begun with a friendly family game of Clue. Everything had been going well until I made a guess at “whodunit” and was wrong. Turned out that it was only because my ten-year-old daughter, Charlotte, had accidentally given me some misinformation, but it didn’t matter because once you make an accusation in Clue and are wrong, you’re out of the game. As a supercompetitive player, I was very upset about being eliminated and sure that it was my daughter’s fault.

Obviously, soon thereafter, I realized that it was only a game and an innocent mistake by my very young daughter and not a big deal. But at the time I was really caught up in the game and upset with the outcome. When my wife, Carrie, said, “Don’t blame Charlotte; it’s your fault for being wrong,” I totally lost control of myself. I’m embarrassed to admit it, but it’s true: I tried to excuse myself politely from the kids and proceeded to storm out of the house in a rage.

What made things worse was that my wife insisted on trying to resolve the conflict right away. Just moments after I’d left the house, I got a text from her, then another, and then another.

“COME BACK TO THE HOUSE NOW!” the first message read. Over and over came messages demanding that I come back to the house and talk. Even though all I wanted at the time was space to cool down, in an effort to resolve the conflict (and probably because at some level I realized how in the wrong I was) I went back to the house to talk with my wife.

The problem was, I wasn’t in the right mindset to resolve any conflict. Whether I was overreacting or not (I was), I was filled with rage. I felt out of control, I felt unsupported, and I felt unable to think and speak rationally. Thus, when my wife went on to lecture me on how wrong I was to erupt like that in front of the kids, though I didn’t fight back (I knew better), it really wasn’t a productive conversation. Though I was listening to her, I wasn’t actively engaged in the conversation, and so I’m sure she wasn’t getting much satisfaction out of it, either. Eventually, we went to sleep.

The next morning we had a better, much more productive conversation. I told her how out of control I had felt and, more important, how unsupported I had felt by her comments. She said that she heard me and understood but that I could never act out my rage like that in front of her or the kids and that it had really scared her. I felt horrible and embarrassed and apologized profusely. We made up and committed to each other and to ourselves and to our children. Most important, we agreed that when future conflicts arose, we would make sure to resolve them when both of our mindsets were right.

What was the difference between these conversations? In the first one, the previous night, I was still in a state of rage. In the second one, I was calm, cool, and rational, and that made all the difference. Essentially, it’s impossible to resolve conflicts with someone in a state of rage or in any highly volatile emotional state, and so it’s simply inadvisable to try. In such situations, no matter how much you want to resolve a conflict immediately, it’s always best to wait until cooler heads prevail.

If you’re the one who’s in the emotionally volatile state, you’ve got to be able to articulate that—and only that—in a calm way. In other words, you’ve got to be able to say to the other party something like this: “I’m in a highly volatile state and would really appreciate trying to resolve this later.” Admittedly, it’s very hard to say this calmly while you’re so worked up, but it’s essential.

If you’re the party who’s dealing with someone in a highly emotional state, it’s essential to give that person space before trying to resolve the conflict. As tempting as it might be to resolve things as soon as possible, it simply won’t work until both parties are calm, cool, and collected. Don’t waste any time and energy on the situation if you can see that the other person’s emotions are still red hot. Instead, take a deep breath, give the other person space, and resolve the conflict later.

In so many interpersonal situations, time is a valuable asset. Conflict resolution, whether at home or at work, is one of them. Avoid the temptation to resolve things right away, and give the situation some time. Both parties probably will come back to the table calmer and more able to have a rational discussion that leaves everyone feeling better.

A few weeks later, we played another family game of Clue. This time, no matter whodunit, I was determined to remember it was only a game and, having dunit wrong before, to get things right this time. Technically my wife won that game, but really, we all won.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Come to a mutual understanding with your significant others at home and/or your close associates at work about the emotional state in which you will try to solve conflicts and the emotional state in which you will not. Articulate this understanding to one another.

2. When a conflict does arise, give each other some space to make sure nobody is trying to resolve the situation while feeling rage, being out of control, or experiencing other extremely volatile feelings.

3. Talk about and resolve the conflict after you’ve each had ample time to reflect, get calm, and get rational.

4. Reflect on the entire conflict-resolution process and how it can be improved further.





43. Let Go to Get What You Want


This is impossible,” I said to my psychotherapist, Judy, with despair. “She’ll never leave her husband, and she’ll never be with me.”

I was an anxious mess. I was madly in love with her, my office coworker at Radio Disney. Not only was I in love with her, I wanted—no, I expected—her to leave her husband for me. I knew she had feelings for me, but it was an impossible situation because despite my feelings for her and her feelings for me, she was married. Furthermore, she was a loyal and responsible wife, and even if she knew deep down she had married the wrong person, she was determined to do the right thing and try to make her marriage work.

“How can I make her leave her husband?” I asked Judy. I was used to getting what I wanted, and surely there was a way to do that in this situation.

“Can you do that?” Judy replied, answering a question with a question like the excellent therapist she was.

“Well,” I reasoned. “I guess I can’t make her do anything. God knows I’ve tried, and it doesn’t seem to be working for me.”

“What can you do, then?” Judy said. “What can you control in this uncontrollable conflict?”

I thought for a minute, and then I replied with what I thought was the right answer: “I guess I can control letting go of the situation.”

“Exactly!” Judy said. “The solution to a conflict you simply cannot control is letting go: of control, of the outcome, of everything.”

But of course that solution would be much easier said than done. The reality is that letting go is hard. In fact, the more you want something or someone, the harder it is to let go. Fortunately for me, Judy didn’t stop there.

“What else can you control, Dave?” she said.

I scratched my head and thought about it a bit. It had been hard enough to think of letting go, and I sure as heck couldn’t think of anything else I could control in this impossible situation. Finally, my therapist broke the silence.

“Can you control taking good care of yourself?” she asked. “Can you control eating well, exercising, getting enough sleep, and generally treating your body well?”

“Of course I can.” I half shrugged and half smiled. I was annoyed, because I couldn’t see how that would bring me any closer to getting what I wanted.

Judy was dead right, though. No matter how stressful the situation was, no matter how anxiety-producing and crazy-making the conflict was, no matter how much I felt that I had no choices at the time, the truth was that I did have choices. I could choose to let go, and I could choose to take great care of myself even in my darkest hour. It certainly wouldn’t be easy, but I was in control.

Sometimes you can resolve conflicts with people easily. Sometimes it takes work, but through time and effort, through listening and mirroring and validation—along with a dose of patience—you can get to a good place with someone. But sometimes conflicts simply can’t be solved. In those instances, the best way, really the only way, to resolve a conflict with another person is to decide to let go. Resolve to surrender what you can’t control and to control what you always can: taking great care of your mind, body, and heart.

Alcoholics Anonymous has a prayer they say at every meeting that is simple but powerful:

God, grant me the serenity

To accept the things I cannot change,

The courage to change the things I can,

And the wisdom to know the difference.

Maybe your husband is cheating on you. Maybe your boss is mistreating you. Maybe the love of your life won’t leave her husband for you. There are many conflicts that will arise between you and another person that you won’t have control over. Often, the faster you can recognize that, let go, and move on or get out, the sooner you’ll feel resolved.

It’s not easy by any stretch of the imagination. Letting go of that married officemate was the hardest thing I’ve ever done. Letting go of the idea that she’d leave her husband for me was a constant battle for months. Ultimately, I took those words from Judy to heart: I focused on what I could control: I took care of myself, began exercising regularly, and went on a strict diet regimen that had me losing sixty-nine pounds and getting into the best shape of my life.

Each day it got a little easier to deal with accepting the fact that this was one conflict whose outcome I couldn’t control. I knew I couldn’t see her every day and still let go, and so I made the difficult decision to leave Disney, the company we worked at together, and cut off all communication between us.

Anything could have happened, but as you already know from the Introduction, this story had a happy ending. Over a year after I’d last talked to Carrie and months after I’d finally let her go, she became available. I cautiously chose to reengage with her at that time, and, well, ten years, one marriage, two businesses, and, most important, three children later, the rest is history.

Sometimes you have to learn to let go to get what you want.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down a time when you had to let go of a person, thought, or goal. How did it feel, and what did you do to make it work?

2. Write down a list of five ways you can make the choice to take better care of yourself in a time of conflict.

3. The next time a conflict arises that you deem unsolvable, refer back to these two items, work to let go, and make the positive choice to take care of yourself.





44. Put On a Bulletproof Vest (or the Simple System That Saved My Marriage)


I just can’t take it anymore. Why can’t we learn how to resolve conflicts better? We’ve been married for seven years! We’re good at getting along, so why can’t we get good at fighting? You’d think we’d have it down by now!”

My wife, Carrie, was angry and frustrated. Frankly, I was, too, because she was right. We had been married for seven years, and overall it had been seven wonderful ones. But our communication certainly could have used improvement, especially our communication when we fought. It just seemed like we repeated the same things over and over: I felt criticized, she felt unappreciated, I got angry and needed space, and she always wanted to talk about everything.

On one hand, we knew that every couple fights. On the other hand, we both wanted to learn to fight better, resolve conflicts better, and in general communicate better.

Several entrepreneur friends in New York swore by this one therapist, Dr. Bonnie, and so we decided to give her a try. Dr. Bonnie Weil is an accomplished psychologist, bestselling author, and thought leader in the psychology of relationships. She had appeared on countless television shows, including the Oprah Winfrey Show—five times—sharing her expertise. She was expensive but, according to my entrepreneur friends, well worth it, so we decide to pay her a visit.

Within one fifty-minute session, amazingly, it felt like Dr. Bonnie understood exactly where each of us was coming from and how we felt. More important, in just three sessions Dr. Bonnie gave us a system for resolving difficult conflicts that we’ve used successfully now for several years and through many an argument. You could even argue that it’s saved our marriage.

Here’s her system, as we practice it at least:

1. The person who’s upset at the other person requests an appointment to discuss it and offers a few possible times to talk. Importantly, none of those times is “right now.” This way, it gives that person some time and space to prepare.

2. When it’s time for the appointment, the two people get together in a quiet, safe place, and the offending party agrees to put on a bulletproof vest. In other words, he agrees to not be offended or get defensive about what the other person is saying. Instead, he agrees to focus on listening and understanding.

3. The person who’s upset describes the problem in its entirety and how it’s making her feel.

4. The other person mirrors and validates everything his partner is saying, not trying to solve or defend or do anything but listen, mirror, and validate.

5. The offending party offers a genuine, authentic “I’m sorry.”

6. When both parties agree that the offended party feels heard and understood, that person shares three possible positive solutions to the problem. The offending party agrees to at least one of the solutions.

7. Finally and perhaps most important, both people celebrate the successful resolution of the conflict by engaging in physical activity together. Sure, that could mean going for a jog, but if that physical activity happens to be intimate, it’s even better!



You might be thinking that this system seems awfully forced and even robotic, and I think that’s a fair complaint about it. But that being said, it really does work. Here’s an example of Bonnie’s system in action:

One day a year or so ago, I was taking the train home with my wife after work, and Carrie asked me why I hadn’t fired an employee yet whom I knew I had to fire. I felt criticized and angry at her for bringing it up the way she did, and I felt out of control and trapped to be on the train with her while experiencing those emotions. I told Carrie I was upset and wanted an appointment and offered her three possible times to discuss it.

Carrie took the earliest appointment, and a couple of hours later we sat down together in our bedroom. Carrie put on her bulletproof vest, and I shared what I was upset about. Carrie did a great job of listening, mirroring, and validating how I was feeling. She said, “I’m sorry,” and I knew she meant it. Then I suggested three possible solutions: We could choose not to discuss work on the train, we could choose to not take the train together anymore, or we could have a code word for when a sensitive topic came up in conversation while we were on the train together.

Carrie said she really loved taking the train with me and wanted to be able to keep doing it, so she chose the first solution: We no longer would talk about work on the train (she also said we should use the third solution in case we ever broke that plan and the conversation got out of hand). We closed the conversation with some jumping jacks, which, to be honest, were followed by much more intimate physical activity. Suffice it to say that soon enough we both felt much better.

Most important, since then, we have barely talked about work on the train, and we haven’t had another argument like that again. In the long run, it really worked!

Obviously, this system is more appropriate for conflicts at home with your significant other than for conflicts at work (especially step 7). But if it is used in the appropriate setting, it’s simple and truly effective. I’m thankful to Dr. Bonnie for sharing it with me and hopeful that you can solve a problem or two with the one you love as well.


FAST First Action Steps to Take:

1. Write down the name of your significant other or the person you’re closest with and then write down a recent conflict you’ve had with that person.

2. Using Dr. Bonnie’s system, write down how you might have resolved that conflict better.

3. Share this chapter with your partner and agree to use this system to resolve your next conflict.

4. The next time you have a conflict with your significant other, refer back to this system and give it a try. Even if it feels forced, stiff, or robotic, see it through. You might be surprised and delighted with the results.

