CHAPTER 10




Recognizing and Resolving Ethical Dilemmas

• “Sure, I will benefit if you buy our product, but I wouldn’t try to sell it to you if I didn’t believe it was the best product for you and your company.”

• “When you work for us, you know you’re working for a company that treats all of its employees equally, regardless of race or gender.”

• “Our agreement creates value for everyone—we’re expanding the pie and also benefiting society.”

• “My sales team deserves 70 percent of the credit for the company’s success over the last two years.”



Imagine that you are negotiating with a person who has made one of these statements. In addition, assume that you do not believe that the facts that they report are true. What is your first reaction? If you are like most people, you will probably conclude that your counterpart is unethical and is lying to gain the upper hand in the negotiation.

But there is an alternative explanation, one that you should consider the next time you think (or know) that a statement made by the other party is false: most people—and negotiators are no exception—make incorrect, self-serving statements on a fairly regular basis without even being aware that they are engaging in unethical behavior. When you treat such negotiators as liars, they are likely to be highly offended, as they believe—and can often justify—every word they said. In addition, treating them like liars may well start an escalatory path that destroys the relationship. How, then, can you deal with this problem?

THE PROBLEM OF BOUNDED ETHICALITY

Many (and perhaps most) of the unethical behaviors in which people engage during negotiations result from ordinary, unintentional psychological processes, not from deliberate—or even conscious—deception. In Chapter 8, we used the term “bounded awareness” to refer to the systematic failure of negotiators to see readily available and important information in their environment. In his work with Mahzarin Banaji and Dolly Chugh, Max also uses the term “bounded ethicality”1 to refer to the systematic and predictable psychological processes that lead people, including negotiators, to engage in ethically questionable behaviors that are inconsistent with even their own preferred ethics. Bounded ethicality comes into play when a negotiator acts in a manner that harms others and that clashes with his or her own conscious beliefs about right and wrong.

The first step in understanding the power of bounded ethicality is to discard the common assumption that the seemingly unethical behavior you observe suggests that the other party lacks your high ethical standards, or that they have consciously chosen self-rewarding behavior over what they believe to be right. In recent years, research in social psychology has thoroughly debunked the notion that all human behavior is intentional and has underscored the powerful impact of the unconscious mind on our actions.

The second critical step is to understand that the problem of bounded ethicality does not only affect others. You, too, are vulnerable. If behaving ethically is genuinely one of your objectives, you need to understand the ways in which an honest person such as yourself might act unethically without conscious awareness. You may think that you are doing nothing wrong, while at the same time acting in ways that fall short of your own ethical standards. Because your morality isn’t the problem, your moral compass will not help you at such times. Rather, the solution is to increase your awareness of the psychological pitfalls that bedevil even the most well-intentioned and ethical negotiators. In this chapter, we will show you how various factors can lead you and your negotiating partners to behave unethically—without conscious awareness—and how you can correct such behavior.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

When people talk about conflicts of interest, they usually assume that professionals consciously consider these opposing forces (what’s good for them versus their professional obligations). Take, for example, the old lawyer joke, “It’s not whether you win or lose, it’s how long you play the game,” which implies that attorneys are primarily motivated to maximize their billable hours. However, when lawyers are paid by the hour, they may truly come to believe that their clients are best served by a thorough, time-intensive process, whereas lawyers whose clients pay them a percentage of a settlement may be more likely to believe that their clients are best served by a quick agreement. These beliefs are not conscious or deliberately unethical, but they are biased by circumstance. Or as Upton Sinclair once stated, “It is difficult to get a man to understand something when his salary depends upon his not understanding it.”

In buyer-seller negotiations, it is common for the seller to believe that she is selling a higher-quality product than the buyer thinks he is buying. In fact, buyers often believe that the goods offered by different sellers are indistinguishable from each other, while the sellers view their own products as significantly better than those of other providers. Thus, when a salesperson says, “Sure, I will benefit if you buy our product, but I wouldn’t try to sell it to you if I didn’t believe it was the best product for you and your company,” she may well believe this statement. Yet substantial research tells us that the seller’s conflict of interest (being honest versus making the sale) can lead her to unconsciously view the world through a biased lens and to believe that her product is the very best option for you—even when that is not the case. When a seller claims that his products are the best on the market, and a prospective buyer believes that the products are indistinguishable from those of the competition, the buyer is likely to make sinister attributions about the seller’s ethics. When the discussion is over, the buyer assumes that the seller’s statements were indicative of unethical behavior when, in fact, the seller was falling prey to the psychological trap that Sinclair predicted.

THE PROBLEM OF AGENTS

Conflicts of interest often become most problematic when agents are involved—whether the agents are investment bankers, lawyers, literary agents, real-estate agents, or some other type of third party with a stake in the negotiation’s outcome. Consider what happens when a real-estate agent advises you, the buyer, to raise your bid on a house even though your current bid is consistent with a rational assessment of the property’s value. Is the agent thinking only of her own commission? We would argue that she is probably not intentionally corrupt, but simply human, and therefore implicitly motivated to see the world in a way that maximizes her own returns from the deal. The agent can quickly think of past situations in which a buyer preferred to overpay rather than risk losing a house, or bitterly regretted not heeding the agent’s advice to overpay. On the other hand, it will be much harder for her to recall times when this was the wrong advice, even though this happened more frequently.

When you are planning to buy or sell a house, your agent will undoubtedly tell you that she is working in your best interest.2 But when we look at the situation objectively, it becomes clear that the agent is a third party in the transaction, one whose interests do not perfectly match those of her principal (the buyer or seller). The buyer who wishes to pay as little as possible and who is in no hurry to buy may have to deal with a well-intentioned agent who is paid more when the selling price is high and who would love to close the deal as soon as possible. Similarly, a seller may be in no rush to sell, yet her agent devotes considerable energy to persuading her that it is best to make a sale before the market cools down. What can be done about this problem?

Due to the failure of agents to act professionally in many domains, including auditing, investment banking, and real estate, both federal and state governments have stepped in to remedy the situation. The most popular solution has been to implement rules mandating disclosure. The reasoning is that, if consumers understand that their advisers and agents have a conflict of interest, they can take the steps necessary to protect themselves. Are such remedies effective? Perhaps not. Consider that, in most states, real-estate agents for buyers and sellers are required to have their customers sign a disclosure statement clarifying that the agent will earn a percentage of any sales transaction. Most people sign the disclosure form and then never again consider the actual conflict of interest between buyer and agent. Instead, they truly believe that their agent is providing objective advice.

Furthermore, research suggests that disclosure could actually increase the problems that result from conflicts of interest.3 In a study conducted by decision researchers Daylian Cain, Don Moore, and George Loewenstein, participants playing the role of “adviser” were (in some cases) required to tell a participant playing the role of “client” that he had a vested stake in having the client believe that a commodity had a high value. As it turns out, this disclosure led “advisers” to feel more comfortable exaggerating their estimates; after all, “I already told them I was biased.” At the same time, the “clients” often believed that their advisers were more trustworthy if they had disclosed their conflict of interest. In other words, advisers would have been more honest, and clients would have been more cautious, if there had been no disclosure!

If disclosure will not help resolve this ethical dilemma, what are we to do? First, to the extent possible, try to solicit advice and expertise from people who do not have a stake in the outcome and who do not profit from manipulating your behavior or decisions. When this is not possible, try to collect additional information from outside sources that can serve as a reality check on the advice you have been given. For example, if the real-estate agent tells you that a particular property or region is worth investing in, solicit an outsider’s opinion by asking a different real-estate agent (a friend, an acquaintance, or a stranger whom you have not hired) whether this advice seems sound. Finally, be willing to ask your agent to justify her analysis. Instead of taking her “expert opinion” at face value, try to discover what objective criteria or procedure she employed before making her claims. She may trust her “intuition,” but there is no reason that you should.

A final note: most of us view conflicts of interest as a genuine societal problem that must be remedied. We understand that conflicts of interest can contort people’s judgments. Yet we have trouble believing that they affect our own judgments. The truth is that none of us is immune. There is no good reason to believe that you will behave any differently from the agent, the auditor, the buyer, or the seller when you have conflicting motivations and interests. To avoid such unintended unethical behaviors, the first step is to recognize your own fallibility.

IMPLICIT ASSOCIATIONS AND STEREOTYPES

Steve Barrett, the purchasing agent for his firm, had to choose between two landscaping companies to maintain the grounds of five different buildings. Company A had a long history in the area and offered fairly traditional services. Company B was newer and offered many more contemporary and innovative ideas. Company A was owned and represented in meetings by a white male; Company B was owned and represented by a Hispanic female. Barrett weighed the proven reliability of Company A against the contemporary image that his firm wished to convey. Almost every discussion and analysis led Barrett to believe that he should move into final negotiations with Company B. In the end, however, Barrett decided to go with his gut. He hired the older, more traditional firm.

A month later, Barrett was filling out some paperwork that asked him to report on diversity in the firm’s supplier relationships. Barrett didn’t mind filling out the forms, as he was a strong supporter of his firm’s view that women-and minority-owned companies should be seriously considered as contractors. As he checked the “Caucasian” and “male” boxes to indicate the ethnicity and gender of the owner of Company A, Barrett scanned the race and ethnicity of the finalists for his past dozen supply contracts. He noticed that women-and minority-owned companies were often finalists in his searches, but rarely got the contract. As he thought back, Barrett began to feel a bit guilty. In the end, however, he concluded that these suppliers were not yet fully competitive, though he hoped they would be in the near future. Barrett remained proud of his continued (and often vocal) support of equity and fairness in society and of his company’s aggressive affirmative-action policies.

Soon after the landscaping contract was signed, Barrett watched a segment of the TV show Dateline NBC featuring Harvard psychologist Mahzarin Banaji that disturbed him. The segment was about the Implicit Association Test (IAT) on Harvard University’s website (http://implicit.harvard.edu).4 (We encourage readers to visit the website before reading further and to try one or two of the “tests.”) This website provides a set of exercises designed to identify unconscious racial and gender biases. With the landscaping episode on his mind, Barrett decided to take one of the tests to prove to himself that his decision had been unbiased.

The first set of items on the test that Barrett selected asked him to categorize photographs of Hispanics and European-Americans as quickly as possible. Using computer keys as described on the site, Barrett identified faces as either “Hispanic” or “white.” In the next test, he was asked to identify words that appeared on the screen as positive (i.e., “good”) or negative (i.e., “bad”). Barrett had no trouble classifying words such as “nice,” “love,” and “peace” as “good” and classifying words such as “death,” “devil,” and “bomb” as “bad.”

In the next stage, these two tests were merged. Now Barrett was asked to hit one key if a Hispanic face or a “good” word appeared on the screen. He was to hit a different key if a white face or a “bad” word appeared. This task proved to be more complicated; Barrett found himself making a few errors and responding considerably slower than he had in previous tasks.

After thirty words or photos had appeared, the task changed. Now Barrett was asked to use one key to identify either a Hispanic face or a “bad” word and to hit a different key to identify either a white face or a “good” word. Barrett was pleased that he was able to complete this task very accurately and quickly.

As he had expected, the computer confirmed that Barrett’s responses for the second combined set of words and faces were much faster than his responses for the first combined set. It appears that Barrett processed information and completed tasks more quickly when white faces were associated with “good” and Hispanic faces were associated with “bad” than when Hispanic was associated with “good” and white with “bad.” As a result, the computer suggested to Barrett that he showed an implicit association between “Hispanic” and “bad” and between “white” and “good.” Although he didn’t consciously endorse such a preference, Barrett’s implicit attitudes seemed to favor whites over Hispanics. Were these implicit associations connected to his landscaping decision? If the company owned by the white male had been the one that was newer but more innovative, would Barrett have concluded that innovation was a more critical factor than experience? Would he have found a way to justify hiring the white male anyway? Barrett was unsettled by the results of the study and what they might imply.

Most of us, including those who perceive ourselves to be liberal and non-discriminating on the basis of race and gender, may be unaware of our implicit associations. Typically, people are not only unaware of their implicit processes, but are also reluctant to believe that there can exist thought processes (which affect behavior!) that are inaccessible to them. So, consider what it could mean when a potential employer says in a negotiation, “When you work for us, you know you’re working for a company that treats all employees equally, regardless of race or gender.” One likely possibility is that the employer believes her statement, but that she and other members of her firm nonetheless discriminate through their implicit thought processes.

Humans tend to stereotype people from groups other than our own, often without conscious awareness. Stereotyping consists of identifying a key feature that is perceived to describe some members of a group, applying these descriptions to all members of the group, and failing to notice the uniqueness of specific group members. Clearly, a major drawback of stereotyping is that it can lead people to become prejudiced and to behave unkindly toward members of other groups. It can also lead us to overlook important information about the individual, causing us to behave in ways that are inappropriate, uninformed, or irrational given what the other person is really like. One result of stereotyping is that our own negotiated outcomes tend to suffer. Dolly Chugh, of the Stern School of Business at NYU, refers to this as the stereotype tax, the price we pay for not overcoming our stereotypes of others.5 In other words, our stereotypes not only hurt other people, they can also hurt us.

Unfortunately, many negotiation texts encourage you to stereotype your negotiation opponent. Such books promote stereotypic and overly simplistic advice on how to negotiate with the Chinese, the Japanese, South Americans, Israelis, and so on. While it is critically important that you learn as much as possible about cultural norms before you enter into cross-cultural negotiations, it is dangerous to negotiate with “them” as if they are all the same. We readily identify variation in the way that people from our own culture behave, but we too easily accept stereotypes about people from other countries and cultures. Too often, these stereotypes lead negotiators to act as if they already know a great deal about the other side, when they could learn much more by entering the negotiation with an open mind and searching for individuating information—or, better yet, by preparing in advance, by asking questions, and by trying to learn about the perspective, personality, and diverse interests of the other party.

We most commonly think about stereotyping based on obvious differences such as race, gender, nationality, and so on. Yet it’s also possible to form stereotypes about specific companies and their negotiating styles that lead us to snap judgments about how a particular company “thinks.” Of course, companies don’t think; people do, and individuals within a specific company differ. When negotiating with different members of the same organization, we, too, often treat these individuals as a single actor—even as we recognize the diversity of thought and opinion within our own organization. Have you ever started a conversation with a representative of a phone company—or an airline—in a heated manner because you had a previous conversation with a representative of that company who was unhelpful and rude? How did that work out for you? Probably not well.

So, when Steve Barrett chose to hire a traditional landscaping company owned by a white male rather than an innovative firm owned by a Hispanic female, was he aware of his implicit attitudes and the degree to which he was showing a preference for those who were a lot like him? Probably not. Becoming a more ethical, effective negotiator requires that we not only confront our intentional biases, but also seek to understand our implicit preferences. Negotiation geniuses are not unbiased people. Rather, they are people who confront their biases and do as much as they can to overcome or offset them.

PARASITIC VALUE CREATION

Pharmaceutical Firm X manufactures a beneficial drug and is selling 100 million pills per year at a price of $4.05 per pill. The manufacturing cost is $0.05 per pill, so the drug is earning Firm X $400 million per year. After a period of time, Pharmaceutical Firm Y introduces a drug that treats the same ailment. Best estimates suggest that this competition from Y will lead X to reduce the price of its drug by about $1, to $3.05. Furthermore, Y is expected to capture 40 percent of the market by charging an even lower price of $2.55 per pill. In other words, X is expected to sell 60 million pills for a $180 million profit per year, and Y is expected to sell 40 million pills for a $100 million profit per year. After Y’s entry into the market, X’s and Y’s combined profitability ($280 million) will be significantly less than the $400 million that X was earning as a monopolist.

Fortunately, the chief negotiator for Firm X has taken a course on negotiation and value creation and has mastered the ideas presented in Chapters 2 and 3 of this book. He approaches Y’s chief negotiator with the following offer: What if X were to pay Y $125 million annually to stay out of the market? Because $125 million is more than the $100 million that Y expects to earn, Y would be better off financially if it did not compete with X in this market. X would also be better off, since its current $400 million profit minus a $125 million payment to Y would exceed the $180 million profit it expects if Y enters the marketplace.

This solution seems perfect, doesn’t it? By working together, X and Y have expanded the pie and created $120 million in value. Let the celebrations begin!

But wait a minute. Where did that “created” value come from? Unfortunately, it came from the ailing consumers who must now continue paying $4.05 per pill rather than $2.55 or $3.05, the approximate amounts they would pay if Y brought its product to market. In other words, the $120 million was not really created; it was just transferred from consumers to producers. Because such agreements restrain competition, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC)—along with similar entities in other countries—considers them illegal. If such agreements were allowed, X and Y could collude to create value at the expense of consumers. James Gillespie and Max Bazerman use the term parasitic value creation to describe what occurs when negotiators create value by taking value away from parties who are not at the bargaining table.6 We think that the word “parasitic” is appropriate because the benefits that the negotiators achieve come at the expense of others.

Since this type of agreement is clearly illegal, and Firm X could not have approached Firm Y with the kind of offer we described, let’s consider how parasitic value creation might actually play out in the real world. What might it look like? In a variation of the scenario described above, the FTC sued pharmaceutical companies Schering-Plough and Upsher-Smith, accusing them of reaching an agreement that restricted trade. Before the FTC lawsuit was filed, Upsher-Smith was planning to introduce a generic pharmaceutical product that would threaten Schering-Plough’s dominant product (K-Dur 20, a potassium supplement). Schering-Plough tried to stop Upsher-Smith’s entrance into the marketplace by filing a lawsuit that accused Upsher-Smith of violating Schering-Plough’s patent. The two pharmaceutical firms reached an out-of-court settlement that specified that Upsher-Smith would delay its entry into the market and that Schering-Plough would pay Upsher-Smith $60 million for five unrelated products.

The FTC lawsuit against the pharmaceutical firms argued that the $60 million was a sham payment for the market delay, intended not as fair compensation for the five products but rather to keep Upsher-Smith’s generic product off the market. The pharmaceutical firms’ lawyers argued that negotiating multiple issues simultaneously (combining the settlement of the pending litigation with the transaction involving five other products) helped create value and was beneficial to society. They even hired a well-known negotiation expert to testify that value creation was good for society.

We know this case well because Max was on the other side, serving as an expert witness for the FTC. Max’s view, then and now, was that parasitic value creation had occurred: the companies created value for themselves, with no apparent concern for the harmful effects of their actions on consumers and, more broadly, on society. In Max’s opinion, the five patents simply provided a cover story.7

Sadly, many of the negotiation exercises conducted in training seminars implicitly encourage students to engage in parasitic value creation. In one common simulation, students represent firms in an industry that has few players. Across a number of rounds, each firm must decide whether to charge a high or low price. When one firm charges a high price and the other firm charges a low price, the low-price firm picks up market share and wins at the expense of the high-price firm. Yet the game is set up so that both parties would be better off if they both charged high prices. Such exercises are based on the well-known prisoners’ dilemma problem, in which players are individually better off playing a noncooperative strategy (setting a low price), but collectively better off playing a cooperative strategy (setting a high price).8 In such simulations, instructors praise the students who figure out how to develop a pattern of mutually high prices that lead to successful value creation for both firms. Given what we know about parasitic value creation, it is troubling that much of this training occurs without any consideration of where the extra profit comes from—the consumer!

When we use the term “parasitic value creation,” we do not mean to insult most value-creating agreements, nor are we objecting to companies charging whatever prices the market will bear. Most of the time, value creation should be allowed even when it will impose costs on parties who are away from the table. For example, we view the U.S. pharmaceutical industry as one of the great success stories of the past century. If these firms hadn’t achieved healthy profits, many drugs that save lives, reduce the need for surgery, and relieve pain would not exist.

On the other hand, any analysis that focuses only on the profits of coordinating pharmaceutical firms and ignores the harm done to consumers would be incomplete—and possibly unethical. We believe that these companies (and their negotiators) should consider, in much the same way antitrust laws ask firms to consider, whether they are creating societal value or simply helping each other extract as much money as possible at the expense of the consumer or other stakeholders. When your negotiations will affect people who are not seated at the table, such as consumers or future generations, make sure that your ethicality is not bounded by the unintentional exclusion of these parties’ concerns.

How can you judge whether the value you create in your negotiation benefits society? One criterion would be to call value creation socially beneficial when the value created for the parties at the table exceeds the costs imposed on outsiders; in such cases, while some of the value created may result from parasitic value creation, the overall result is still a net benefit to society. More generally, to remain alert to the potentially parasitic aspects of your value creation, we recommend that you ask the following questions:



• Who are all of the parties affected by this agreement?

• How is each party affected?

• Should I be concerned about any of these parties?

• How do the effects of the agreement on parties not at the table compare with the effects on the parties involved in the agreement?



We close this section with a political note. One legal, yet disturbing, example of parasitic value creation concerns the role of special-interest groups in elections. In the United States, special-interest groups, including corporations and nonprofit organizations, contribute large sums of money to political campaigns. Politicians, in turn, provide special-interest groups with access to the federal government and influence over policy. Politicians benefit, as the funds keep their campaign coffers full. And the vast sums that special-interest groups spend year after year on lobbying suggest that they are receiving a fine return on their investment. From a simple value-creation perspective, this negotiation achieves gain for all parties—unless you happen to be an average citizen without a powerful lobby! Ideally, elected officials would implement wise policy for everyone, rather than enacting distorted policies that benefit special-interest groups at the expense of the broader public. Then again, for the many reasons we have already covered in this chapter on bounded ethicality, we fear that few, if any, politicians or lobbyists are having a hard time sleeping at night. They have lots of ways to justify their behaviors and little incentive to question their profitable strategies.

OVERCLAIMING CREDIT

After twelve years of marriage, Jim and Karen have decided to divorce. Fortunately, they are both nice people, and have agreed to divide their assets fairly and to avoid conflict that could negatively affect their two children. They hire a divorce mediator, who asks both Jim and Karen to tell her privately how the financial assets should be divided.

“I think I deserve 60 percent of the assets,” Jim tells the mediator. “In the first year of our marriage, I received a very large inheritance from an uncle that helped us out a lot. We wouldn’t have been able to afford the down payment on our house if it wasn’t for that money. So, I think I deserve a bit more than Karen.”

Next, the mediator meets privately with Karen, who also believes that 60–40 is the correct division of assets, but not in favor of Jim. “I think I should get 60 percent and Jim should get 40 percent. After all, I’ve earned almost twice as much as Jim over the past twelve years.”

Is Jim being greedy? Is Karen? Are they both arguing for more than they honestly believe that they deserve? Has the divorce affected their ethics for the worse? More likely, as a result of egocentrism (described in Chapter 5), they genuinely believe that they have contributed more to the marriage than is actually the case.

Overclaiming credit can hinder the implementation and progress of a variety of joint ventures, from start-up companies to marriages. Because we tend to make self-serving attributions regarding our behaviors, even honest, well-meaning people are likely to believe that they contributed more to an enterprise than they actually did and then to make moral judgments about those who disagree with them. This serves to fuel the conflict. So, when your colleague argues, “My sales team deserves 70 percent of the credit for the corporation’s success over the last two years,” accept the fact that she probably believes this statement is true even if you are sure it is not. If pushed, she can probably find some data or logic (however frivolous it may seem to you) that supports her claim.

Even at a societal level, overclaiming can inflict great harm. Across the globe, overharvesting has devastated once-thriving fisheries. Many fisheries have collapsed, and considerable uncertainty surrounds the question of when and how they will be brought back to a sustainable level. A significant part of the problem can be traced to the fact that different fishing groups all believe they are only taking their “fair share” of the resource.9

How can you control your own natural psychological tendency to overclaim? Max and his colleagues Nick Epley and Eugene Caruso recently asked one group of MBA students from a prestigious program to estimate the percentage of work they personally completed in their study groups.10 On average, the claims made by members of each group, when added together, totaled 139 percent. Of course, there is only 100 percent to go around. However, the researchers found that the tendency to overclaim diminished when they asked group members to “unpack” the contributions of others—that is, when they asked group members to think about the contribution of each other member, not just their own contribution. Overclaiming did not disappear entirely, but it did drop by about half; consciously and explicitly thinking about the contributions that each person had made reduced the magnitude of the bias. If you want to diminish the tendency of your group or team members to overclaim credit or contribution, one way to do so is to get them to focus not only on what they have done, but on what each individual, considered one at a time, has done as well.

PUTTING IT TO PRACTICE

Most discussions of ethics in negotiation focus on your intentional choices—whether or not it is okay to lie, to hide information, and so on. In this chapter, we have stressed that negotiators are often not even aware that they are engaging in ethically questionable behavior. Furthermore, the busier people are, the more they will rely on automatic thought processes, and the more likely it is that they will engage in ordinary unethical behaviors.11 Unfortunately, most negotiators are busy people for whom negotiating is just one of the many tasks that they must accomplish each day. To make matters worse, there is already a lot to think about when negotiating: how to create and claim value, how to be a good investigative negotiator, how to defend against strategies of influence, et cetera. How can a negotiator do all of this and still avoid falling back on the kinds of automatic processes that lead to ordinary unethical behaviors?

Our perspective on bounded ethicality yields specific advice for managing your own ethical behavior and for understanding and managing the behavior of others. In terms of your own behavior, some important steps include:



1. If you are in a situation where you have a conflict of interest, become extra vigilant. To the extent possible, try to eliminate the source of the conflict (e.g., by recusing yourself from decisions in which you have a conflict of interest).

2. Be aware of the possibility that you may be discriminating against others unconsciously. Taking the IAT tests (mentioned earlier) may help you appreciate this natural tendency. Then, be proactive and take steps to offset your proclivity for selectively rewarding those whom you implicitly favor.

3. Whenever you feel that you have created value, try to analyze where exactly that value is coming from. Is anyone being made worse off? Is this trade-off acceptable to you?

4. When allocating credit, be careful not to give yourself too much credit—or to give too much credit to those whom you like. Specifically, be wary of the tendency to overweight those factors and inputs on which you perform strongly and that make you look good.



You can also use your understanding of bounded ethicality to better understand your negotiation counterparts and to develop better relationships with them. Here, we offer three guidelines for leveraging your knowledge to this end:



1. Audit the claims of your counterparts and look for unintentional biases.

2. Accept the fact that they may be unaware of their bounded ethicality. They may not notice that they are biased or that they are being parasitic in their efforts to create value. Avoid sinister attributions. When someone makes a statement that you do not believe, or “creates” value at the expense of others, avoid labeling him a liar or a thief. Instead, help him see the causes and consequences of his judgments and behaviors.

3. Finally, if you are unable to help your counterpart revise his biased perspective, follow the advice in Chapters 6 and 9 to craft a response that takes his misperceptions into account. For example, when you believe a salesperson is overstating the quality of his product, rather than withdrawing from the discussion or accusing him of exaggeration, deal with this ordinary unethical behavior through the use of a contingency contract. Ask how the superior quality of his product can be measured, and attach payment to performance. If the salesperson was being intentionally deceptive, he will back off the claim. But if he is engaging in ordinary unethical behavior—and believes his exaggerated claim—he will accept the contingency clause (to your benefit).

THE ETHICAL NEGOTIATION GENIUS

We recognize that there is no guarantee that you will easily implement these recommendations. Hopefully, however, we have convinced you that an ethical negotiation genius is one who wants to try to eliminate unintended unethical behaviors along with more obvious intentional ones. Just because many of these unintended unethical behaviors are common does not mean they are “okay.” In our view, ethics in negotiation is about actively striving to be a better person, not about reaching—and settling for—an “acceptable” status quo.





