CHAPTER 11




Negotiating from a Position of Weakness

One of the questions that we hear most often from our students and clients—many of whom are seasoned dealmakers—sounds something like this: “The framework and strategies you have presented are great. They have helped us a lot. But what can you do when you have no power in the negotiation? Can you get a great deal when the other side is holding all the cards?” When we ask our students and clients to explain their situation, we hear many versions of the same basic stories. Here are the most common:





STORY 1:

“In our business, potential customers constantly tell us that we have to lower our price, and that if we don’t lower it, they will go to our competitors. They do not seem to want to talk about anything other than price. And the fact of the matter is, they can go to our competitors and get what they want. How can we possibly negotiate a good deal in such situations?”





STORY 2:

“I recently received a job offer from a company that I would like to work for. The one big problem is that the compensation is not as good as I would like it to be. The other big problem is that my BATNA stinks. I have no other job offers, and I’m pretty desperate. How can I negotiate a better deal for myself?”





STORY 3:

“I am involved in a dispute and the other side is threatening to sue. Their lawsuit is entirely frivolous, but if we go to court, they can continue to litigate until I go bankrupt. They have a lot of money and can easily afford a long court battle. What can I do?”





STORY 4:

“My country is a small player on the world stage. When it comes to negotiating economic or political international agreements, we are constantly being pushed around. More powerful countries overlook our interests, and we practically have to plead for what we most desperately need. Is there some way to improve our position?”



As these stories demonstrate, weakness in negotiation results when the other side’s BATNA is relatively strong and your BATNA is relatively weak. Have you ever felt trapped in such predicaments? How did you respond? In our experience, most people in such situations either panic or quickly accept the futility of trying to negotiate away their misfortune. Few actually do what it takes to negotiate effectively and to improve their outcomes. We have also noticed that those who do think carefully and systematically about such situations, and who do not abandon the negotiation framework developed in this book, are often able to achieve outstanding results in the face of seemingly impossible odds.

In this chapter, we will help you to understand the secrets of these negotiation geniuses. We will first present strategies that you can leverage even when you have little power. We will then share with you strategies for upsetting the balance of power—that is, how you can move from being weak to being strong in the negotiation.

NEGOTIATING WITHOUT POWER

There is perhaps nothing that creates more anxiety for negotiators than the feeling of desperation that comes from having no good alternatives. The situation only worsens when you realize that the other side is not as anxious as you are to do the deal. Whether you are negotiating the specifics of your only job offer or a contract with the only vendor who can provide what you desperately need, knowing that “no deal” would be disastrous can place a lot of pressure on you. Unfortunately, this anxiety can cause you to give up the hope of creating or claiming value and to lose sight of the need to prepare and execute negotiations carefully and systematically. Instead, you begin to focus on getting a deal done at any cost. While it would be unfair for us to suggest that there is no reason to be concerned in such situations, it would also be unfair—and wildly inaccurate—to suggest that there is little you can do to improve your prospects. Consider the following strategies:

STRATEGY 1: DON’T REVEAL THAT YOU ARE WEAK

Think back to the story we presented in Chapter 1, in which President Roosevelt’s campaign manager was negotiating with a photographer over how much to pay for the use of three million copies of a photograph. The problem was that the campaign had already printed the three million copies, and the photographer (who owned the copyright to the photograph) had the legal right to charge $1 per copy. The campaign manager’s BATNA was very weak: if an agreeable price could not be negotiated, they would have to throw away the pamphlets or face litigation. Neither of these eventualities came to fruition. Not only did the campaign manager secure the right to use the photograph, but the photographer even offered to pay $250 to consummate the deal.

The key to the campaign manager’s success: the campaign manager’s position was weak, but the photographer did not know that it was weak. Had the photographer known that three million copies of the photograph had already been printed, he would have known that he was in the position of power and could negotiate a more profitable deal.

The obvious lesson: having a weak BATNA is not terribly problematic if the other side does not know that your BATNA is weak. If you have a weak BATNA, don’t advertise it!

Surprisingly enough, many people do not heed this advice; in fact, they often make their bad situation worse by unwittingly revealing the weakness of their BATNA. You do this whenever you tell your customer that “time is of the essence” or that “we can meet with you whenever you have the time.” Often, it is important to convey that you are facing time constraints or that you have a flexible schedule. But you can send the same messages without making your desperation transparent. For example, you might say that “one of our preferences is to move ahead quickly” or that “we have some flexibility with regards to meeting with you.” When you are under pressure and focused on the weakness of your BATNA you may need to remind yourself to use this less revealing language.

STRATEGY 2: OVERCOME YOUR WEAKNESS BY LEVERAGING THEIR WEAKNESS

Recently, an executive student came to Deepak for help with a negotiation. He was attempting to sell his 50 percent stake in a company to his business partner, who controlled the other 50 percent. The seller (Deepak’s student) was focused on the desperation of his situation: he needed liquidity very soon, and his partner was the only viable buyer of his shares. The first thing the seller wanted to discuss was the degree to which he should be willing to devalue his shares in order to make the deal happen. “How low should I be willing to go?” he asked.

Nowhere in his analysis was there a consideration of how much the shares might be worth to the business partner—that is, how high a price the buyer might be willing to pay. When Deepak began to probe in this direction, it became clear that the business partner had much to gain by buying out the seller: the buyer had a lot of money, he had long desired to take the company in new directions that the seller had resisted, and purchasing the shares would give the buyer full control over the company’s future. As the discussion continued, the student began to realize that he was not the only one who was “weak” the buyer was also weak, albeit for very different reasons. Focusing on these factors helped the seller to increase his target and change the trajectory of the negotiation. In his discussions with the buyer, he outlined the many benefits to the buyer of making this purchase, downplayed his own desperation, and anchored aggressively in his opening offer. What was the eventual outcome? The two sides agreed to a deal in which the student sold only 40 percent of the company back to his partner—at a total price that was higher than he had originally hoped to receive for his entire 50 percent.

This story highlights the distinction between negotiators who focus only on their own BATNA and those who evaluate the other side’s BATNA. If their BATNA is weak, that means that you bring a lot of value to the deal—and you should be able to claim some (or much) of that value. In other words, having a weak BATNA is not particularly problematic if the other side’s BATNA is weak as well.

Consider again the success of Roosevelt’s campaign manager. Imagine that the photographer had discovered that the campaign manager’s BATNA was very weak. Would that guarantee a good outcome for the photographer and a poor outcome for the campaign manager? Not necessarily—because the photographer’s BATNA was also weak! If there were “no deal,” the campaign would suffer the costs of reprinting three million pamphlets, but the photographer would also lose a huge (“once in a lifetime”) opportunity to get tremendous public exposure for his artistic work.

What typically happens when both sides are in a position of weakness? If you think back to the fundamental framework developed in Chapter 1, you will recognize that when both parties have a weak BATNA, it means that the ZOPA is large. In other words, a lot of value is created when the two sides reach an agreement. Who claims more of this value? Usually it is the one who understands the fundamentals and leverages the strategies we discussed in Chapter 1. In this case, the one who fares better is the one who makes the other side’s weakness more salient throughout the negotiation. By focusing on the photographer’s opportunity for publicity, the campaign manager was able to secure a great outcome for his side. Meanwhile, the photographer was so focused on the prospect of losing a great opportunity that he failed to consider the value that he could bring to the Roosevelt campaign.

STRATEGY 3: IDENTIFY AND LEVERAGE YOUR DISTINCT VALUE PROPOSITION

Firms that bid for business (such as consulting firms, offshore services firms, quasi-commodity suppliers, construction and landscaping professionals, et cetera) often find themselves in a position of weakness. Here is a common complaint: “In our industry, our customers hold an auction for every deal. They solicit bids, and then accept the lowest one. There is no opportunity to create value by introducing multiple issues. Our customers tell us that we must lower our price further, otherwise they will go to our competitors.”

These negotiators are stuck bargaining over only one issue (usually price) in an arena where their competitors can compete effectively on the issue being discussed. Though these situations represent a very specific example of “weakness,” we devote special attention to them here because these are among the most common problems our students and clients face.

How can you create and claim value when your counterpart (typically, your customer) is only interested in discussing price? In many such situations, you can improve your prospects by changing the game you are being forced to play. Consider that, in negotiation, your ability to legitimately claim value is a function of your ability to create value. If you bring nothing to the other side that they cannot get elsewhere, then your offer is no better for them than their BATNA. In other words, the ZOPA is small or nonexistent. Why would they want to make a deal with you?

The good news is that, very often, you do bring something to the table that distinguishes you from your competitors. This is your distinct value proposition (DVP), and it need not be a lower price. You may have a better product, a higher-quality service, a good reputation, a strong brand, or a host of other assets that your customer values and that you can provide more effectively or cheaply than your competitors. Keep in mind that your DVP is not just something you think your customer should value, but something they actually value. If you bring such value-adding elements to the deal, you have the possibility of using them to get what you want (for example, a higher margin, repeat business, et cetera). The key is to figure out how to make your DVP a factor in the negotiation. This can be difficult when you are stuck in a price-only auction, when the other side seems uninterested in discussing any issue other than price, or when the other side is not familiar with the principle of creating value by negotiating multiple issues. Fortunately, all of these obstacles are surmountable. The following four strategies can help you make your DVP a factor the next time you take part in a negotiation or auction:



Submit multiple proposals. It is not always possible to adequately gauge, prior to making an offer, whether the customer has any interests other than a low price. For this reason, bidders often wonder whether they should bid the lowest possible price or a slightly higher price that includes additional features (such as a higher-quality product or additional services). Next time, try doing both! Instead of submitting one bid, consider making two or more bids simultaneously, a strategy that we initially described in Chapter 3. For example, one bid might be low on price and on service, while the other is somewhat higher on both. If the customer values service, they will appreciate knowing that they can get extra attention from your firm at an additional cost. This strategy will also increase your chances of submitting the winning bid: if they only value price, your low bid will be competitive; if they value other features, your higher bid will be competitive.



Lower your bid just enough to get into the second round. One reason why many companies use price-only auctions is that there are too many potential vendors from which to choose. But not all auctions end with a signed contract. Often, the auction is designed simply to “narrow the field.” For example, a customer might invite ten or more firms to bid for a project, and then winnow the list down to the two or three firms with the lowest price bids. These candidates are then invited to engage in one-on-one negotiations. Our Harvard colleagues Guhan Subramanian and Richard Zeckhauser have coined the term negotiauction to describe this two-stage process.1 In such situations, you need not submit the lowest bid; rather, you should submit a bid that is low enough to pass the initial hurdle, and then try to create value when negotiating multiple issues with the customer.

Keep in mind that your customers may not necessarily “announce” a formal negotiauction (most will not have heard the term) or explain the rules ahead of time. But they may still proceed as though that is the process they are following. Moreover, many customers will be willing to discuss your multi-issue proposal even after the auction is over if you were a “low enough” bidder. As such, it is often a good idea to reach out to your customers after you have “lost” the auction to see if you are in a position to offer a package deal that they value.

One of our students recently described to us how his firm ended up on the losing end of this strategy. His firm was competing against five other firms who were all vying for the same prized customer. The customer held an auction and announced that two of the five firms would advance to the final round of negotiations. The student’s firm was one of the two to advance. “We were pretty excited,” recalled the student. “We knew how to position our firm in relation to this [one remaining] competitor, and we were confident that the deal was ours. But we lost the deal—to a competitor who had not even made it past the initial auction!” While our student and his colleagues were celebrating, the sales team of the third firm had gone back to the customer and made the case that they could provide the best package deal, despite how the auction had turned out.



Take the agent out of the game. A common complaint among negotiators who are forced to compete solely on price sounds something like this: “We are a high-value partner for our customer. Unfortunately, the customer uses a purchasing agent to negotiate its deals, and this agent is compensated entirely based on how low a price she negotiates. The next thing we know, we’re stuck in an auction where the only thing that matters is who can provide the cheapest product. We lose—and the customer loses, too. The only winner is the purchasing agent!”

Intermediaries such as purchasing agents—whose incentives are not always aligned with those who have hired them to negotiate on their behalf—constitute one of the biggest barriers to efficient dealmaking. But there are ways to keep such intermediaries from derailing your negotiation. Here are two strategies for doing so, based on the successful experience of our executive students and clients:



• Send a copy of your proposals to the customer. Some months ago, one of our students decided to try the strategy of submitting multiple proposals to the purchasing agent, and so he submitted a high-price/high-value offer and a low-price/low-value offer. His low-price offer was accepted. Some weeks later he discovered (in a conversation with the customer) that the customer had never even seen the high-price proposal! In other words, the agent had conveniently eliminated it from the “short list” that was submitted to the customer. Having learned from that experience, our student now makes a habit of sending to his customers (“as a courtesy”) a copy of any proposal he submits to the purchasing agent. “Even if the customer chooses not to look at the information I send,” explains our student, “the very fact that it’s sitting on the boss’s desk makes the purchasing agent think twice before he tries to disregard my high-value proposal.”

• Negotiate a post-settlement settlement with the customer. When our clients and executive students tell us that pressure from the agent is forcing them to sideline their distinct value proposition in an effort to lower the price, we often tell them not to worry. Typically, purchasing agents exit the scene once they have served their purpose (albeit self-servingly) of choosing a vendor. If you really have the ability to create additional value for the customer (beyond cutting price), you will be in a strong position to pitch your proposition once you are dealing with the party that stands to benefit from “hearing you out.” In other words, don’t assume you are stuck with an inefficient agreement; if both sides can be made better off, you can always revise the agreement after you have won the deal.



Educate your customers between deals. How often do you communicate with your customers (or potential customers) when there is no potential deal on the table? You might send your customers a holiday card once a year, but how often do you reach out to educate them about your ability to provide them with new sources of value? If you are like the vast majority of negotiators, you spend little (if any) time doing so. But if your customers do not understand your distinct value proposition, then that is exactly what you should be doing. It should come as no surprise that customers will value your input and insights most when they have the time to listen to you, when they are least concerned about cutting costs, and when they are under no pressure to commit to anything. These conditions are most often in place when there is no deal on the table—that is, when they are not likely to disregard your comments as an attempt to manipulate them. In the middle of an auction, time pressure, cost concerns, and pressure to make a final decision all work against you. But those who reach out to their customers (and potential customers) in between auctions have the possibility of building relationships, learning about their customers’ interests and, most important, making their DVP a factor in the next negotiation or auction. Most customers are willing to discuss these matters openly and will appreciate your desire to understand their needs. In at least a few cases that we know of, vendors were able to pre-empt their customers’ next auctions entirely; by signaling an interest in understanding and meeting the customers’ needs and negotiating multiple issues simultaneously, they were able to sign deals before they ever went to auction! This should not be too surprising: both sides stand to benefit by engaging in negotiations that extend beyond discussions of price. Sometimes all the customer needs is a little bit of encouragement—or education—to push him in the direction of his own self-interest.

STRATEGY 4: IF YOUR POSITION IS VERY WEAK, CONSIDER RELINQUISHING WHAT LITTLE POWER YOU DO HAVE

Many years ago, when Deepak was a senior in college, he received a job offer from a consulting firm. Deepak loved the offer, with one exception: the salary was lower than he had hoped it would be. Deepak called the HR manager and asked whether salaries were negotiable. The HR manager told him that salaries were not negotiable, but offered to set up a lunch with the managing partner so that Deepak could discuss any issues that concerned him. At lunch, after an hour of pleasant conversation, the managing partner explained that the firm calculated starting salaries using a very simple formula in which only three factors mattered: the college the new hire had attended, his or her academic major, and prior work experience. Since they had already considered these factors, they could not increase Deepak’s salary.

Deepak knew that he had very little power in the negotiation: he had no better offer to use as leverage, and he estimated that “holding out for more” would result in little, if any, increase in salary. He decided to try a different kind of strategy altogether.

Deepak responded by saying that he understood the partner’s perspective, that he really loved the firm, and that he would definitely accept the offer. Having said that, Deepak continued, would the partner be willing to continue the discussion regarding his salary? With the partner’s consent, Deepak made an extensive argument that boiled down to the following: he would bring more value to the firm than the simple formula suggested. He concluded by emphasizing that salary was not the most important issue to him—he had already accepted the offer because he was very excited about the opportunity to work at this firm—but that salary was nonetheless an issue, as it would be for any young person starting out in life. If there were any help that the firm could give him, it would be greatly appreciated.

The partner liked what he heard, and promised Deepak that he would at least give this perspective some thought. The following day, the partner called Deepak to tell him that the firm would give him a 10 percent increase in salary because they had “taken another look at his [summer] work experience and decided that it probably should have been given more weight in the first place.”

Was that really the reason for the raise? Deepak thinks that is unlikely. The more likely reason is a simple but significant insight regarding power: if you have very little power, you may be better off giving it up entirely. Put another way, if you can’t outmuscle the other side in a negotiation, you may want to stop flexing your muscles and, instead, simply ask them to help you. When negotiators try to leverage their power, others reciprocate. This pattern can be disastrous when you are the weaker party. But when you make it clear that you have no intention of fighting or negotiating aggressively, others may also soften their stance. Once the managing partner decided that he wanted to help Deepak, he simply needed to find a way to justify this decision. Once he found a way, Deepak got what he wanted.

STRATEGY 5: STRATEGIZE ON THE BASIS OF YOUR ENTIRE NEGOTIATION PORTFOLIO

Max recently consulted with a firm in an industry where profit margins have fallen from about 20 percent to less than 5 percent over the last decade. This decline in margins has been due to an increase in new market entrants and to a growing perception among customers that the competitors in the industry are interchangeable. In an attempt to learn about the firm and industry, Max asked the firm’s executives how often they simply refused to reduce their margins below 10 percent. In other words, how often did they risk losing the deal in hopes of earning a higher profit margin? The executives responded that the days were long gone when they could try to be so tough—they needed every dollar of revenue that they could get. Max then asked them to estimate what percentage of their business they would lose if they held out for 10 percent margins. Their estimate: at least 25 percent. At that point, Max simply recommended doing some arithmetic: “If you double your margins [from 5 percent to 10 percent],” Max noted, “and you lose even 49 percent of your business, you are still better off in terms of overall profit.”

The results of this simple analysis came as a surprise to the executives. But their surprise is not, in fact, surprising. Too often, when negotiators are myopically focused on the current negotiation, the strategy they adopt is not an effective one for their portfolio of negotiations. If you had only one deal to negotiate, it would make sense for you to reduce your margins as much as necessary to win the deal; after all, any amount of money is preferable to no money at all (assuming that no money is what you will get by pursuing your BATNA). But because there are almost always multiple negotiations to consider, you need a strategy that makes sense for your entire portfolio of negotiations. If you are going to negotiate many deals with many different customers, you may be willing to lose some money in one negotiation (because you held out for a higher margin and lost the deal) in order to win even more money in another negotiation (because you held out for a higher margin and they accepted). Better yet, if you can distinguish between those negotiators who will accept a higher margin and those who will not—and if you can justify charging different prices to different customers—you may be in a position to increase profits even further by charging higher margins only to those who can stomach it.

The key is to audit the implicit assumptions you make when formulating your negotiation strategy. You may perceive yourself as being “weak” if you measure strength only as the ability to push hard in any given negotiation without losing the deal. But you may discover that you are actually quite “strong” once you begin to think about your ability to withstand losing some deals because you are maximizing the value of your entire negotiation portfolio. When you consider your entire portfolio, it is far easier to imagine taking bigger risks, keeping the clients for whom you can add the most value, and becoming more profitable.

UPSETTING THE BALANCE OF POWER

Weakness is always frustrating, but perhaps never more so than when the other side acknowledges the value you create, but still pushes you around—simply because they are bigger and stronger and can do whatever they want. Maybe your largest customer thinks it has the right to make onerous last-minute demands or to ignore some of its contractual responsibilities. Or perhaps your competitor has decided to sue you for infringing on their patent—a case that has little merit, but that they can litigate to the hilt thanks to their deep pockets. If you want to stay in business, such bullies implicitly say, you will have to play by their rules. In some cases, small business owners are held hostage by their employees; their top salesperson might be rude, unprofessional, and overpaid, but if he leaves the firm and joins the competition, they will lose half of their business.

In each of these situations, your prospects seem bleak for two reasons. First, you are in a position of weakness. Second, you are dealing with a person or an organization that is inconsiderate of your needs and entirely cavalier in the pursuit of their own self-interest. How might you negotiate in such instances? Begin by considering the various strategies we have outlined above for negotiating without power. If these are not sufficient, consider exercising a different, potentially powerful option: shifting the balance of power in your favor. As we will demonstrate, some negotiations require us not to improve our ability to play the game as it has been defined, but to change the nature of the game itself. The following strategies will help you turn the tables on would-be bullies and achieve outcomes far superior to those you might otherwise expect.

STRATEGY 1: INCREASE YOUR STRENGTH BY BUILDING COALITIONS WITH OTHER WEAK PARTIES

In their book Negotiating Rationally, Max Bazerman and Margaret Neale tell the story of how Lee Iacocca, then CEO of Chrysler, found a way to mitigate his company’s weakness by building a coalition with other weak parties: his U.S. competitors.2 In 1986, the three U.S. auto companies (General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler) were engaged in extremely unhealthy competition, as each tried to gain market share through the use of rebates. Each time one company announced a rebate, the other two rushed to raise their own rebate offer. Before long, the auto companies were losing money, on average, on every car they sold! Iacocca recognized that, because of this escalation problem, the automakers were in a very weak position vis-à-vis the consumer. He decided to put an end to this by announcing to the press that Chrysler would discontinue its rebate program—but that if either of the other two companies continued to offer rebates, Chrysler would match those rebates. This action by Chrysler helped to end the rebate war, stopped profit erosion in the industry, and returned all three U.S. automakers to profitability.

Why was Iacocca’s strategy effective? Because it shifted power away from buyers and toward sellers. When a company offers to match its competitors’ offers, this can turn out to be a very bad deal for consumers; such initiatives eliminate the incentive that competitors have to lower their prices (or offer rebates) to attract customers. As a result, the three U.S. automakers, which could no longer be pitted one against another on price alone, gained bargaining power.

You can use the same strategy—building coalitions with other weak parties—in your own negotiations. Consider that, when your customer has many other companies from whom he can purchase, you are in a weak position, but so is each of your competitors. When your boss has the option of hiring or firing you, you are in a weak position, but so is each of your coworkers. And when your country is small and has little voice in international negotiations, your country is in a weak position, but so are many other small countries. Fortunately for those who have little power in their negotiations, it is sometimes possible to shift the balance of power by aligning with these other weak entities.

For example, when bargaining with management, individual employees have often banded together to form unions. If a company were to negotiate with employees one at a time, it could credibly threaten to hire someone else if the employee’s demands were perceived as excessive. When employees bargain collectively, however, they avoid competing against one another. The result is typically an above-market wage for all employees. This process effectively shifts power and money from shareholders to employees. A similar rationale has led many small businesses in the United States to negotiate collectively with insurance companies in order to lower the cost of health insurance, and has led many small farmers in developing countries to form “cooperatives” that allow them to negotiate higher prices for the produce they take to market.

In the realm of international relations, a vivid example of the power of coalitions surfaced during the 2003 World Trade Organization negotiations in Cancún, Mexico. Disgruntled by the continued lack of attention paid to the issues of concern to developing nations (such as reducing agricultural tariffs and farm subsidies), twenty-one “weak” countries banded together to create the Group of 21. This group is now in a much stronger position to negotiate for the interests of its members than any member nation would have been on its own.

In each of these examples, coalition building among weaker parties led to a weakening of the previously more powerful side’s BATNA. When you build—and are able to sustain—a coalition with other weak parties, you make it difficult for the other side to pit one weak party against another, or to credibly threaten to walk away from the deal.

STRATEGY 2: LEVERAGE THE POWER OF YOUR EXTREME WEAKNESS—THEY MAY NEED YOU TO SURVIVE

In 1919, after the end of World War I, the leaders of the victorious Allied forces (most notably, the United States, Great Britain, and France) met in Paris to conduct many months of negotiations that would determine the fate of Europe and much of the rest of the world. Many of the countries affected by the war were invited to make appeals and arguments to the Allies regarding their fate. Most of these arguments pertained to the reshaping of geographic boundaries. The negotiations led to the birth of some new nations, as well as to the reshaping of existing boundaries that helped some countries while hurting others. Most nations that gained territory had been strong allies of the victors and could thus justify a claim to the “spoils” of war. But among those that profited from these talks was a weak country that had contributed relatively little to the Allied war effort: Romania. When the negotiations ended, Romania had roughly doubled in size. How was this possible? Why was Romania able to claim so much value when it had done little, if anything, to create value?

Romania’s power lay not in its strength but in its weakness. Here’s why: When the war ended, the greatest perceived threat to the Allied nations (in particular, to Great Britain and the United States) was not a resurgence of the defeated enemy. Rather, it was communism, the recently empowered political philosophy that had made its debut with Russia’s 1917 October Revolution. Because of the great fear of communism’s potential to spread westward, Romania, which lay immediately to the west of Russia, suddenly became an important consideration. If Romania fell, communism would gain another large foothold in Europe. The leaders of Romania did not want this to happen; more important, they knew that the Allied forces did not want this to happen—and that is how they were able to extract more value from the postwar negotiations than they might have otherwise “deserved.” Romania’s argument can be simplified thus: give us what we ask for, or else we will remain weak; then we will be destroyed, and you will suffer as a consequence.

Similar dynamics play out in business contexts as well. In one case, two companies that had signed a joint-venture (JV) agreement found themselves enmeshed in a bitter dispute when one of the companies, anxious about the other’s growing presence in a market in which they competed, threatened to sue for patent infringement. The defendant knew that the case was frivolous, but also knew that the plaintiff, a much larger company, could afford to litigate until the defendant went into bankruptcy. Despite its seemingly precarious situation, the defendant managed to convince its JV partner to drop the lawsuit and to reach a mutually agreeable settlement. The defendant’s argument was essentially the following: “If you take us to court, you have the power to push us into bankruptcy. Clearly, we do not want this. But let’s also think about what this would mean for you: you would lose a valuable partner. It would be best for both of us if we could set aside the threat of patent litigation and see whether we can work out an agreement that allows us to continue using the disputed technology, for you to feel more secure about your market position, and for us to continue a value-creating relationship that capitalizes on our synergies.”

What is the underlying principle of this strategy? If you create value for others, you gain at least some power to claim value for yourself—regardless of whether the other side wishes to reward you for what you bring to the table. In extreme cases, when they push too hard, they potentially hurt themselves. They may not recognize this, however, which is why it is worth reminding them that strength is not simply measured by “what you can force others to do” or “how easily you can make someone’s life miserable” rather, it may be better measured by “what value you can create for others.” As a result, it is often useful to tell the negotiation “bully” that an overly strong show of force can be counterproductive: “If you push me too hard, you’ll destroy me—and lose a value-creating partner.”

STRATEGY 3: UNDERSTAND—AND ATTACK—THE SOURCE OF THEIR POWER

For many years now, Planned Parenthood medical clinics across the United States have faced a recurring problem. Every so often, antiabortion protestors picket outside the clinics in the hope of discouraging women from entering them. The strategy seems to work quite well; many women who might otherwise visit the clinics are daunted by the prospect of passing through a large crowd that is waving signs and hurling verbal abuse. Setting aside the moral and political elements of this conflict, how might the clinics deal with the strategic problem of reducing the number of intimidating protestors?

A number of Planned Parenthood clinics around the country have adopted a particularly creative strategy for fighting back, usually referred to as the “Pledge-a-Picket” program. Here’s how it works: The clinic asks its supporters to pledge donations to the clinic on a per protestor basis. The more protestors that show up to picket the clinic, the more money the clinic raises in donations! For example, if someone pledges 50 cents per protestor, and one hundred protestors show up at the clinic, that supporter will donate $50 to the clinic. Many clinics have used this strategy to effectively reduce the incentive of protestors to show up to picket, and some have raised tens of thousands of dollars in pledges. The Planned Parenthood of Central Texas (PPCT) in Waco has even posted a sign outside its clinic that reads: “Even Our Protesters Support Planned Parenthood.”

As the Pledge-a-Picket story reveals, it is not enough that you recognize the strengths and weaknesses of each side. It is also critical that you understand the source of each side’s strengths and weaknesses. Once the Planned Parenthood clinics understood that the source of their opponents’ power was the ability to draw large numbers of protestors outside the clinic, they were able to think of a novel way of diminishing the benefits of doing so.

A student of Deepak’s who owns a highly successful real-estate development company recently used this strategy to deal with a problem that will seem strange to many Americans. His company is located in a country where blatant political corruption is much more common than in the United States. In this particular case, the developer was awaiting governmental approval for a very lucrative construction project that he had signed. Everything was ready to go when, suddenly, the approval process was stopped dead in its tracks. The reason became clear days later when the developer received a phone call from the son of the powerful elected official who was in charge of signing off on the approval. The son wanted a stake in the project, and he made it clear that if the partnership were accepted, the approval would be granted quickly. The developer knew that it was possible to circumvent the son (and his father) by going through the court system and by contacting other officials with more seniority, but that process would take a long time. Unfortunately, time was of the essence; his company was about to go public, with an initial public offering (IPO) scheduled in three months. If potential investors were to discover that the project might not be approved, the company would be valued somewhat less. More problematic would be the timing of such a rumor. If the politician’s son was rebuffed, he could decide to publicize the approval problems just when the company was about to go public. What to do?

Deepak advised the following strategy, which the developer executed with much success: go public immediately with the information regarding potential delays in approval. In other words, reveal to the media that the project is under way, but that its approval will probably not be finalized until some months after the company goes public. At the same time, the developer should release all of the documents related to the merits of the project, as well as the letters that the politician sent earlier in support of the project’s approval. That way, investor confidence will remain high.

This strategy has at least three obvious merits. First, by getting ahead of the story, the developer controls how the news is reported and interpreted. Second, by making this information public two months before the IPO, the news itself is made less salient to investors by the time the company goes public. Third, and perhaps most important, with the news already in the press, the politician’s son loses his only source of leverage. Because the son’s power lies primarily in his ability to damage the developer when he is most vulnerable (during the IPO), that is the element to be targeted. As with the Pledge-a-Picket strategy, this strategy identifies and destroys the primary source of an opponent’s power.

The same principle applies to negotiations of all sorts. If you are afraid to confront your powerful salesperson, or are wary of denying his request for yet another exorbitant raise, consider the source of the salesperson’s power. In this case, it may be that the salesperson has stronger relationships with your customers than you do. Knowing this, how might you strategize? In the weeks and months ahead, begin building relationships with each of your key customers. You might even lock them in with attractive multiyear contracts. Then, when you stand up to your salesperson’s demands, there is little with which he can threaten you. He may choose to leave the firm and go to a competitor, but his ability to take your customers with him will be significantly weakened.

THE POWER OF GENIUS

All of the strategies and insights discussed in this chapter stem from one crucial insight: while being in a position of weakness is sometimes unavoidable, you will negotiate most effectively when you leverage the fundamentals—systematic preparation and careful strategy formulation. Unfortunately, many negotiators compound the problem of weakness by becoming obsessed by the factors that make them weak. This does not mean that you should ignore your weaknesses. But, as dangerous as it is to ignore your weaknesses, it can be equally devastating to overlook your strengths or to assume you have none.

Those who “think weak” inevitably also “act weak.” If you are obsessed by your weaknesses, you will be less likely to set reasonably high aspirations, to feel confident asking for more information, to demand that your concessions be reciprocated, or to push the other side to consider the value proposition you are offering. You will also be more susceptible to influence tactics and threats.

Negotiation geniuses recognize their weaknesses and try to mitigate them. Once they have done so, they know they must also focus on their strengths, prepare systematically, and negotiate with an eye toward improving their negotiating position. Doing so will not guarantee “victory,” but it will ensure that you have done as well as possible given the situation. Indeed, the power of negotiation genius may be most valuable to you in precisely those situations where the alternative is to despair—or to rely on gut instinct.





