CHAPTER 12




When Negotiations Get Ugly: Dealing with Irrationality, Distrust, Anger, Threats, and Ego

By most expert accounts, the Cuban Missile Crisis brought the world closer to nuclear annihilation than it has ever been—before or since. The crisis entailed an escalation of conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union that took place between October 16, 1962, and October 28, 1962. What drove two civilized nations to the brink of mutual destruction? More important, how did they manage to negotiate their way to a safe, mutually acceptable peace?

In his book Thirteen Days, Robert Kennedy described the events leading up to the crisis, arguably the most dangerous two weeks in all of human history.1 The conflict was instigated when United States spy planes revealed that the Soviet Union had begun placing missiles in Cuba that would be capable of delivering nuclear weapons to the United States. Due to the close proximity of Cuba, the U.S. government became very anxious. Making matters worse, just weeks earlier, Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin had explicitly promised the Americans that no such missiles would be placed in Cuba.

In the days that followed the Americans’ discovery of the missiles, the two enemies exchanged threats and counterthreats. As the conflict escalated, emotions mounted and distrust heightened. Both sides were aware that an attack by either country would lead to retaliation, and so it would be entirely irrational for either side to take any steps that could lead to war. But both sides were also aware that irrationality might prevail. As Soviet chairman Nikita Khrushchev wrote in a letter to President John F. Kennedy during the crisis, “If indeed war should break out, then it would not be in our power to stop it, for such is the logic of war.”

Acutely aware that both sides were armed and ready to launch nuclear weapons, President Kennedy reflected on the growing sentiment among many of his advisers that a tough military response against Cuba was the best option. Kennedy instead chose the less aggressive option of instituting a naval blockade of Cuba, explaining to his advisers that “the great danger and risk in all of this is a miscalculation—a mistake in judgment.” More belligerent actions, Kennedy argued, would likely drive the conflict to a point of no return: “It isn’t the first step that concerns me, but both sides escalating to the fourth and fifth step—and we don’t go to the sixth because there is no one around to do so.” According to Robert Kennedy, “the President believed from the start that the Soviet Chairman was a rational, intelligent man who, if given sufficient time and shown our determination, would alter his position. But there was always the chance of error, of mistake, miscalculation, or misunderstanding, and President Kennedy was committed to doing everything possible to lessen that chance on our side.”

But clear communication and rigorous analysis would not be sufficient to resolve the crisis. There was also the matter of personal egos and national pride. The entire world was watching, and neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev could afford to be seen as weak by his citizens, political opponents, media analysts, or the international community at large. Robert Kennedy recalled a discussion that took place between the president and his advisers one evening: “Neither side wanted war over Cuba, we agreed, but it was possible that either side could take a step that—for reasons of ‘security’ or ‘pride’ or ‘face’—would require a response by the other side, which, in turn, for the same reasons of security, pride, or face, would bring about a counter-response and eventually an escalation into armed conflict.”

There was every reason for the situation to spiral entirely out of control. How, then, were the two sides able to negotiate a peaceful settlement? According to Robert Kennedy, it was the negotiation genius of his brother, President John F. Kennedy, that saved the world from nuclear war: President Kennedy made it his top priority to understand as well as possible the interests, needs, constraints, and perspective of the other side. “The final lesson of the Cuban missile crisis,” wrote Robert Kennedy, “is the importance of placing ourselves in the other country’s shoes. During the crisis, President Kennedy spent more time trying to determine the effect of a particular course of action on Khrushchev or the Russians than on any other phase of what he was doing. What guided all of his deliberations was an effort not to disgrace Khrushchev, not to humiliate the Soviet Union, not to have them feel they would have to escalate their response because their national security or national interests so committed them.”

The final deal, negotiated heavily through back channels in an effort to help the parties save face, was this: the Soviet Union would remove the missiles from Cuba; in return, the United States would pledge not to invade Cuba and to remove American missiles from Turkey (which were seen as a threat by the Soviet Union). Out of a concern for how this latter concession would be judged by the public, Robert Kennedy insisted to Soviet ambassador Dobrynin that the removal of missiles from Turkey could not be seen as a quid-pro-quo concession for the removal of missiles from Cuba. As a result, this element of the deal was not made public for years.

In retrospect, the outcome of this crisis seems unremarkable: both parties removed their offending missiles and the conflict deescalated. But it is worth asking: what would have happened if President Kennedy, instead of focusing so intently on Khrushchev’s needs and interests, had instead listened to his military advisers, most of whom strongly supported air strikes against Cuba rather than the less aggressive blockade option? Consider the following. During the Cuban Missile Crisis, U.S. intelligence reports concluded that while Cuba had missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads, it had no actual nuclear warheads. It was only years later that the truth—previously known only to the Cubans and the Soviet Union—was made public: at the time of the crisis, Cuba had enough nuclear warheads to obliterate the eastern seaboard of the United States—and they had the authority and intent to use these warheads if they were attacked. In other words, the unremarkable outcome of the Cuban Missile Crisis was by no means assured. If, instead of negotiating with his enemy, President Kennedy had chosen to act tough, flex U.S. military muscle, and follow the advice of his top brass, his decisions would have resulted in the deaths of tens of millions of Americans.

Throughout this book, we have encouraged you to try to understand the interests, needs, constraints, and concerns of the other side and to work with your counterparts to create value. But what happens when this seems virtually impossible? What happens when your counterpart is your “enemy,” unwilling or unable to work with you to reach a mutually agreeable outcome? It is worth remembering at such moments that President Kennedy confronted, simultaneously, the very worst of what is possible when negotiations turn ugly—irrationality, distrust, anger, threats, and ego—and succeeded nonetheless. Here we will consider each of these five factors and, in doing so, provide you with a set of principles and strategies that you can leverage when your own negotiations turn ugly.

DEALING WITH IRRATIONALITY

“All of the strategies you have described work when you’re dealing with people who will listen to reason,” an exasperated executive student remarked recently. “But the people I deal with are completely irrational. How can you possibly negotiate with someone who is irrational?” As the executive’s question reveals, negotiators often struggle with the task of trying to negotiate with those who behave recklessly, strategize poorly, and act in ways that seem to contradict their own self-interest; any would-be negotiation genius needs to understand how to deal with these obstacles.

Our advice is this: be very careful before labeling someone “irrational.” Whenever our students or clients tell us about their “irrational” or “crazy” counterparts, we work with them to carefully consider whether the other side is truly irrational. Almost always, the answer is no. In most cases, behavior that appears to be irrational has a rational—albeit hidden—cause. Here, we will share the three most common reasons that negotiators erroneously judge others as irrational.2 We will also describe the dangers of doing so and explain how to avoid making such mistakes.

MISTAKE 1: THEY ARE NOT IRRATIONAL; THEY ARE UNINFORMED

An executive (who is one of Deepak’s students) was recently involved in a dispute with an ex-employee. The employee claimed that he was owed $130,000 in sales commissions for the work he had done prior to being fired from the firm a few months earlier. The executive, on the other hand, claimed the employee was owed nothing—in fact, he insisted the employee had been overpaid by $25,000.

What was the reason for this discrepancy? At the time the employee was fired, the company’s accounts were a mess; records had been kept poorly. Since then, the firm had hired a new accountant and updated all of the records. These records now clearly revealed that the employee’s claim was entirely illegitimate; if anyone had a claim to make, it was the firm. The executive was uninterested in going to court to recoup the $25,000 that the firm was owed and wanted to drop the matter entirely.

The executive called the employee and told him what the accounting records revealed; he also offered to send a copy of the records. He then made it clear that his case was airtight, but offered to forgive the $25,000 overpayment if the employee agreed to forgo his groundless suit as well. The employee’s response: “No way. I don’t need to see the records. I’ll see you in court!”

The CEO was very confused. There was no way for the employee to win in court. Why was he behaving so irrationally?

Deepak suggested to the executive that the problem was probably not that the employee was irrational, but that he lacked credible information. The executive was convinced that the employee would lose the court battle, but it was possible that the employee was still confident that he would win the case because he did not trust the executive or the firm’s record keeping. How could the executive educate the employee regarding his prospects for winning in court? Deepak advised him to have an objective third party, specifically a professional accounting firm, conduct an audit of the records pertinent to this dispute and to mail the results to the employee. (This would be far less expensive than going to court.) Having this information would diminish the employee’s perceived likelihood of winning in court and make litigation a less attractive option. What was the result? The employee dropped the suit.

When Deepak was in graduate school, an economics professor began the first day of class with the following statement: “I want you all to remember something—you are not stupid, you are just ignorant. If you were stupid, we could not do much about it. But ignorance we can fix.” This insight is as relevant to negotiators as it is to graduate students. Often, when the other side appears irrational, they are in fact uninformed. If you can help educate or inform them—about their true interests, the consequences of their actions, the strength of your BATNA, and so on—there is a strong likelihood they will make better decisions. For example, if someone says no to an offer that you know is in her best interest, do not assume she is irrational. Instead, work to ensure that she understands why the offer is in her best interest. She may simply have misunderstood or ignored a crucial piece of information.

MISTAKE 2: THEY ARE NOT IRRATIONAL; THEY HAVE HIDDEN CONSTRAINTS

In 2005, the U.S. government passed legislation to increase food aid to countries that were in dire need of such assistance. There was much support among politicians and activists for this initiative. Not surprisingly, however, there were also certain special-interest groups that opposed this legislation. Here’s what was surprising: one of the groups that voiced opposition was a consortium of nonprofit organizations whose mission it was to lobby for an increase in food aid to disadvantaged countries! What explains such seemingly irrational and self-defeating behavior? Why would this group oppose legislation that achieves precisely what it purports to want?

The answer lies not in understanding the group’s interests, but in understanding its constraints. In order to increase the amount of food sent to disadvantaged countries, the consortium had in the past partnered with American farmers to lobby the U.S. government jointly for greater aid. Why did the farmers join in this campaign? Because when the U.S. government increased food aid, it bought more food from American farmers. As a result, both the farmers and the nonprofits got what they wanted.

This case, however, was different. Mindful of escalating budget deficits, Congress had decided that the only way to increase foreign food aid was to purchase the food more cheaply—not from American farmers, but from developing countries. What would appear to be a double win for the nonprofits (increased food aid and increased support for poor farmers in developing countries) instead created a predicament. If the nonprofits supported the legislation, they would be severing ties with their longstanding coalition partner, the American farmer. Instead, the nonprofits decided that their long-term interests were best served by opposing the legislation. This may still seem like a questionable decision on moral, ethical, or other grounds, but it seems irrational only when we overlook the hidden constraints facing the nonprofits.

The problem of hidden constraints is present in many negotiations. When a firm loses a star employee because it refuses to raise her salary to match a competitor’s higher offer, the firm is not necessarily behaving irrationally; it may instead be constrained by an HR policy that restricts it from creating huge pay differentials in the firm.

Similarly, when your counterpart seems unwilling to make even small, reasonable concessions that could seal the deal, you might tell yourself he’s a fool, or you might try to discover how much authority he has to negotiate a comprehensive, value-maximizing deal. If he is heavily constrained, you might try to negotiate with someone who has greater dealmaking authority.

In negotiation, a wide variety of possible constraints exists. The other side may be constrained by advice from her lawyers, by the fear of setting a dangerous precedent, by promises she has made to other parties, by time pressure, and so on. Negotiation geniuses try to discover these constraints—and to help other parties overcome them—rather than dismissing others as irrational.

MISTAKE 3: THEY ARE NOT IRRATIONAL; THEY HAVE HIDDEN INTERESTS

Some years ago, a group of managers decided to promote Leslie, one of the firm’s administrative assistants. Leslie had worked for the firm for thirty years and was only two years away from retirement. She had performed well throughout her career and had received salary increases commensurate with her performance. Because she was already at the top of her salary bracket, it was not possible for the managers to pay her more money; nor was she scheduled for a formal performance appraisal. Rather, the managers simply wanted to do something nice for Leslie, so they decided to surprise her with a promotion. Her job responsibilities would not change, but the new title would give her greater status and prestige.

When she heard of the promotion, Leslie was delighted. She understood that her salary or job responsibilities would not increase, but that was fine with her.

Soon after receiving the promotion, however, Leslie learned that she was now among the lowest-paid employees with her job title. She also began to feel uneasy about having a “fake” job promotion—she was doing no more work and receiving no more pay than she used to, and this made her feel self-conscious with her coworkers. She asked for a raise and voiced her willingness to accept more responsibilities, but was quickly denied.

Within a few weeks of her promotion, Leslie decided that she would rather quit her job than be treated this poorly. By doing so, she lost two years of compensation and also took a hit in her retirement benefits. The managers, who had only the best of intentions, were left asking themselves, “Why did she behave so irrationally?”

What the managers failed to appreciate was that money and status were not the only issues of interest to Leslie. She also cared about perceptions of fairness and equity. The managers felt they had given her more than she even deserved. But in failing to see how their decision would play out in the future, they created a situation in which Leslie felt undervalued, phony, and embarrassed.

More generally, people will sometimes reject your offer because they think it is unfair, because they don’t like you, or for other reasons that have nothing to do with the obvious merits of your proposal. These people are not irrational; they are simply fulfilling needs and interests that you may not fully appreciate. When others appear irrational, negotiation geniuses do not write them off as crazy. Instead, they investigate: “What might be motivating her to act this way? What are all of her interests?”

BUT WHAT IF THEY REALLY ARE IRRATIONAL?

If your counterpart truly is irrational—in other words, he is determined to work against what is in his best interest—then your options will be fewer. You can try to push through an agreement despite his irrationality, you can try to “go around him” by negotiating with someone else with authority who seems more willing to listen to reason (such as his boss or colleague), or you may decide to pursue your BATNA because his irrationality has eliminated all hope of creating value. You might also leverage the various strategies for confronting your counterpart’s biases that we have outlined in Chapters 4–6.

But we suggest—again—that you reconsider your assessment. Negotiators who are quick to label the other party “irrational” do so at great potential cost to themselves. When you use the “irrational” label, you limit your options, because there is not much you can say to someone who you truly believe is unable to reason, uninterested in fulfilling her own interests, and incapable of negotiating effectively. Your options greatly increase when you recognize that the other party is not irrational, but simply uninformed, constrained, or focused on interests that you did not anticipate. And as you know, the more options you have, the more effectively you will negotiate.

DEALING WITH DISTRUST

Some years ago, a dispute arose between a U.S. manufacturer of electronic equipment and one of its foreign distributors. Each side felt that the other had reneged on its responsibilities, and both were ready to go to court to settle the matter. Not surprisingly, the two sides had very different perspectives regarding what had gone wrong.

The manufacturer claimed that the distributor had failed to meet its minimum purchase-order requirement for a key product and that the distributor did not have enough distribution channels in place to fulfill its contractual responsibilities. The manufacturer simply wanted to be paid for the equipment it had already delivered and to terminate its agreement with the distributor. The manufacturer claimed that it could no longer trust the distributor and wanted nothing more than to end their relationship.

Meanwhile, the distributor claimed that, within months of signing their agreement, the manufacturer had introduced a new and improved model of the same product and had refused to offer the distributor rights to sell it. By all indications, the distributor claimed, the entire agreement had been a scheme to dump old, obsolete models in the distributor’s region. In doing so, the manufacturer had defrauded the distributor. The distributor was demanding millions of dollars in reparation. It, too, felt that the breach of trust was so severe that there was no way to revive the relationship.

As it turns out, the story has a happy ending. The two sides opted for mediation rather than litigation. With the mediator’s assistance, they were able to reach an agreement that pleased both sides and that avoided a lengthy court battle.

What was the agreement? Instead of ending their relationship and deciding which party would pay the other for a breach of contract, the two sides agreed to continue their relationship with a restructuring of their existing agreement. The manufacturer agreed to give the distributor the right to distribute the new equipment (including the exclusive right to distribute in some parts of the region), and both sides dropped their financial claims.

When we present this case to our executive students, many of them are surprised that either of the two parties would be willing to agree to such a deal. The most important element of any relationship is trust, these executives argue; because the two sides had lost trust in each other, it was unwise to negotiate a continuance of the relationship. When we ask the executives to elaborate on this perspective, they often make one or more of the following statements:



• “If there is no trust, you will get nothing done.”

• “Why do a deal with someone you don’t trust? It’s not worth the risk.”

• “If they’ve exploited your trust before, they will do it again.”



We agree with the sentiment captured in each of these statements: indeed, trust is essential in relationships; hence, it is a critical ingredient in negotiation. But we disagree with the belief that trust cannot be regained. More fundamentally, we disagree with the belief that you should end a negotiation (or terminate a relationship) the moment you think that the other side is untrustworthy. Negotiation geniuses consider distrust to be a major obstacle to negotiation. But before they abandon hope of regaining the trust that has been lost, they work to rebuild it.

The first step in rebuilding trust is to diagnose the distrust that exists. Negotiators often think of trust as one-dimensional: either your counterpart is “trustworthy” or she is not. But consider that there are many different kinds of trust.3 For example, you will trust your surgeon primarily on the basis of whether he or she has the competence to perform a surgery on you, but you will trust your spouse more on the basis of whether he or she is honest with you. Similarly, there are many dimensions along which we might trust our business partners, lawyers, employees, children, friends, and so on. It is also the case that we can trust someone on one dimension (“my lawyer is very competent”) but not on another (“my lawyer is sometimes dishonest”). When this happens, you must decide which dimension of trust is most critical to the relationship. If someone cannot be trusted on the critical dimension, you must either fix the trust problem or consider your alternatives to dealing with her.

Two broad categories of distrust are relevant to many negotiations: distrust of another’s character and distrust of another’s competence.4 Consider that, in the manufacturer-distributor dispute, both sides distrusted each other—but for different reasons. The manufacturer believed that the distributor was incompetent: it did not have the infrastructure or know-how to sell the equipment it was licensed to distribute. Meanwhile, the distributor’s distrust was more an issue of character: only a dishonest and unethical company would dump outdated equipment in his region and hide information regarding newer models during the initial negotiation.

Once you have diagnosed the source of distrust, you can identify the steps needed to regain it. How might the distributor and the manufacturer regain trust in each other? Because each side is dealing with a different type of distrust, the process will be different for each of them. In the case of the distributor, its management must demonstrate to the manufacturer that their company is in fact competent. How might they do this? They might invite the manufacturer to visit their region to see the distribution channels firsthand, they might show purchase-order data that confirm their ability to achieve high sales, or they might provide reasonable justifications as to why their initial order did not meet the minimum purchasing agreement.

Meanwhile, to gain the trust of the distributor, the manufacturer’s management must demonstrate that they are honest and ethical. They might do this by explaining to the distributor that it is common practice in the United States not to reveal information regarding products in development—though they now understand that this practice may be viewed negatively in some other countries. The manufacturer might also offer to extend a peace offering (in the form of financial or other considerations) as an apology for unintended wrongdoing. Finally, the manufacturer’s decision to allow the distributor to sell the new product may in itself help overcome the perception that the manufacturer intended to exploit the distributor all along.

If the two sides in this negotiation—or in any negotiation—are able to identify and eliminate the source of distrust, trust can clearly be rebuilt. Unfortunately, negotiators are often dismissive of this possibility. Instead, once they have labeled the other party “untrustworthy,” they look only for information that confirms this belief. Moreover, when they are themselves distrusted, they often become defensive or angry rather than focused on trying to systematically eliminate this perception. Negotiation geniuses understand that when the other side says (or implies) that you are untrustworthy, it is time to investigate: “Why does he think so? What would it take to overcome this perception?”

DEALING WITH ANGER

A few years ago, Deepak was shooting pool at a bar with a friend and two strangers. Suddenly, a group of about eight college students stormed into the room. They threw a pool stick onto the table, disrupting the game, and started to scream and curse. Needless to say, Deepak and his friend were taken aback. The two strangers who were playing with them immediately charged at the leader of the gang of students. In a matter of seconds, the friendly game of eight ball had become a shoving match. A fight was about to break out—and it was not at all clear why.

Trying to stop the fight, Deepak and his friend wedged themselves between the two main combatants. It soon became obvious that the college students were upset because they believed that, moments earlier, someone at Deepak’s table had disrupted their game in the adjacent room. Deepak knew this was not true, but the accusation only fueled the rage on both sides. Deepak and his friend wanted to clear up the misunderstanding, but the situation was getting more physical by the moment. It would have been quite easy for Deepak and his friend to simply walk away—by now, the fight was entirely between the college students and the two strangers—but that did not seem like the right thing to do.

Once it became clear that the provocateurs were unwilling to consider the situation a misunderstanding, Deepak tried a different approach. “Okay,” he said to the leader of the college students. “We understand that you think someone ‘messed with you.’ But what do you think needs to happen now to avoid a fight?”

The leader looked at Deepak just long enough to answer. “I don’t know, but you guys messed up our game, so it’s a bit late to apologize,” he said before rejoining the fray.

Deepak decided to try again: “Okay, but now you’ve messed up our game as well—so aren’t we even?”

“No, we’re not even,” the student shouted. “You started it!”

“I see. Well, let’s say someone in this room did start something,” Deepak said. “Can you imagine something that could happen now that would make you prefer not to fight? What would that look like? What would you rather be doing?”

The leader was in disbelief, but took a moment to consider the question. “Well, I’d rather be playing pool,” he answered, “but we’re going to have to start a whole new game.”

“And how much will that cost?” asked Deepak.

“One dollar,” the student responded.

Deepak took a dollar bill out of his wallet and handed it to the leader. “How about it? Your next game is on me.”

The leader smiled as he slowly reached for the dollar. “You know, that’s very cool,” he said. “That’s really very nice of you.” He spent the next few minutes calming down his friends, and then escorted them out of the room. The fight was avoided, no blood was spilled, and no bones were broken. All it took was one dollar.

As this story shows, negotiators often confront counterparts who are angry or upset. And while we may think that these emotions are entirely unjustified, this does not change the fact that the angry party thinks that his or her anger is warranted.

How do you typically handle such situations? While another person’s anger may evoke your own, many of us recognize that this is not the most effective response to someone’s emotional outburst. Instead, there is obvious merit in trying to defuse the other side’s anger and refocus attention on the substantive issues at hand. But defusing someone’s anger is often easier said than done. Most negotiators do not have a systematic way to deal with the anger of those with whom they are negotiating. Furthermore, seemingly unjustified anger often erupts when you least expect it. What should you do when this happens? The following strategies will enhance your ability to handle angry negotiators in ways that salvage the deal and the relationship.

STRATEGY 1: SEEK TO UNDERSTAND WHY THEY ARE ANGRY

When your negotiation counterpart is angry, you must first find out why. The answer will point you toward an appropriate strategy for handling the situation. For example, if the other party is angry because she is misinformed, the solution is to inform her; if she is angry because she feels disrespected, the solution is to respect her; if she is angry because she misheard what you said, the solution is to clarify your intentions, and so on. Just because you know that your counterpart has no reason to be upset does not mean that she knows this. In the pool hall dispute, for example, the students’ anger was explicable (although it was still an overreaction) once they made clear that they thought they had been attacked first. Consistent with the approach we have underscored throughout this book, the best way to deal with emotions you do not fully understand is to investigate their source.

STRATEGY 2: GIVE VOICE TO THEIR ANGER

Most negotiators recognize that anger is usually counterproductive. As a result, when dealing with someone who has lost his temper, most negotiators are likely to do whatever they can to suppress his expression of anger. “Getting angry will get us nowhere,” you might be tempted to say, or, “We’re not going to sit here and listen to you shout,” or, “It’s in everyone’s best interest if you calm down.”

These are all reasonable statements, but they overlook an important fact. If you do not give an angry negotiator the opportunity to voice his frustration, he will likely become even more angry—or, at the very least, resentful. A much better approach is to encourage people to voice their anger and to help you understand its source. You might say, for example, “I can see that you’re angry, and I want to understand why that is. Tell me what’s on your mind.” The key is to give legitimacy to the other person’s feelings. You can (and should) question the legitimacy of what he believes, but you should not waste time questioning the legitimacy of a person’s anger given what he believes to be true.

STRATEGY 3: SIDESTEP THE EMOTION

Some years ago, Deepak’s martial arts instructor gave him some important advice regarding how to block a kick or a punch: “The best block is don’t be there.” In other words, when you try to stop someone’s physical attack with your own physical maneuver (a block), you are pitting power against power—and the stronger party will have an advantage. But if you can sidestep the attack, you will avoid the hit, retain your balance, and remain in control of the situation.

The same is true when it comes to emotion in negotiation. When the other side is angry, do not allow yourself to be the target by taking it personally. Instead, understand that her anger is a natural consequence of her beliefs. If she believed differently, she would not be angry. The best thing for you to do, then, is to keep your composure and help her change her beliefs. Sidestepping emotions is certainly not easy—especially when the other side is launching personal attacks and seems intent on provoking a response. To aid in sidestepping the emotion, ask yourself the following questions:



• If I were in her position, would I be acting the same way?

• Is this genuine emotion, or is it a tactic aimed at intimidating me?

• Is this how she behaves with everybody?



If you can conclude that their anger is natural given where they stand, or that they are simply acting tough to manipulate you, or that this is how they treat everyone, you will find it easier to sidestep the attack and maintain control of your own emotions.

STRATEGY 4: HELP THEM FOCUS ON THEIR TRUE UNDERLYING INTERESTS

The most difficult part of Deepak’s pool hall negotiation was not figuring out the other party’s underlying interests (which were to play pool and not lose face). Rather, it was making the other party’s underlying interests salient to them. Anger prevents people from staying focused on the substantive issues about which they care deeply. Your task is to help the angry negotiator shift attention away from those elements that fueled his anger and toward those elements that would fulfill his interests. Try asking questions such as these:



• “What would you like to see happen now?”

• “What would you rather be doing?”

• “What would help us put this behind us?”

• “Is there anything else you would like to discuss or clarify before we return to the substantive issues you highlighted earlier?”



All of these questions facilitate a transition away from anger and toward interests.

DEALING WITH THREATS AND ULTIMATUMS

Deepak has a client, the CEO of a large agricultural firm, who was recently negotiating with a large commercial bank for a multimillion-dollar line of credit. Because the CEO had personal connections with a director at the bank, he did not bother to procure competing bids from other banks. After months of negotiations, the deal was structured and both sides were ready to sign the agreement. Before this could happen, however, the CEO discovered during a conversation with an industry expert that the bank was charging his company a risk-adjusted rate that was significantly higher than what other banks would have charged. The CEO was both surprised and upset. Had his “friend” at the bank taken advantage of him? Even if this was the case, it was not clear whether the CEO could threaten to go to the bank’s competitors; this option had been viable some months ago, but now the company needed the line of credit very soon. Restarting the entire negotiation process with another bank could be extremely costly.

The CEO called the bank director, shared what he had learned, and proposed a revision of the terms of the agreement. Upon hearing the CEO’s proposed revision, the director became very angry. In particular, he was “very turned off” by the suggestion that the CEO wanted to “renege” on their verbal agreement. In a long e-mail that followed the conversation, the director began by writing: “My flexibility on pricing is none.” If this was unacceptable to the CEO, he continued, then they “should have serious discussions” regarding the types of proprietary information the CEO was barred from sharing with the bank’s competitors. The threat was implicit, but clear: “We cannot move on this issue. You are welcome to go to our competitors.”

The CEO approached Deepak for advice on how to respond to the director’s e-mail. He had a variety of questions: Was this a “true ultimatum” or simply a negotiation “tactic”? Should he continue to push for a better pricing structure, or should he instead ask for smaller concessions on other, less thorny issues? Should he be forceful or pleasant? Should he continue to appear upset, or should he appear calm and in control? Deepak’s advice, described below, leveraged three strategies for dealing with threats and ultimatums in negotiation.

STRATEGY 1: IGNORE THE THREAT

Deepak began by advising the CEO to completely ignore the ultimatum (“My flexibility on pricing is none”)—to pretend that this statement had never been made. Instead, the CEO should respond to the less harshly written, more substantive elements of the e-mail, which referred to “reliance on market rates,” “competitive pricing,” and “structuring fees that reflect the market standard.” Specifically, he told the CEO to thank the director for agreeing to think about the deal from the perspective of what is consistent with prevailing market rates—and to make no mention of the director’s alleged inflexibility on pricing. Why? If the director issued the ultimatum out of frustration, ignorance, or the desire to save face, the worst thing for the CEO to do would be to draw attention to the ultimatum and make it more difficult for the director to back away from his statement in the future. It would be much better to ignore the ultimatum and give the director space to retreat from it in the ensuing days and weeks. It is worth pointing out that this advice is sound even if the ultimatum is real—that is, even if the other side is truly unwilling or unable to offer you any more concessions. If this is the case, and you have ignored their ultimatum, rest assured that they will mention it to you again.

President Kennedy used a similar strategy during the Cuban Missile Crisis. During the height of the crisis, he received two different (and somewhat contradictory) messages from Khrushchev within the span of twenty-four hours. One of them (the “hard” message) was very aggressive; in it, Khrushchev demanded the removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey in exchange for the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba. In the “soft” message, which was much less antagonistic, Khrushchev offered to remove the missiles from Cuba in exchange for the United States ending the blockade and promising that there would be no attack on Cuba. As Kennedy’s advisers discussed how to craft a response that would address all of the issues contained in both messages, Robert Kennedy suggested a different approach: ignore the hard message. Robert Kennedy was among those who believed that the hard message (which was the only one that was sent publicly) was designed more to help Khrushchev save face in the world community than it was to promote substantive discussions. Ignoring the hard message—whose terms the U.S. government could not immediately accept—and instead agreeing to the terms of the soft message, Robert Kennedy argued, would be a much more productive strategy.

More generally, it is possible to ignore the other side’s ultimatum even when it includes no soft message. Consider the following ultimatum: “This is our final offer: take it or leave it.” How might you respond to this statement while still ignoring the ultimatum? Consider the following viable responses:



• “It seems pretty clear that you find it difficult to make further concessions on the issues we’ve been discussing. I suggest we focus on other aspects of the deal and come back to this point once all other elements are on the table.”

• “I can see that you fully believe that you have already conceded as much as should be necessary to close the deal. As it turns out, we feel the exact same way regarding our concessions. Hopefully, this means that we are close to reaching an agreement. So let’s keep working.”

• “I can understand your frustration. We both know there is a deal to be made, and yet we can’t seem to find it. Can you help me better understand your perspective? Why do you think we’re not there yet?”



Notice that each of these responses ignores the “take it or leave it” demand. Instead, the responses are aimed at softening the other side’s statement so that it will not be a barrier in the future if, in fact, it is possible for them to make further concessions.

STRATEGY 2: NEUTRALIZE ANY ADDITIONAL THREATS THEY MIGHT BE TEMPTED TO MAKE

Returning to the bank negotiation story, Deepak next advised the CEO to pre-empt (to the extent possible) any additional threats the director might be tempted to make. He did so by helping the CEO anticipate the threats and counterarguments that his draft e-mail reply would generate, and then encouraged him to respond comprehensively to these potential reactions. For example, one potential response by the director would be to threaten (implicitly) to drag out the negotiations, knowing that the prospect of lengthy discussions would likely force the CEO to capitulate. Anticipating this, Deepak advised the CEO to include the following text in the e-mail: “We understand that these new issues may cause delays in structuring and implementing a final agreement. If you also anticipate such delays, we suggest involving other senior bank officials in this process from the very start.” Why might this statement neutralize the director’s potential threat? Because the CEO knew that the involvement of senior bank officials would make the director lose credibility at his bank, a consequence he would be highly motivated to avoid.

Pre-empting the other side’s aggression is also a useful tactic when you are dealing not with threats, but with their legitimate complaints or concerns. For example, the director may have been genuinely concerned that having to restructure the deal at this late stage in the negotiation would cause him embarrassment, as he would be forced to tell his boss that the deal would bring in less money than he had earlier announced. In such instances, you can make your own position stronger if you are able to voice the other side’s legitimate complaints or concerns for them, rather than waiting for them to raise these issues. For example, you might say: “We understand that corporate politics and other institutional hurdles sometimes make it difficult to make even reasonable changes to a deal this late in the game. But we would like to work with you to figure out ways to make this happen. We also feel—and hope that you agree—that the most important issue continues to be reaching an agreement that is consistent with prevailing market rates.” When you are the first to voice their concerns, you lessen the degree of antagonism with which they can argue against you. They may still fight back, but they will be in no position to suggest that you are concerned only about yourself, or that you don’t understand their perspective.

STRATEGY 3: IF YOU DON’T FIND THE THREAT TO BE CREDIBLE, LET THEM KNOW

If the director’s threat had been credible—if he would have truly preferred “no deal” to a change in pricing—then the CEO would have had little room to maneuver. Often, however, a threat is not credible—you know they will not follow through on it—but it is still impossible to entirely ignore or pre-empt it. How should you respond? In as positive a tone as possible, signal to the other side that, because you understand their constraints and their interests, you don’t find the threat to be credible. Consider, for example, how the CEO could have responded to the bank director’s threat to walk away from the deal:



Signal 1: Your constraints will not allow you to follow through on this threat: “Finally, with regard to the interest rate: we feel comfortable in knowing that you will, as always, follow your bank’s policy of pricing risk according to market standards. This gives us confidence that, as you run the numbers and look at the data, you will find ways to lower the rate you have quoted. As you’ve mentioned in the past, this is one of the benefits of working with a large bank like yours: at the end of the day, we don’t have to argue about what is fair—we can all take a look at the market.”



Signal 2: Your interests will not allow you to follow through on this threat: “It is obvious that there are some discrepancies on how we are calculating risk in this case. But we know that, like us, you have been working on this deal for many months now and will not want to see it unravel over one issue. So let’s work on resolving this in a way that is agreeable to all parties involved.”



Both of these responses are friendly and gracious, but both make it clear to the director that you do not perceive his threat (whether veiled or explicit) to be credible.

DEALING WITH THE NEED TO SAVE FACE

When you have exposed the fact that the other side’s threat is not credible, that their anger is baseless, or that their lack of trust in you is unfounded, you have every reason to celebrate: you were right and they were wrong. But you are not in the clear yet. Unless the other side is able to save face—that is, to avoid embarrassment or humiliation—they may be very reluctant to change their perspective or their behavior. Instead, they may act in ways that help them preserve their dignity or salvage their ego, but that destroy value.

Negotiation geniuses will not only give their counterparts the opportunity to save face, they will help them to save face. “Above all, while defending our own vital interests,” President Kennedy said in a speech at American University soon after the Cuban Missile Crisis, “nuclear powers must avert those confrontations which bring an adversary to the choice of either a humiliating defeat or a nuclear war.”5 In your negotiations, the stakes will not be nearly as high. But if President Kennedy was worried that someone would enter a nuclear war to avoid humiliation, consider how much more likely it is that someone will walk away from thousands or millions of dollars in order to save face.

Suppose you are negotiating the purchase of a product or service, and the seller tells you: “There’s no way for us to lower our price—this is our final offer.” Later, it becomes clear to both of you that she will have to lower her price in order for you to make the purchase. Here are some ways to help this counterpart save face:



• “I’m glad I was able to find ways to compensate you for a lower price, because I know you could not have lowered it otherwise.”

• “I realize that you are doing me a favor by reducing the price beyond what is normally possible, and I greatly appreciate it.”

• “We’re fortunate that we were able to get past the discussion of price, in which you had already conceded all you could. Instead, we were able to focus on creating a package deal that pleased us both.”



Each of these responses reduces the likelihood that the other side will stick to her ultimatum, because each gives her a legitimate, face-saving way to frame her decision to change course. Often, your counterparts will find their own way to justify backing away from their original claims; if they can’t, it helps if you can give them a story to tell themselves—and to others who might question their decision to back down. It is worth pointing out, however, that each of these responses would be less necessary if, from the start, you had followed the strategy of ignoring their ultimatum altogether.

It is also worth keeping in mind that it’s not only your counterpart who has a strong need to save face. You are just as likely to sabotage your self-interest when pursuing it would make you lose face. So when you’re involved in a disagreement or dispute, don’t place your ego on the line. This means refraining from making empty threats or ultimatums. It also means carefully thinking through the implications of calling someone a liar, lashing out in anger, or staking a firm claim on a position that you may one day have to abandon. Negotiation geniuses avoid these behaviors and instead focus on alternatives that serve the same purpose, but that entail less risk. Instead of calling someone a liar, ask him to substantiate his claims. Instead of lashing out in anger, tell your counterpart why you are upset. And instead of swearing that you will never back off from a particular position, anchor aggressively and provide a justification for the anchor.

WHAT LOOKS GOOD VERSUS WHAT WORKS WELL

Many of the strategies and tactics we have presented for dealing with tough negotiation situations are not the kind you would see in a Hollywood movie. In a movie (and, regrettably, in some negotiation texts), the protagonist fights fire with fire, slams his fist on the table, and doesn’t back down from a fight. These tactics look good on the big screen, but most of them do not work well in practice. Negotiation geniuses approach “ugly” negotiations the same way that they approach “beautiful” ones—with an investigative approach that focuses on each side’s underlying interests. We will end with another sage quote from Deepak’s martial arts instructor: “If you’re in danger, don’t throw a spinning back-kick to their face. Instead, attack their kneecap. The kick to the face looks good, but the kick to the knee will save your life.” The same principle applies here: save the histrionics for the stage, and bring your negotiation genius to the bargaining table.





