CHAPTER 13




When Not to Negotiate

This story takes place on April 1, 2005—yes, on April Fool’s Day—but as strange as it may seem, this tale is entirely factual. It started with a Harvard economics professor who wanted to procure some manure (yes, you read that correctly). For years, this professor (who is not one of the authors) had been driving to a piece of farmland located about ten miles from his million-dollar home, shoveling manure into his truck, and carting it back to use in his garden. Of course, taking something from someone else’s property without their knowledge and without payment is illegal—even when the thing you’re taking is manure. There is some evidence to suggest that the professor was unaware that he had been breaking the law for all these years. Nonetheless, it was very clear to him on that night, April 1, 2005, that he was in big trouble. One of the farmhands spotted the professor as he tried to exit the property with the manure in his truck and promptly blocked the professor’s path with his own truck. The farmhand, who was also the nephew of the property owner, was clearly upset. The farmhand threatened to call the police, and the professor had to think fast. He had two clear options: he could rely on his people skills (apologize, plead ignorance, promise to make amends, et cetera), or he could rely on his training as an economist. He chose to do the latter.

Valuing the manure in his truck at no more than $20, the professor offered the farmhand $20. The farmhand became more upset. Believing he had just offered the farmhand more than his reservation value, the professor was probably surprised; nonetheless he upped his offer to $40. In response, the farmhand called the police. The professor was charged with trespassing, larceny, and malicious destruction of property (yes, we are still talking about manure). But these charges would soon become the least of the professor’s concerns. Once news of the event became public, it spread quickly through local, national, and international media channels. Even Jay Leno joked about the Harvard professor’s misadventure in his Tonight Show monologue.

Where did the professor go wrong? Obviously, he erred in not recognizing that he was stealing the manure. Even worse, he overlooked all of the signs that he was not in a position to negotiate his way out of trouble. Had the professor considered how weak his BATNA was (“If there is no deal, I will face legal hassles and public ridicule”) and how strong the farmhand’s BATNA was (“If there is no deal, he will call the police”), he might have decided not to try to haggle. Furthermore, seeing how upset the farmhand was, the professor might have realized that his “negotiation” might appear to be a bribe and only fuel the fire. Finally, even after deciding that a monetary offering would help settle the matter, why would the professor offer so little? Given the stakes, the strength of the farmhand’s BATNA, and his heightened emotions, a much better approach would have been to apologize, plead ignorance, and ask the farmhand what it might take to make amends for the unfortunate situation. Instead, the professor decided to negotiate—and that’s when the manure really hit the fan.

This book is designed to help you improve your negotiation skills and give you the tools you need to achieve better outcomes for yourself and for the people you care about. Though titled “When Not to Negotiate,” even this chapter is aimed at expanding your negotiation ability, because one critical aspect of expertise in any domain is recognizing your limits. Upon reading this book, you may be tempted to start trying out your newfound negotiation skills everywhere—all the time and on everyone—to see if you can get others to do what you want.

Our advice: slow down. Recognize that the “softer” aspects of what you have learned (listening, understanding, empathizing, and so on) are some of the most widely applicable tools you can leverage, especially in sensitive situations where adrenaline-driven tactics might only make matters worse. Becoming a negotiation genius is a matter of not only knowing how to negotiate, but also knowing when to negotiate.

Specifically, negotiation may not be the best option: when the costs of negotiation exceed the amount you stand to gain, when your BATNA stinks (and everyone knows it), when negotiation would send the wrong signal to the other party, when the potential harm to the relationship exceeds the expected value from the negotiation, when negotiating is culturally inappropriate, or when your BATNA beats the other side’s best possible offer. This chapter will help you better understand—and better strategize in—each of these situations.

WHEN TIME IS MONEY

Many years ago, Max was teaching a course on negotiation in Bangkok, Thailand. The students, naturally, were curious to know whether Max could negotiate in the real world or whether he simply knew the topic from an academic perspective. So each class began the same way. One of the students would ask Max where he went the previous evening and then ask the key question: “How much did you pay the taxi driver to get back to the faculty dorms?” At the time, in Thailand, one would routinely negotiate the price of the ride with the taxi driver before getting into the car. The students could then judge whether Max paid the rate that locals would pay or whether he paid the price reserved for foreigners—and for those lacking strong negotiation skills. By the end of the first week, Max understood the local taxi market quite well and was able to impress his students regularly with his ability to negotiate a good rate.

Then Marla, Max’s wife, arrived in Thailand. On the evening of her arrival, Max and Marla took a long walk across town to a nice restaurant. After dinner, just outside the restaurant, Max hailed a taxi and, in his poor Thai, told the driver the destination. The driver asked for 70 baht ($2.80 at the time), which was a very high price. Max countered with 30 baht ($1.20), the lowest possible price for a local taxi ride and the price Max had paid a few days earlier for a similar ride. The driver quickly dropped his price to 50 baht; Max repeated his offer of 30 baht. The driver came down to 40 baht. Max stuck to 30 baht. The driver decided to pursue his BATNA and drove away.

Max hailed another taxi and shared the destination with the driver. The driver’s response was 50 baht—a much more reasonable first offer than the one made by the previous driver. Max countered with an offer of 30 baht. The driver came down to 40 baht, at which point Max repeated his 30 baht offer. Again the driver drove away.

At this point, Marla, exhausted from her trip across the globe, asked Max what was going on. He explained that the drivers were demanding $1.60 for the cab ride and that he knew he could negotiate the price down to $1.20. Marla was not only unimpressed, but also rather annoyed. She offered to “chip in” 40 cents if that would seal the deal and get her home. Max wanted to explain that it was important for him to get a deal that would impress his class the next day, but he decided not to push it. Instead, he learned an important lesson. He had not only been ignoring the value of his own time but, more important, the value of Marla’s time.

It is common for negotiators to become so focused on “getting a good deal” or “winning” that they fail to consider the value of the time they are spending (or wasting) in pursuit of fairness or victory. In doing so, they often waste time on trivial negotiations that could be better spent consummating more important deals, completing other tasks, or simply relaxing. Many negotiators claim they are extremely busy people who are constantly short on time—yet these same people do a very poor job of prioritizing their time. If you tend to claim that you have very little free time, consider where your effort would provide the highest payoff. Then focus more on improving your performance in these critical negotiations and less on trivial negotiations, such as those that would give you only a nominal discount on an already acceptable starting price.

Unfortunately, making this change is not as simple as recognizing that time is a limited resource that should not be wasted. You also need to recognize the many ways in which you have been conditioned to make these kinds of mistakes and work hard to change your habits. For example, consider that, across cultures, people are conditioned to look for the best deal, to not waste money, to avoid penalties and fines, and to finish everything on their dinner plate. What’s wrong with such advice?

Usually there is nothing wrong with following these rules, but sometimes they motivate us to make irrational decisions that destroy value. Deepak discovered this one evening when his wife, Shikha, asked him to return the DVD they had rented the previous evening. The DVD was due back before midnight; if it was not returned on time, they would have to pay a fine. The problem was that Deepak happened to be sitting very comfortably in the living room. He had no desire to get up, get dressed, and drive two miles to return the movie. Deepak explained that he would prefer to return the movie the following day when he drove by the video store on the way to work, and that he could live with the $3 fine. Shikha saw things differently. She was unimpressed by Deepak’s position on the matter, which she characterized as “being lazy.”

Deepak suggested that they look at the situation in a different light. “Suppose there was no DVD or penalty involved,” he said. “Instead, imagine there’s someone standing outside the video store, handing out $3 to anyone who comes by. Would you want me to get up, get dressed, and drive two miles to pick up that $3? No way! So if it isn’t worth going out there for $3 in that situation, there really isn’t any reason for me to go now.”

Shikha agreed with Deepak’s argument, but as always, she improved his analysis. “From now on,” she said, “perhaps we should plan ahead so that we don’t find ourselves in situations where we have to choose between wasting money and wasting time.” In fact, she pointed out, Deepak could have returned the DVD on the way to work that morning, avoided the penalty, enjoyed the evening in the living room, and eliminated the need for this entire conversation. But, according to Deepak, that would not have been nearly as fun—or insightful.

As this story reveals, we are often tempted to underestimate the value of our time because we are misapplying seemingly reasonable advice (e.g., get the best deal, don’t accept what is unfair, avoid penalties, and so on). Furthermore, as Shikha’s solution to the DVD problem reveals, it is often possible to make rational decisions and at the same time avoid unpleasant trade-offs if one has prepared effectively from the start.

WHEN YOUR BATNA STINKS—AND EVERYONE KNOWS IT

In our jobs as professors at the Harvard Business School, second-year MBA students often visit us seeking advice on negotiating their job offers. Quite often, the students sit down and describe the excellent offer that they have received—great company, great location, great boss, and great initial assignment. We congratulate them on obtaining the offer and ask how we can help. They explain that the offer is just a bit low on one issue—salary. It seems that many of their friends have been offered more money by other firms.

At this point, we ask the question they learned to expect from us during their first-year course on negotiation: “What’s your BATNA? What other offers do you have?” They often complain that negotiating would be easy—and they wouldn’t need our advice—if they had multiple offers. The problem, they explain, is that they only have one offer and that the prospective employer knows this (or will soon know, because the student will not lie about it).

How should these students negotiate for a higher salary? While the advice we give varies by situation, one piece of advice that we commonly offer—based on Deepak’s story in Chapter 11—comes as a bit of a surprise to our students: They should call their future employer, express their enthusiasm regarding the company and the offer, and accept the job. Then, after accepting, they should ask their new boss for a favor: “Would you mind looking at some data regarding starting salaries of MBA students who have graduated from HBS? I’d like you to consider whether a somewhat higher starting salary might be both possible and fairer.” Finally, they should clarify that they have already accepted the offer regardless of whether the salary changes or not—what happens in the salary negotiation will not affect their decision to join the firm.

Our students commonly protest that they would lose too much power in the negotiation by accepting first. “What power are you referring to?” we ask. “If you try to negotiate with your new employer, and your BATNA is to remain on the job market without an offer, and the employer knows that they have already given you something higher than your reservation value, then you have little power to begin with.” In such a situation, you may not want to play the “negotiation” game. You may be much better off playing a different game—for example, the game called “fairness,” or the one called “could you please help me?” More generally, you may want to avoid negotiating when a reasonable analysis suggests that you will lose the negotiation game but may win some other type of game. In particular, when your BATNA stinks, their BATNA is fine, and all of this information is common knowledge, you may want to simply say yes in the negotiation and then change the game.

Does this advice work? Think back to how Deepak negotiated a job offer with his preferred employer. His strategy was to accept the offer before negotiating and then to create an environment where the managing partner liked him, wanted to help him, and could find ways to justify a salary increase. The result: a 10 percent increase in starting salary after both the HR department and the managing partner had said that salaries were nonnegotiable.

WHEN NEGOTIATING SENDS THE WRONG SIGNAL

Steve, a senior manager in a highly profitable accounting firm, was surprised one morning when he received a phone call from the president of his company. “What could he possibly want with me?” wondered Steve, who had never before met or spoken with the president. The president told Steve that he was planning to make a lot of changes in the organization and that one of the primary changes would involve restructuring the executive team: some people would be leaving, and some new blood would be brought in. The president asked Steve to meet with him the following day for a brief conversation. The next day, only minutes into their conversation, the president offered Steve a new job at the executive level, a promotion that would move him up three levels in the organization.

Most employees of most organizations would be absolutely thrilled to receive such an opportunity. But this situation was different. In his current position, Steve was not only earning a high salary, but was also a member of a highly coveted bonus pool that usually tripled his annual salary. The new job, while at the executive level, might end up paying him considerably less. The president had not discussed compensation, and Steve wondered whether the president himself knew what his salary would be in the new position. Steve was excited about the new job, but was extremely worried about the prospect of seeing his compensation cut in half, or worse! What to do? Should he ask what compensation he would receive? Should he anchor the negotiation by revealing how much compensation he was currently receiving and then invite a response? Should he ask for more time to make the decision and then try to obtain additional information from other sources? Should he simply accept or reject the offer as it stood?

There may be no single “right” approach to this situation. But let’s consider what Steve did and, more important, why he did it.

Based on how quickly the company president made the offer and based on the fact that the president waited to make the offer until they were face-to-face, Steve gathered that the president wanted a quick decision. Furthermore, the president had chosen not to bring up the topic of compensation. Steve interpreted this to mean one of two things: either the president was confident that the compensation would be sufficient, or he was purposefully avoiding the topic because he did not want Steve’s decision to be motivated primarily by financial considerations. Given the emphasis the president kept placing on “building a new team with a shared vision,” Steve reasoned that the latter was almost certainly true. If so, perhaps the worst thing to do would be to bring up compensation.

Steve came to the conclusion that this was not the time to negotiate. For one thing, even if the compensation was very low, he might be in a better position to negotiate a higher salary after he had proven himself in the new role. He might regret his decision not to negotiate if he was unable to negotiate an adequate salary later, but he could stomach the risk. More important, trying to negotiate under the current circumstances would send the wrong signal—that he was more interested in money than in being a part of the leadership team and helping to reshape the organization.

Steve told the president that, while some aspects of the job were obviously still unclear, he shared his vision and was excited to join the team. He added: “I fully trust you to help make my transition into this new role both successful and mutually rewarding.”

Later, some of Steve’s colleagues told him that he should have negotiated compensation—that he was in a great position to do so because the president had clearly sought him out.

Steve’s response? “Maybe I could have tried to negotiate a stellar compensation package, and maybe I’ll regret not having negotiated when I had the chance. But I’m absolutely certain that I sent exactly the right signals—that I am a team player, that I trust the president, and that I am not solely motivated by dollars and cents—to a powerful person with whom I expect to have a close long-term relationship.”

What eventually transpired? After he received the promotion, Steve’s salary was cut in half—but he was given enough in bonuses, stock options, and scope for future advancement that his annual compensation effectively doubled.

As the reasoning behind Steve’s decision reveals, the decision to negotiate always sends some signal. Typically, the signal you are sending when you initiate a negotiation is that you require more in value before you can agree to a deal. And, typically, this is a fine signal to send. However, in some situations, the signal you send when you decide to negotiate is that you do not trust the other side or that you are more concerned about what you will get from the deal than you are about the relationship, or about the rationale for the deal itself.

If your decision to negotiate will send the “wrong” signal, you have three options.



1. Negotiate anyway. You might decide that what you stand to gain from negotiation outweighs the costs of sending the wrong signal.



2. Change the signal. You might try to actively manage the way in which the other party will perceive your decision to negotiate. For example, Steve might have initiated a discussion of compensation as follows: “I am very excited about the offer and hope to play a role in transforming this organization. I also appreciate your trust in me. Before I sign on, I do have some questions. I’m sure that’s no surprise. Would it be possible for you to give me some more information regarding my role, responsibilities, and compensation? Regarding compensation—I don’t want you to get the wrong idea. I am not fixated on the dollars and cents. But it is something that anyone with three young children needs to at least consider. Is this something that we can discuss?” In saying this, Steve might have made it less likely that launching a compensation negotiation would upset or offend the president.



3. Decide not to negotiate. If you think that the cost of sending a negative signal is too high and that it will be difficult to change the signal, you may want to decide, as Steve did, that this is not the time to negotiate.

WHEN RELATIONSHIPS MIGHT SUFFER

Sharon and Mark purchased a piece of land and proceeded with their plans to build their dream house. The home’s construction would stretch their budget, but they carefully planned a way to build at the lowest price possible. Fortunately, Sharon and Mark had attended a seminar advertised in their local newspaper on “getting the price you deserve.” Their instructor had told them that the more bids they sought, the lower their price would be. Accordingly, they took their architectural plans to eight different builders and were delighted when one builder came in with a surprisingly low bid—a full 10 percent lower than the second-lowest bid.

The negotiation course seemed to be paying off. If the builder is this desperate for projects, Sharon and Mark speculated, perhaps he will accept further concessions. In face-to-face negotiations, they pushed for a lower price. At first, the builder resisted. But when Sharon and Mark offered to sign the contract that day, set a deposit check on the table (another trick picked up in the negotiation class), and then threatened to go elsewhere, the builder had to reconsider. He thought about his desire to keep his crew employed and agreed to lower the price by another 3 percent, shaking his head and grumbling about whether any profit remained. Sharon and Mark seemed to have negotiated the best price they could have hoped to obtain—the lowest bidder’s reservation value! Their happiness kept them from noticing the fact that the builder felt trapped and was unhappy with how the negotiation had unfolded.

After the contract was signed, Sharon and Mark’s architect came up with a number of changes, all of which they thought looked great. They took these seemingly small “change orders” to the builder and were shocked by the prices that the builder demanded to accommodate the altered work plan. Sharon and Mark pushed hard for lower prices, but this time the builder refused to make concessions. Their excellent initial price continued to rise, due not only to the change orders, but also to an increase in lumber costs (the contract had a cost-of-lumber adjustment). Many difficult conversations took place between the builder, who remained grumpy about his profit margin, and Sharon and Mark, who were frustrated by the price increases.

When the builder told them that the house would most likely be completed in three months, Sharon and Mark sold their condo and set a closing date that coincided with the expected completion date of the house. However, the house was not completed on time, and Sharon and Mark were forced to move into temporary housing. Again and again, they discussed their need for completion with the builder, who repeatedly blamed the delays on subcontractors. Sharon and Mark checked the contract and found no clause dealing with delays.

After nine weeks in temporary housing, Sharon and Mark finally moved into their supposed “dream house.” At first they were pleased with the house. But the longer they lived in it, the more problems they encountered: one of the heating systems failed during the winter, two of the appliances were unreliable, some of the carpentry wasn’t finished, and cracks started to emerge in the drywall. Some of these items were under warranty; some were not. The builder did not quickly attend even to those items that were under warranty; after all, he had already been fully paid for his work. “I know that I’m obligated to fix the cracks in the drywall,” the builder said during one heated conversation with Sharon, “but I’m not obligated to do it at your convenience.”

Ultimately, Sharon and Mark regretted that they had ever decided to build their dream house. Their condo had been fine for their needs, and a lot less of a hassle.

Why was the building project such a disaster? Sharon and Mark got a great price for a house that they eventually did not want. They focused on getting a low price at the expense of other important issues, such as timely completion and quality construction. Most important, they pushed for a price that, while desirable, destroyed their relationship with the other party. When Sharon and Mark received the builder’s low bid, they probably should have accepted it and then negotiated “friendlier” issues, such as how to deal with change orders, whether to add a small lateness penalty and a small timeliness bonus to the contract, and so on. Sharon and Mark did a good job negotiating the price of their home construction, but they would have done a much better job negotiating their overall outcome had they avoided negotiating the builder down to his reservation value.

As we think about how Sharon and Mark should have handled their negotiation, it is worth recalling (from Chapter 1) what transpired when Albert Einstein was “negotiating” his job offer with Princeton University. Einstein requested an annual salary of $3,000, and Princeton responded by offering to pay him $15,000 annually. Princeton’s decision to offer Einstein an appropriate wage, rather than accepting (or haggling over) his low bid, was the right one to make—and not simply because the other party was Albert Einstein. Organizations often face a choice between paying employees the bare minimum required to attract and retain them and paying a “fairer” or more generous wage. Ethical considerations aside, organizations (and consumers like Sharon and Mark) will generally benefit by taking a long-term perspective that entails building a reputation for fairness and for contributing to the well-being of their negotiation counterparts.

WHEN NEGOTIATING IS CULTURALLY INAPPROPRIATE

Let’s revisit Max’s taxi negotiations in Thailand and see how these might work—or not work—once Max returns to Boston. Imagine that Max returns to the United States, walks out of the airport terminal, and waits in line for a taxi. When his taxi arrives, Max asks the driver how much it will cost for a ride to his home in Cambridge. The driver says that he will go by what the meter registers, but estimates that it will be close to $20. As other travelers wait impatiently behind him, Max begins to haggle. He offers $10. The taxi driver swears at Max and calls the attendant responsible for managing the taxi stand. The attendant pulls Max aside and tells him that he is holding up the line and will have to either take the ride now or find a different way to get home.

Should Max be surprised that this negotiation failed? Of course not. Nor should he be surprised if he next went to a grocery store and was unable to engage the clerk in a negotiation over the price of a bottle of water. Some of the behaviors that Max found to be perfectly acceptable in Thailand would be laughable, even offensive, back home in the United States. It is worth mentioning that we have had students tell us occasionally about their success in negotiating seemingly nonnegotiable items (such as the price of a cup of coffee at Starbucks). You might also recall how Shikha, Deepak’s wife, successfully negotiated with a taxi driver in Boston (as described in Chapter 3). But very often, such negotiations will fail because they are not culturally appropriate.

Within our own culture, we tend to know which behaviors are consistent with social norms and which are not. Our knowledge of our own culture tells us what time we should show up for a party that “starts at 7 P.M.,” whether it is acceptable to burp after a meal or to show the soles of our shoes, and countless other rules of conduct. Our understanding of our own culture also tells us when it is appropriate to negotiate—and when it is not. Unfortunately, we often violate such norms in other cultures. If Max, when in Bangkok, had simply accepted the 70 baht offer from the taxi driver, he not only would have overpaid, but he would have also given the driver a funny story (about the ignorant foreigner) that he could share with his friends. As another example, consider that in some cultures and contexts, it may be acceptable to anchor aggressively and then negotiate down to a mutually agreeable price; in others, your willingness to retreat from your original, justified anchor may signal to the other party that you were initially lying or being greedy.

How can you know whether it is okay to negotiate in a particular culture? How should you initiate negotiations in a different culture? The first step in answering these questions is always preparation. Before you travel, elicit advice from others who have done business in that culture or who are from that culture. Learn as much as you can, including what is and is not appropriate to say and discuss, how and when to initiate substantive discussions, how to build rapport and trust, how to manage status and respect issues, and how aggressively people can be expected to anchor. The more you know going in, the better prepared you will be to negotiate effectively.

Even if you are not culturally sophisticated, all is not lost. Imagine that you find yourself having to negotiate in a foreign land where you know very little about the local culture or social norms. What should you do? Ask to be educated. Most people in most parts of the world will not be offended by—and will probably appreciate—a statement such as the following:



As you know, we have not done business in this country before. That’s one of the reasons we are thrilled to have this opportunity to meet with you and discuss issues of mutual interest. However, this also means that we may not always know the correct way to articulate or convey certain ideas. We hope you will be forgiving if we say or do something that seems awkward. We assure you that we mean no disrespect and that, while we may stumble occasionally, we are fast learners. Perhaps you are feeling similar anxiety, in which case we can assure you that we understand your good intentions. I think we all stand to benefit if everyone feels comfortable discussing issues openly, asking questions, and being patient. I hope that you agree. We’re excited about the opportunity we have not only to do business with you, but also to learn about your culture.



How would you respond if someone with whom you were negotiating made this statement? In all likelihood, you would welcome their sentiments and feel more relaxed and comfortable yourself. Unfortunately, when negotiating cross-culturally, many people instead decide to “fake it,” rely on cultural stereotypes, or ignore the cultural element altogether. None of these strategies beats the investigative approach that we first introduced in Chapter 3: when you don’t know something, try to learn it.

WHEN YOUR BATNA BEATS THEIR BEST POSSIBLE OFFER

In 1981, Roger Fisher and William Ury published a short book entitled Getting to YES: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In. As you may know, the book became a best seller and transformed the practice of negotiation. Previously, most writing on the topic of negotiation focused on protecting “what’s yours” and getting as much of “what’s theirs” as possible—an approach that many people would describe as “win-lose” negotiation. By contrast, Getting to YES encouraged agreement and exalted the pursuit of “win-win” deals.

Overall, Getting to YES has had a very positive impact on society. But among some of its enthusiasts, the book seems to have created too strong of a bias toward always “getting to yes.” The amazing success of Getting to YES has contributed to the perception that an impasse, or “no deal,” is equivalent to a failed negotiation. But sometimes in negotiation, you should not get to yes! Sometimes your BATNA is better than any offer your current negotiation counterpart can make, and “no deal” is the best outcome that two fully rational negotiators can hope to achieve. In these cases, the best you can do is to get to “no” as efficiently as possible. How will you know when “no deal” is the best outcome? Look for the following signs:



• You have told them about your other offers, and they are unable to match or beat the value that these alternatives offer to you.

• Instead of trying to meet your needs, they are trying hard to convince you that your interests are not what you think they are.

• They seem more interested in stretching out the negotiation than in exchanging information, building a relationship, or structuring an agreement.

• Despite your best efforts, they will not answer any of your questions; nor will they ask about your needs or interests.



In such situations, there is no virtue in negotiating for the sake of negotiating or negotiating well past the time it should take for you to discover that no ZOPA exists. When there is no ZOPA, there should be no deal. In such situations, instead of “getting to yes,” exercise your BATNA.

CAN’T A GENIUS NEGOTIATE EVERYTHING?

As we have stressed throughout this book, more often than not, negotiating allows you to create value above and beyond your alternatives to reaching agreement. But it is worth keeping in mind that not every aspect of life is a negotiation. By considering the context of the negotiation, the relationships involved, and your alternatives away from the table, you will become adept at identifying when to negotiate, when to accept a deal without negotiating, and when to simply walk away. Some negotiation “experts” will tell you that “you can negotiate anything.” Perhaps you can—but that does not mean you should. Often, there are better things to do than negotiate. Negotiation geniuses are able to recognize and leverage these alternatives.





