CHAPTER 14




The Path to Genius

Some years ago, one of us sat in on an MBA negotiation class that was taught by a well-known negotiation professor. It was the last day of the semester-long course, and the professor kept referring to his students as “negotiation experts” (for instance, “now that you are negotiation experts,” and so on). We found this quite disturbing. These students were not experts—certainly not yet. Some of them might never become negotiation experts. And yet the last day of the course was being celebrated as the last step in the learning process. In contrast, we hold no such illusions. Rather, we believe that reading this book is your first step toward becoming a negotiation genius—or expert.

Recall the distinction we made in Chapter 6 between experience and expertise. Experience is what you gain when you engage in a particular behavior (such as negotiation) many times. Expertise is what you gain when you are able to infuse your experience with a “strategic conceptualization” of what you are doing.1 Unfortunately, many people confuse these two ideas and mistakenly think that their vast experience in negotiation qualifies them as experts.

One of our executive students recently told us that he didn’t expect to learn much from a course on negotiation. He had accumulated many years of negotiation experience and had “seen it all.” In support of his argument for the supremacy of experience, he even quoted Benjamin Franklin: “Experience is a dear teacher.” Unfortunately for the student (and his prospects for learning), he had misunderstood Franklin’s point. When he used the word “dear,” Franklin meant it as a synonym for “expensive,” not “precious.” This becomes clear when you consider Franklin’s full statement: “Experience is a dear teacher, but fools will learn at no other.” Yes, experience is an extremely important part of becoming a negotiation genius, but it is not sufficient.

The students whose professor told them they were experts, the dealmaker who came to us with twenty years of negotiating experience, and you, all have one thing in common: when it comes to negotiation, you do some things well, you do some things poorly, and the best way for you to become a more effective negotiator—indeed, a negotiation genius—is to think more deeply and analytically about the framework we have developed. Only by leveraging experience and insight will you truly achieve expertise.

WHICH STORY WILL YOU TELL?

Try to remember a recent negotiation in which you reached an agreement, but got a pretty lousy deal. Now imagine that you complained about the outcome to your boss, colleague, friend, or spouse. How did you account for your result? Here are some common explanations that we have heard from negotiators.



• “The other party said that they had a better offer from the competition. There was nothing more that I could do.”

• “The market moved against us.”

• “There was not enough time to push for a better deal.”



And here are some explanations that we rarely hear:



• “I didn’t prepare systematically.”

• “Our team was not well-coordinated.”

• “I didn’t collect the information that I needed prior to the negotiation.”

• “I blurted out an offer before I thought it through.”



The difference between the two lists is crucial. The first consists of external attributions. The failure was due to factors beyond your control. The problem was with the situation, not with what you did or did not do. In contrast, the second list consists of internal attributions for the failure—there were things you could have done differently to achieve a better outcome. When we think of our successes, we are very quick to attribute them to factors within our control. But when we think of failures, we usually find ways of externalizing the blame.

The good news is that these types of external attributions may salvage your reputation with your boss. They will also make you feel better about the “fact” that the bad deal wasn’t your fault and that you did the best you could. The bad news is that the poor outcome probably was at least partially your fault; thus, you are not being entirely honest with yourself or with others. Most often, when you get a lousy deal, it is because you were in a difficult situation and you did not handle it as well as you could have. Now for the really bad news: when you attribute your failures to external factors, you make it very difficult to learn from your experience and improve as a negotiator.

As a negotiator, you face a choice: do you want to feel good about yourself or do you want to learn? Because you have reached the last chapter of this book, we presume the latter. If so, your goal is to find ways to integrate the principles, strategies, and tactics presented in this book into your life. We end by suggesting some ways for doing so.

PERFECT CAN BE THE ENEMY OF GOOD

It has been said that “perfect is the enemy of good,” a principle that applies to personal change in many areas. If you try to do too much, too soon, you will be overwhelmed. For example, you may want to try to memorize all of the ideas and strategies you found useful in this book so that you will be prepared for every possible eventuality in your next negotiation. If you try to do this, you will inevitably fall short of your expectations—and of your potential.

In addition to recognizing the virtues of incremental (rather than hurried) progress, you must anticipate the various obstacles to change that you will undoubtedly face. You may find it difficult to try new ideas or strategies because you are risk averse or because you find the status quo to be comforting. Or you may find it difficult to change your ways when everyone around you expects you to believe certain things and behave a certain way. It is also possible that you simply won’t have the time necessary to devote to change. Recognize that all of these obstacles—and others that you might think of—are typical. Your need to confront these obstacles does not say anything about you or your prospects for effective change; it simply means that you are human. This understanding may give you some relief, but it does not solve your problem. How can you overcome common obstacles to change and effectively leverage the ideas in this book?

Here are some practical steps that you can follow to transition from reading about key negotiation ideas and strategies to changing how you actually negotiate:



1. Review the book (or any notes you may have taken as you read) and make a list of all of the strategies and tactics that you would like to try in your own negotiations. Once you have done this, identify which items on the list require further contemplation and which ones you can use immediately.

2. Among those ideas that you wish to contemplate further, identify one key concept that you will spend time working on in the week ahead. Set aside some time in your schedule to think more deeply about this idea. How might you apply it to your negotiations? What are its strengths? What are its weaknesses? How might you integrate the principle into your way of thinking? Do the same for all of the other ideas you would like to contemplate further: tackle one idea each week. If you have the time to explore more ideas in a particular week, add items to your weekly list.

3. Identify other people, such as friends and colleagues, with whom you would like to discuss particular negotiation strategies. Ask them to play devil’s advocate to your proposed use of a strategy and to critique your game plan. Trying out new negotiation strategies on supportive friends or colleagues will not only give you the confidence to transfer your new skills to important negotiations, but will also help you identify mistakes you may have overlooked.

4. For those strategies that you are ready to implement immediately, think about your current (or upcoming) negotiations. Write down which specific strategies and tactics you would like to employ in each negotiation. To avoid “shooting from the hip” when you get to the bargaining table, you should also plan how exactly you will implement these strategies.

5. After your negotiations, think about other strategies that you could have applied but did not. Think about how you might do so in the future.

6. Every so often, revisit the book to see if there are other ideas, strategies, or tactics that seem relevant to your current or upcoming negotiations.

CREATING THE RIGHT ENVIRONMENT FOR GENIUS

An executive student who runs a midsize company came back to visit Deepak a year after taking his course on negotiation. The executive had been so energized by the course material that he wanted all of his employees to learn and master the strategies discussed in class. During the course of the past year, he reported, he had put forth a lot of effort to educate his employees. Unfortunately, he had achieved very mixed results. He described the problem:



“In my company, we have two divisions: the ‘Openers’ and the ‘Closers.’ It is the job of Openers to bring in potential clients. Once the potential client is sufficiently interested in what we have to offer, they are passed on to the Closers. It is the Closers’ job to close the deal. When I tried to teach my employees about investigative negotiation, creating and claiming value, etc., a strange thing happened. The Openers got the message quickly. They were excited to leverage these new ideas in their negotiations with potential clients. But the Closers—they didn’t get it. They looked at me as if I was talking complete nonsense. And they went back to their jobs and didn’t change a thing. They continue to claim very little value and to do whatever it takes to sign the deal. They seem to have no sense of the merits of value creation, or of the potential for value claiming!”



The executive wondered aloud whether the problem was that he was recruiting more open-minded people as Openers and more closed-minded people as Closers. Deepak responded by asking whether, in his firm, these two divisions were actually referred to as “Openers” and “Closers.” “Yes,” the executive said. “Why, then,” asked Deepak, “are you so surprised that your Closers are closing deals for you?” The executive was not sure what he meant, so Deepak asked another question: “What do you think Closers are most afraid of doing in their jobs?” The executive thought for a moment, then responded: “Losing the deal.” Deepak asked if there were any incentive systems in place to reward Closers. There were: their bonuses were tied to the number of deals they closed.

That was the problem. These employees were being told (literally) that their job was to close the deal. They were also being rewarded financially on the basis of closing the deal. Yet the executive was surprised when the Closers ignored his suggestion that they should try to claim as much value as possible. Why would they do anything that might risk losing the deal?

This problem is common. Often, we—or our employees and coworkers—have both the analytic ability to learn new skills and the desire to change our behavior, yet we are constrained by the culture or incentive systems that exist in our organizations. For the ideas in this book to take shape in the real world, you need to take steps to remove these constraints. If you are in a position of authority, assess the culture and incentive systems that govern your team, division, or organization. If you determine that these systems will stifle the changes you hope will take root in the negotiation behaviors of your employees or colleagues, work to facilitate change. If you are not in a position of authority, but can see how your organization’s culture or incentive system is creating a barrier to change, consider taking it upon yourself to educate those who can do something about it.

THE DISAPPEARING CIRCLE

When executives and MBA students first enroll in a course on negotiation, they typically arrive with assumptions about the “things that are negotiable” in life. Usually, in their minds, a small circle of negotiable things exists: buying or selling a house, a car, or a business; haggling with a street vendor; negotiating salary with an employer; and perhaps little else. They look forward to learning how to be more effective in these negotiations. But as the course progresses, and we discuss different strategies and tactics for negotiating in a wide variety of contexts, their circle of negotiable things begins to grow. More and more issues, conflicts, and situations seem negotiable. Students often report that this is an empowering feeling. But where does it end? How large is the circle really?

Those who reflect deeply on the ideas presented in their negotiation course—or the ideas presented in this book—in the months and years that follow their classroom (or reading) experience discover that, eventually, the circle grows infinitely large; that is, it simply disappears. There are no longer “things that are negotiable” and “things that are not negotiable.” Instead, they discover that they have learned a set of basic principles for human interaction. These principles are not about buying, selling, crafting deals, reaching agreements, overcoming bias, and so on. Those activities are mere applications of more fundamental principles for successfully engaging with other people who, like you, are usually well-intentioned human beings who have different interests and perspectives.

A negotiation genius is someone for whom the circle has disappeared—for her, the ideas and principles are what matter, and these are ingrained in her approach to dealing with all types of human interaction. For a negotiation genius, applying the ideas in this book during a complex business transaction is no different from applying the ideas when having a conversation with a spouse, a friend, or an employee. Investigative negotiation principles are as applicable to a legal dispute as they are to a spat with a coworker; influence tactics can be usefully applied not only to the sale of your business services, but also in your negotiations with your children.

NEGOTIATION GENIUS IS ACHIEVABLE

We end with an observation regarding genius. The mistake is to think that some people are born geniuses (Einstein, Mozart, Michael Jordan, et cetera), and others of us are not. In fact, genius is often a combination of natural ability and a lot of hard work. But, you will argue, no amount of hard work will turn you into Michael Jordan or Mozart or Einstein. You are probably correct—you are unlikely to have the “raw materials” needed for their achievements. The good news is that you do have the raw materials needed to become a negotiation genius—almost everyone does. Negotiation genius is about human interaction, and the only raw material you need to achieve it is the ability to change your beliefs, assumptions, and perspective. You have this ability. If you now put forth the effort to implement what you have learned, then you will become a negotiation genius—someone who finds it easy to achieve brilliant results in all types of negotiations. We hope you will put forth this effort. We hope this book motivates you to do so and guides you along the path.





GLOSSARY




analogical reasoning: The process of learning by comparing and contrasting similar lessons from two different episodes or events.

anchor: A number, such as a first offer, that focuses negotiator attention and expectations and helps resolve uncertainty.

behavioral decision research: An area of research that focuses on the systematic ways that the human mind deviates from rationality; has led to scientific revolutions in fields such as economics, psychology, finance, law, medicine, marketing, and negotiation.

best alternative to a negotiated agreement (BATNA): The course of action a negotiator will pursue if and when the current negotiation is unsuccessful (i.e., ends in impasse).

bounded awareness: The systematic failure to see readily available information that is relevant to a decision but is not the object of focus.

cognitive biases: The systematic mistakes that negotiators make because of the way in which their minds operate.

competitive arousal: An emotional state that results from heightened perceptions of rivalry, and that can create in negotiators the desire to “win at any cost.”

contingency contract: A provision in an agreement that leaves specific elements of the deal unresolved until a particular source of uncertainty is resolved in the future. Such provisions allow both sides in the negotiation to “bet” on their differing beliefs regarding the probability of a future event.

contingent concessions: In negotiation, concessions that are explicitly tied to specific actions by the other party. These are phrased in a quid-pro-quo manner to clarify that concessions will only be made if the other party does their part.

contrast effect: The tendency to judge the magnitude of something based not on its absolute or objective size, but instead on how it appears relative to a (perhaps arbitrary) point of reference.

co-opetition: Situations in which a party has the incentive to cooperate with another party on some fronts, while competing with the same party on other fronts.

de-biasing strategies: The steps a negotiator takes to reduce his or her naturally occurring decision biases.

distinct value proposition: The host of assets that your negotiation counterpart values and that you can provide more effectively or cheaply than your competitors.

door-in-the-face strategy (DITF): The technique of increasing others’ willingness to comply with your request by first asking them to agree to an even more extreme request that they are almost certain to reject.

egocentrism: The tendency for our perceptions and expectations to be biased in a self-serving manner.

fixed-pie bias: Negotiators often fail to create value because they assume “whatever is good for them is bad for us” that is, they believe there is a “fixed pie” of value or resources even when it is possible to increase the size of the pie.

foot-in-the-door strategy (FITD): A strategy of influence that is based on the premise that the willingness of others to agree with one request leads to an increased commitment on their part to agree with additional requests that naturally follow from the initial request.

framing effects: The common tendency for negotiators to treat risks involving perceived gains differently from risks involving perceived losses.

haggling: The iterative give-and-take that occurs after each party has made its initial offer.

illusion of superiority: A bias that causes people to view themselves as better than others on a variety of desirable attributes.

inattentional blindness: A phenomenon in which people are focused so intently on a particular task that they fail to see obvious information in their environment.

incentive compatible: Negotiated clauses that offer incentives for the other party to behave in ways that are consistent with the spirit of your agreement.

information asymmetry: The fact that each side in the negotiation is inevitably aware of facts and data that the other side does not know.

insider lens: The perspective negotiators typically adopt when they are personally involved in a decision or negotiation. The insider lens is more susceptible to bias, and more likely to rely on intuition, than the outsider lens.

investigative negotiation: A negotiation mind-set and methodology that focuses on discovering the often hidden or guarded interests, priorities, needs, and constraints of the other party.

irrational optimism: A positive illusion that leads most of us to believe that our futures will be better and brighter than those of other people.

learned optimism: The perspective that a person’s tendency to overestimate her chances of success is a learned, functional attribute; theoretically, unrealistically high levels of optimism will motivate persistence in the face of rejection.

logrolling: The act of making trade-offs across issues in a negotiation. In particular, logrolling involves giving the other side something that they value relatively more in return for receiving something that you value relatively more.

loss aversion: The tendency for people to be more motivated to avoid losses than they are to accrue gains.

marginal utility: The happiness associated with an incremental change in circumstances; for example, how much happier a negotiator is when he receives an additional concession above what was already received or expected.

motivational biases: A range of misperceptions resulting from the common human tendency to view the world the way we wish it were rather than how it truly is. In particular, the desire to see ourselves as fairer, kinder, more competent, more generous, more deserving, and more likely to succeed than others.

negotiauction: A two-stage bidding/negotiation process in which an initial auction narrows the field to the most promising candidates, who are then invited to engage in one-on-one negotiations.

nonrational escalation of commitment: The act of continuing to pursue a failing course of action based on the strong psychological need to justify (to oneself or to others) one’s prior decisions and behaviors.

non-zero-sum negotiation: A negotiation in which what one party gains is not associated with an equivalent loss for the other party. In such negotiations, the total value of the deal depends on how well the parties employ value-creating strategies.

norm of reciprocity: The widely held expectation and understanding that parties should repay or reward others for their benevolent or helpful behaviors. In negotiation, the norm of reciprocity creates the expectation that both sides will take turns making concessions.

outsider lens: The perspective negotiators typically adopt when they are not personally involved in a decision or negotiation. The outsider lens is less susceptible to bias, and less likely to rely on intuition, than the insider lens. The outsider lens helps negotiators to generalize across situations and to identify relevant patterns and lessons.

overconfidence: A bias that describes the tendency of negotiators to be more confident in their assessments than reality supports.

package reservation value: The “walk-away” value that you calculate using all of the issues in the negotiation. This is the minimum total value you will need to obtain in the negotiation if you are to forgo your BATNA. It is often necessary to use a scoring system to help calculate your package reservation value.

parasitic value creation: Value creation that occurs when negotiators at the table are made better off because they have extracted value from parties who are not at the bargaining table.

Pareto-efficient agreement: An agreement in which there is no way to make one party better off without hurting at least one other party.

Pareto improvements: Changes to a deal that make at least one person better off without making anyone worse off.

positive illusions: Unrealistic positive beliefs regarding our abilities and our future. Such beliefs, arguably, contribute to our psychological and material well-being by protecting our self-esteem and motivating us to persevere when faced with difficult tasks.

post-settlement settlements: Agreements that are negotiated after the initial agreement is signed. Post-settlement settlements are pursued in order to create additional value.

prisoners’ dilemma: A competitive situation in which both players are individually better off playing a noncooperative strategy, but collectively better off playing a cooperative strategy.

psychological biases: Systematic departures from rationality that can derail an otherwise sound negotiation strategy.

reactive devaluation: The tendency of negotiators to denigrate the value of a concession or idea simply because it was made by someone who is seen as an adversary.

reference group neglect: The common—and harmful—failure of negotiators to adequately consider the strength of the opposition.

reference point: Any salient source of comparison. Reference points can affect the judgments negotiators make regarding the value of a particular issue or offer.

reservation value: A negotiator’s “walk-away” point in a negotiation. If the value being offered by the other side is equal to the negotiator’s reservation value, the negotiator is indifferent between accepting the offer and rejecting it in favor of pursuing his/her BATNA.

self-serving attributions: The tendency to make causal judgments in ways that help the negotiator feel good about him-or herself.

social proof: A psychological principle that states when there is uncertainty or ambiguity regarding the appropriate course of action, people look to the behavior of similar others for guidance.

stereotype tax: The cost we bear when we base our decisions about others on stereotypes rather than on more useful information about them as individuals.

stereotyping: Identifying a key feature that is perceived to describe some members of a group, applying this description to all members of the group, and failing to notice the uniqueness of specific group members.

target price: The outcome a negotiator hopes to achieve in the negotiation. This is also referred to as a negotiator’s aspiration level.

value creation: The act of increasing the total amount of value that is up for grabs in the negotiation. This is done, for example, when negotiators identify each other’s priorities and engage in logrolling.

vividness bias: The tendency of negotiators to focus too much attention on vivid features of offers and to overlook less vivid concerns that may nonetheless have a stronger impact on their satisfaction.

want-self versus should-self: The internal negotiation people often face between doing what they want to do versus doing what they think they should do.

winner’s curse: Situations in which a bidder wins the deal by paying more than the commodity is worth, due to a failure to consider the information advantage of the other party.

zero-sum negotiation: A negotiation in which whatever one party gains results in an equivalent loss to the other party. Also referred to as “fixed-sum negotiation” and “distributive negotiation.”

zone of possible agreement (ZOPA): The set of all possible outcomes in a negotiation that would be acceptable to all parties. In a one-issue price negotiation, this is the space between the seller’s reservation value and the buyer’s reservation value.





NOTES




CHAPTER 1: CLAIMING VALUE IN NEGOTIATION

1 This story was recounted by David Lax and James Sebenius in their 1986 book The Manager as Negotiator: Bargaining for Cooperation and Competitive Gain (published by Free Press).

2 Adapted from D. Malhotra (2005). Hamilton Real Estate: Confidential Role Information for the Executive VP of Pearl Investments (SELLER). Harvard Business School Exercise 905-053. Available, along with the Role Information for “Buyer” and a Teaching Note, from Harvard Business School Publishing.

3 Fisher, R., and Ury, W. (1981). Getting to Yes. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

4 Northcraft, G. B., and Neale, M. A. (1987). Experts, Amateurs, and Real Estate: An Anchoring-and-Adjustment Perspective on Property Pricing Decisions. Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes, 39(1), 84–97.

5 Ibid.

6 Malhotra, D. (2004). Trust and Reciprocity Decision: The Differing Perspectives of Trustors and Trusted Parties. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 94: 61–73.

7 Shell, R. G. (1999). Bargaining for Advantage: Negotiation Strategies for Reasonable People. New York: Viking.

8 Galinsky, A. D., Mussweiler, T., and Medvec, V. H. (2002). Disconnecting Outcomes and Evaluations: The Role of Negotiator Focus. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(5), 1131–1140.

CHAPTER 2: CREATING VALUE IN NEGOTIATION

1 This statement was made by Richard Holbrooke during a panel discussion at Harvard University in October 2004.

2 Adapted from A. Tenbrunsel & M. Bazerman (2006). Moms.com Simulation and Teaching Note. (Dispute Resolution and Research Center, Northwestern University.)

3 Valley, K. L., Neale, M, A., and Mannix, E. A. (1995). Friends, Lovers, Colleagues, Strangers: The Effects of Relationships on the Process and Outcome of Dyadic Negotiations. Research on Negotiation in Organizations, 65–93, eds. R. J. Bies, R. J. Lewicki, B. H. Sheppard. Greenwich, CT: JAI.

4 Raiffa, H. (1985). Post-Settlement Settlements. Negotiation Journal, 1, 9–12.

CHAPTER 3: INVESTIGATIVE NEGOTIATION

1 ABC News (2004, July 13). Nader Campaign Accepts Republican Donations. From http://abclocal.go.com/kgo/story?section=News&id=1873814.

2 Brandenburger, A. M., and Nalebuff, B. J. (1996). Co-opetition. New York: Doubleday.

CHAPTER 4: WHEN RATIONALITY FAILS: BIASES OF THE MIND

1 Malhotra, D., and Hout, M. (2006). Negotiating on Thin Ice: The 2004–2005 NHL Dispute. Harvard Business School Cases: 906-038 and 906-039.

2 LaPointe, J. (2004, December 27). Bettman’s Vision for the NHL Did Not Include Labor Strife. New York Times, D1; (2005, January 10); Worst Managers: Gary Bettman, National Hockey League, Business Week, 76.

3 LaPointe, Bettman’s Vision for the NHL Did Not Include Labor Strife, op. cit.

4 Cannella, S. (2005, February 17). Shameless and Pointless: Bettman, Goodenow Disgrace the NHL More than Ever, Sports Illustrated online.

5 Hahn, A. (2005, July 26). NHL: Players OK Pact. Newsday, A86.

6 Farber, M. (2005, February 17). Down with the Ship: With Season Sunk, Bettman, Goodenow Should Resign. Sports Illustrated online.

7 Originally cited by Ross, L., and Stillinger, C. (1991). Barriers to Conflict Resolution. Negotiation Journal, 7(4), 389–404.

8 Bazerman, M., Baron, J., and Shonk, K. (2001). “You Can’t Enlarge the Pie”: Six Barriers to Effective Government. New York: Basic Books.

9 Thompson, L. (2001). The Mind and Heart of the Negotiator. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

10 Stillinger, C., Epelbaum, M., Keltner, D., and Ross, L. (1990). The Reactive Devaluation Barrier to Conflict Resolution. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University.

11 Babcock, L., and Laschever, S. (2003). Women Don’t Ask: Negotiation and the Gender Divide. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

12 Ku, G., Malhotra, D., and Murnighan, J. K. (2005) Towards a Competitive Arousal Model of Decision Making: A Study of Auction Fever in Live and Internet Auctions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 96(2), 89–103.

13 Sebenius, J. K., and Wheeler, M. A. (1994, October 30). Sports Strikes: Let the Games Continue. New York Times, 3, 9.

14 Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice. Science, 211(4481), 453–458.

CHAPTER 5: WHEN RATIONALITY FAILS: BIASES OF THE HEART

1 Homer (R. Lattimore, trans.) (1999). The Odyssey. New York: HarperCollins.

2 Schelling, T. C. (1984). Choice and Consequence: Perspectives of an Errant Economist. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 58.

3 Bazerman, M. H., Gibbons, R., Thompson, L. L., and Valley, K. L. (1998). Can Negotiators Outperform Game Theory? Debating Rationally: Nonrational Aspects in Organizational Decision Making. Halpern, J. J., and Stern, R. N., eds. Ithaca, NY: ILR; O’Connor, K. M., De Dreu, C. K. W., Schroth, H., Barry, B., Lituchy, T. R., and Bazerman, M. H. (2002). What We Want to Do Versus What We Think We Should Do: An Empirical Investigation of Intrapersonal Conflict. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 15(5), 403–418.

4 Loewenstein, G. (1996). Out of Control: Visceral Influences on Behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 65(3), 272–292.

5 O’Connor, K. M., De Dreu, C. K. W., Schroth, H., Barry, B., Lituchy, T. R., and Bazerman, M. H. (2002). What We Want to Do Versus What We Think We Should Do: An Empirical Investigation of Intrapersonal Conflict. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 15(5), 403–418.

6 U.S. News & World Report (2005, January 30), 52. It is also interesting to note that the loser paying the legal expenses of the winner is the law in some parts of the world; e.g., in England.

7 Bazerman, M. H., and Neale, M. A. (1982). Improving Negotiation Effectiveness Under Final Offer Arbitration: The Role of Selection and Training. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67(5), 543–548; Babcock, L., and Loewenstein, G. (1997). Explaining Bargaining Impasse: The Role of Self-Serving Biases. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(1), 109–126.

8 Diekmann, K. A., Samuels, S. M., Ross, L., & Bazerman, M. H. (1997). Self-Interest and Fairness in Problems of Resource Allocation: Allocators Versus Recipients. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72(5), 1061–1074.

9 Harris, S. (1946). Banting’s Miracle: The Story of the Discovery of Insulin. Toronto: J. M. Dent and Sons.

10 Ross, M., and Sicoly, F. (1979). Egocentric Biases in Availability and Attribution. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(3), 322–336.

11 Rawls, J. (1971). A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

12 Taylor, S. E. (1989). Positive Illusions: Creative Self-Deception and the Healthy Mind. New York: Basic Books.

13 Kramer, R. M., Newton, E., and Pommerenke, P. L. (1993). Self-Enhancement Biases and Negotiator Judgment: Effects of Self-Esteem and Mood. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 56(1), 110–133. Kramer, R. M. (1994). Self-Enhancing Cognitions and Organized Conflict. Unpublished manuscript.

14 Taylor, S. E., and Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and Well-Being: A Social Psychological Perspective on Mental Health. Psychological Bulletin, 103(2), 193–210; Bazerman, M. H. (2005). Judgment in Managerial Decision Making (6th ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons.

15 Seligman, M. E. P. (1991). Learned Optimism. New York: Pocket Books.

16 Babcock, L., and Loewenstein, G. F. (1997). Explaining Bargaining Impasse: The Role of Self-Serving Biases. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(1), 109–126; Kramer, Self-Enhancing Cognitions and Organized Conflict.

17 Brewer, M. B. (1986). Ethnocentrism and Its Role in Intergroup Conflict. In S. Worchel & W. G. Austin (eds.), Psychology of Intergroup Relations. Chicago: Nelson Hall; Kramer, Self-Enhancing Cognitions and Organized Conflict.

18 Diekmann, K. A., Samuels, S. M., Ross, L., and Bazerman, M. H. (1997). Self-Interest and Fairness in Problems of Resource Allocation: Allocators Versus Recipients. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 72(5), 1061–1074; Tenbrunsel, A. E. (1998). Misrepresentation and Expectations of Misrepresentation in an Ethical Dilemma: The Role of Incentives and Temptation. Academy of Management Journal, 41(3), 330–339.

19 Sorenson, T. C. (1965). Kennedy, New York: Harper and Row, 322.

20 Kramer, R. M. (1994). Self-Enhancing Cognitions and Organized Conflict. Unpublished manuscript.

21 Salovey, P., and Rodin, J. (1984). Some Antecedents and Consequences of Social-Comparison Jealousy. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47(4), 780–792.

22 Kramer, R. M. (1994). Self-Enhancing Cognitions and Organized Conflict. Unpublished manuscript.

23 Malhotra, D., and Murnighan, J. K. (2002). The Effects of Contracts on Interpersonal Trust. Administrative Science Quarterly, 47(3), 534–559.

24 Medvec, V. H., Madey, S. F., and Gilovich, T. (1995). When Less Is More: Counterfactual Thinking and Satisfaction Among Olympic Medalists. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 69(4), 603–610.

25 Larrick, R., and Boles, T. L. (1995). Avoiding Regret in Decisions with Feedback: A Negotiation Example. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 63, 87-97; Kahneman, D., and Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm Theory: Comparing Reality to Its Alternatives. Psychological Review, 93(2), 136–153.

26 Spranca, M., Minsk, E., and Baron, J. (1991). Omission and Commission in Judgment and Choice. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 27(1), 76–105.

CHAPTER 6: NEGOTIATING RATIONALLY IN AN IRRATIONAL WORLD

1 Dawes, R. M. (1988). Rational Choice in an Uncertain World. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Jovanovich.

2 Neale, M. A., and Northcraft, G. B. (1990). Experience, Expertise, and Decision Bias in Negotiation: The Role of Strategic Conceptualization. In B. H. Sheppard, M. H. Bazerman, and R. J. Lewicki (eds.), Research in Negotiation in Organizations (vol. 2). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

3 Stanovich, K. E., and West, R. F. (2000). Individual Differences in Reasoning: Implications for the Rationality Debate. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645–665.

4 Kahneman, D., and Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness Revisited: Attribute Substitution in Intuitive Judgment. In T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, and D. Kahneman (eds.), Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment. New York: Cambridge University Press, 49–81.

5 Chugh, D. (2004). Why Milliseconds Matter: Societal and Managerial Implications of Implicit Social Cognition. Social Justice Research, 17(2), 203–222.

6 Ball, S. B., Bazerman, M. H., and Carroll, J. S. (1991). An Evaluation of Learning in the Bilateral Winner’s Curse. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 48(1), 1–22.

7 Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., and Gentner, D. (2003). Analogical Learning in Negotiation Teams: Comparing Cases Promotes Learning and Transfer. Academy of Management Learning and Education, 2(2), 119–127.

8 Kahneman, D., and Lovallo, D. (1993). Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking. Management Science, 39, 17–31.

9 Ibid.

10 Cooper, A., Woo, C., and Dunkelberg, W. (1988). Entrepreneurs’ Perceived Chances for Success. Journal of Business Venturing, 3, 97–108.

11 Kahneman, D., and Lovallo, D. (1993). Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking. Management Science, 39, 17–31.

12 Lewin, K. (1947). Group Decision and Social Change. In T. M. Newcomb and E. L. Hartley (eds.), Readings in Social Psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.

13 Lewis, M. (2003). Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game. New York: W.W. Norton.

14 Thaler, R., and Sunstein, C. (2003, September 1). Who’s on First? The New Republic, 229, 27.

15 Bazerman, M. H. (2006). Judgment in Managerial Decision Making (6th ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons.

CHAPTER 7: STRATEGIES OF INFLUENCE

1 Cialdini, R. (1993). Influence: Science and Practice. New York: HarperCollins.

2 Cialdini, R. (Summer 2003). The Power of Persuasion: Putting the Science of Influence to Work in Fundraising. Stanford Social Innovation Review, 18–27.

3 The late Amos Tversky and Nobel Laureate Daniel Kahneman first noted that “losses loom larger than gains” in their work on “prospect theory” published in 1979. Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A. (March 1979). Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk. Econometrica 47, 263–292.

4 Kalichman, S. C., and Coley, B. (1995). Context Framing to Enhance HIV-Antibody-Testing Messages Targeted to African American Women. Health Psychology, 14, 247–254.

5 Rothman, A. J., Salovey, P., Pronin, E., Zullo, J., and Lefell, D. (1996). Prior Health Beliefs Moderate the Persuasiveness of Gain and Loss Framed Messages. Unpublished raw data.

6 Meyerowitz, B. E., and Chaiken, S. (1987). The Effect of Message Framing on Breast Self-Examination: Attitudes, Intentions, and Behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 500–510.

7 In their seminal work on prospect theory, Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman explained that such preferences result from the way in which we evaluate the prospects of winning or losing relative to salient reference points (such as the status quo). Specifically, they argue that people have diminishing marginal utility associated with gains and diminishing marginal disutility associated with losses. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (March 1979). Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk. Econometrica, 47, 263–292.

8 Cialdini, R., Vincent, J., Lewis, S., Catalan, J., Wheeler, D., and Darby, B. (1975). Reciprocal Concessions Procedure for Inducing Compliance: The Door-in-the-Face Technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 206–215.

9 Taylor, T., and Booth-Butterfield, S. (1993). Getting a Foot in the Door with Drinking and Driving: A Field Study of Healthy Influence. Communication Research Reports, 10, 95–101.

10 Burger, J. M., and Guadagno, R. E. (2003). Self Concept Clarity and the Foot-in-the-Door Procedure. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 25, 79–86.

11 Langer, E. J., Blank, A., and Chanowitz, B. (1978). The Mindlessness of Ostensibly Thoughtful Action: The Role of “Placebic” Information in Interpersonal Interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 635–642.

12 Cialdini, R. B. (January 2004). Everybody’s Doing It. Negotiation, 7.

13 Festinger, L. (1954). A Theory of Social Comparison Processes. Human Relations, 7, 117–140.

14 James, J. M., and Bolstein, R. (Winter 1992). Large Monetary Incentives and Their Effect on Mail Survey Response Rates. Public Opinion Quarterly, 56, 442–453.

15 Malhotra, D. (2004). Trust and Reciprocity Decisions: The Differing Perspectives of Trustors and Trusted Parties. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 94, 61–73.

16 Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1981) The Framing of Decisions and the Rationality of Choice. Science, 211, 453–458.

17 Thaler, R. (1985). Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice. Marketing Science, 4, 199–214.

18 Bazerman, M. H. (2005). Judgment in Managerial Decision Making, 6th ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

CHAPTER 8: BLIND SPOTS IN NEGOTIATION

1 Feder, B. (2006, January 26). Quiet End to Battle of the Bids. New York Times, C1.

2 Feder, B., and Sorkin, A. R. (2005, November 3). Troubled Maker of Heart Devices May Lose Suitor. New York Times, A1.

3 Feder, B. (2006, January 26). Quiet End to Battle of the Bids. New York Times, C1.

4 Meier, B. (2005, November 10). Guidant Issues Data on Faulty Heart Devices. New York Times, C5.

5 Bajaj, V. (2005, December 28). F.D.A. Puts Restrictions on Guidant. New York Times, C1.

6 Feder, B., and Sorkin, A. R. (2006, January 18). Boston Scientific, with Abbott’s Help, Raises Bid for Guidant. New York Times, C1.

7 Saul, S. (2006, January 25). J&J Passes on Raising Guidant Bid. New York Times, C1; Feder, B. (2006, January 26). Quiet End to Battle of the Bids. New York Times, C1.

8 Harris, G., and Feder, B. (2006, January 27). F.D.A. Warns Device Maker over Safety. New York Times, C1.

9 Tully, S. (2006, October 16). The (Second) Worst Deal Ever. Fortune, 154 (8).

10 Bazerman, M. H., and Chugh, D. (2006). Decisions Without Blinders. Harvard Business Review, 84(1).

11 (1995, November 10). American Won’t Make First Bid on USAir. Charleston Daily Mail, C4.

12 Akerlof, G. (1970). The Market for Lemons: Qualitative Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 89, 488–500.

13 Ball, S. B., Bazerman, M. H., and Carroll, J. S. (1991). An Evaluation of Learning in the Bilateral Winner’s Curse. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 48(1), 1–22.

14 Bereby-Meyer, Y., and Grosskopf, B. (2002). Overcoming the Winner’s Curse: An Adaptive Learning Perspective. AOM Conflict Management Division 2002 meetings, No. 13496. http://ssrn.com/abstract=324201.

15 Moore, D. A., and Kim, T. G. (2003). Myopic Social Prediction and the Solo Comparison Effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85(6), 1121–1135.

16 Camerer, C., and Lovallo, D. (1999). Overconfidence and Excess Entry: An Experimental Approach. American Economic Review, 306–318.

17 Fox, C. R., and Tversky, A. (1998). A Belief-Based Account of Decision Under Uncertainty. Management Science, 44(7), 879-895.

18 Emphasis added. Brahimi’s comments were made during a panel discussion at the Harvard Business School in October 2002.

19 Simons, D. J. (2003). Surprising Studies of Visual Awareness. [DVD]. Champaign, IL: VisCog Productions, http://www.viscog.com.

20 Neisser, U. (1979). The Concept of Intelligence. Intelligence, 3(3), 217–227.

CHAPTER 9: CONFRONTING LIES AND DECEPTION

1 Gladwell, M. (2005). Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking. New York: Little, Brown.

2 Ekman, P. (2002). Telling Lies: Clues to Deceit in the Marketplace, Marriage, and Politics. New York: W.W. Norton.

3 Malhotra, D. (2004). Smart Alternatives to Lying in Negotiation. Negotiation, 7(5).

CHAPTER 10: RECOGNIZING AND RESOLVING ETHICAL DILEMMAS

1 Banaji, M. R., Bazerman, M. H., and Chugh, D. (December 2003). How (Un)Ethical Are You? Harvard Business Review.

2 Indeed, in most states, a seller’s real-estate agent has a formal fiduciary responsibility to the seller.

3 Cain, D., Loewenstein, G., and Moore, D. (2005). The Dirt on Coming Clean: Perverse Effects of Disclosing Conflicts of Interest. Journal of Legal Studies, 34, 1–25.

4 Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., and Schwartz, J.L.K. (1998). Measuring Individual Differences in Implicit Cognition: The Implicit Association Test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(6), 1464–1480.

5 Chugh, D. (2004). Why Milliseconds Matter: Societal and Managerial Implications of Implicit Social Cognition. Social Justice Research, 17(2), 203–222.

6 Gillespie, J. J., and Bazerman, M. H. (1997). Parasitic Integration: Win-Win Agreements Containing Losers. Negotiation Journal, 13(3), 271–282. We use the term “parasitic value creation” synonymously with Gillespie and Bazerman’s term “parasitic integration.”

7 The administrative law judge ruled in favor of the pharmaceutical firms. An FTC bipartisan panel overruled the administrative judge by a 5–0 vote. They, in turn, were overruled by an appeals court. The U.S. Supreme Court refused to hear the FTC’s appeal of the appellate court ruling, helping create the blueprint for parasitic value creation that has become even more common in the pharmaceutical arena.

8 Murnighan, J. K. (1994). Game Theory and Organizational Behavior. In B. M. Staw and L. L. Cummings (eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

9 Kim Wade-Benzoni, Ann Tenbrunsel, and Max Bazerman developed an experimental simulation based on this class of problems in which participants played the roles of representatives of various commercial and recreational fishing groups meeting for a conference to discuss the crisis. They found that the participants made self-serving interpretations of what was fair, and that these biased interpretations were an excellent predictor of overharvesting.

10 Caruso, E., Epley, N., and Bazerman, M. H. (2006). The Good, the Bad and the Ugly of Perspective Taking in Groups. In E. A. Mannix, M. A. Neale, and A. E. Tenbrunsel (eds.), Research on Managing Groups and Teams: Ethics and Groups (vol. 8). London: Elsevier.

11 Chugh, D. (2004). Why Milliseconds Matter: Societal and Managerial Implications of Implicit Social Cognition. Social Justice Research, 17(2), 203–222.

CHAPTER 11: NEGOTIATING FROM A POSITION OF WEAKNESS

1 Subramanian, G., and Zeckhauser, R. (February 2005). “Negotiauctions”: Taking a Hybrid Approach to the Sale of High-Value Assets. Negotiation.

2 Bazerman, M. H., and Neale, M. A. (1992). Negotiating Rationally. New York: Free Press.

CHAPTER 12: WHEN NEGOTIATIONS GET UGLY: DEALING WITH IRRATIONALITY, DISTRUST, ANGER, THREATS, AND EGO

1 Kennedy, R. (1971). Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: W. W. Norton.

2 Malhotra, D. (2006). Is Your Counterpart Irrational…Really? Negotiation, 9(3).

3 Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., and Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An Integrative Model of Organizational Trust. Academy of Management Review, 20, 709–734.

4 Dirks, K. T., and Ferrin, D. L. (2001). The Role of Interpersonal Trust in Organizational Settings. Organization Science, 12, 450–467.

5 Thirteen Days, 97.

CHAPTER 14: THE PATH TO GENIUS

1 Neale, M. A., and Northcraft, G. B. (1990). Experience, Expertise, and Decision Bias in Negotiation: The Role of Strategic Conceptualization. In B. H. Sheppard, M. H. Bazerman, and R. J. Lewicki (eds.), Research in Negotiation in Organizations (vol. 2). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




The authors, and the ideas in this book, have been strongly influenced by our colleagues. We are really good at finding excellent people as colleagues. Many of these colleagues are or were part of the faculty and doctoral programs at two excellent institutions: Northwestern University and Harvard University—with large concentrations of colleagues in the Kellogg Graduate School of Management and the Harvard Business School, respectively. Both universities are leading centers for research and teaching in the area of negotiations and many of the ideas in this book were developed by—or in collaboration with—the excellent scholars we interacted with while at these schools. From our days at Kellogg, we would like to acknowledge the insights of Sally Blount, Jeanne Brett, Tina Diekmann, Craig Fox, Adam Galinsky, Dedre Gentner, Andy Hoffman, Michael Jensen, Mark Kennedy, Laura Kray, Gillian Ku, Terri Kurtzberg, Rick Larrick, Beta Mannix, Doug Medin, Victoria Medvec, David Messick, Don Moore, Keith Murnighan, Maggie Neal, Tetsu Okumura, Holly Schroth, Pri Pradhan Shah, Harris Sondak, Ann Tenbrunsel, Leigh Thompson, Cathy Tinsley, Tom Tripp, Kimberly Wade-Benzoni, Mark Weber, and Lauri Weingart.

At Harvard University, we are both fortunate to be professors in the Negotiations, Organizations, and Markets Unit of the Harvard Business School, where we have been surrounded by excellent colleagues who improve the quality of our work: Nava Ashraf, George Baker, Gregory Barron, Yoella Bereby-Meyer, Peter Coles, Francesca Gino, Jerry Green, Brit Grosskopf, Brian Hall, Lorraine Idson, Kathleen McGinn, Simone Moran, Al Roth, Jim Sebenius, Ravi Singh, William Simpson, Guhan Subramanian, Andy Wasynczuk, Michael Watkins, Toni Wegner, and Michael Wheeler.

We are also both associated with the Program on Negotiation at the Harvard Law School, which has been a tremendous source of social and intellectual support. Our affiliation with the Program on Negotiation, a variety of doctoral programs at Harvard, and with other schools and departments at the university, has allowed us to benefit from the ideas and insights of many others during our time at Harvard, including Modupe Akinola, Mahzarin Banaji, John Beshears, Iris Bohnet, Hannah Riley Bowles, Daylian Cain, Eugene Caruso, Heather Caruso, Dolly Chugh, Luke Coffman, Nick Epley, Steve Garcia, Dan Gilbert, Joshua Greene, Fiona Grieg, Susan Hackley, Karin Kassam, David Laibson, Jolie Martin, Mary Carol Mazza, Wendy Mendez, Katy Milkman, Jason Mitchell, Bob Mnookin, Sendhil Mullainathan, Neeru Paharia, Jeff Polzer, Todd Rogers, Ben Shenoy, Larry Susskind, Carmit Tadmor, Mike Tushman, and Dan Wegner.

We also have learned a great deal from Jon Baron, Linda Babcock, Art Brief, Jenn Lerner, George Loewenstein, Brian McGrath, Madan Pillutla, Phil Tetlock, and many other colleagues and friends whom we will later be embarrassed for forgetting.

We would also like to thank the thousands of executives from around the world who have been our students or clients. Some of your experiences have found their way into this book. Many of your problems, questions, and stories have motivated the substance of this book. And all of you have inspired us to write it.

When it came to the task of actually writing, we were extremely fortunate to have absolutely fantastic editorial help. Katie Shonk, Max’s longtime research assistant, spent countless hours reading, editing, and commenting on every word, sentence, and chapter. Her help was invaluable. Our excellent faculty assistants, Alyssa Razook and Elizabeth Sweeny, proofread, fact-checked, and generally fixed stuff in the book. Our editor at Bantam, Toni Burbank, knew exactly when to push us, and when to trust our judgment. The process of writing the book was vastly improved thanks to her assertiveness, enthusiasm, and collegiality.

Finally, we would like to acknowledge the support of our families. Deepak’s parents, Chander and Sudesh Malhotra, and his brother, Manu Malhotra, read multiple drafts of the book and provided innumerable helpful suggestions. Deepak’s wife, Shikha, not only read and edited every page of the book, but also provided the encouragement and support necessary to push the project through to the end. Max’s spouse, Marla Felcher, always provides a thorough critique of all of Max’s ideas, and refines his arguments in the process. We would also like to thank Shikha and Marla for clarifying—by being a part of our lives—that the best things in life require no negotiation.





ABOUT THE AUTHORS




Deepak Malhotra is an Associate Professor in the Negotiations, Organizations, and Markets Unit at the Harvard Business School. Deepak teaches Negotiation courses in the MBA program and in a wide variety of executive programs.

Deepak’s research focuses on negotiation strategy, trust development, international and ethnic dispute resolution, and the dynamics of competitive escalation. His research has been published in top journals in the fields of management, psychology, and conflict resolution. Deepak has also won numerous awards for both his teaching and his research.

Deepak’s professional activities include training and consulting with firms across the globe in a multitude of industries, including banking, education, energy, financial management, health care, hospitality, information technology, manufacturing, media, newspaper, nonprofits, pharmaceuticals, printing, real estate, retail, and telecommunications.

For more information about Deepak, please go to: http://pine.hbs.edu/external/facPersonalShow.do?pid=189290



Max H. Bazerman is the Jesse Isador Straus Professor of Business Administration at the Harvard Business School. In addition, Max is formally affiliated with the Kennedy School of Government, the Psychology Department at Harvard University, the Institute for Quantitative Social Sciences, the Harvard University Center on the Environment, and the Program on Negotiation.

Max’s research focuses on decision-making in negotiation, and improving decision-making in organizations, nations, and society. He is the author of 180 research articles and chapters, and the author, co-author, or co-editor of fifteen earlier books, including Judgment in Managerial Decision Making (2005, Wiley, now in its 6th edition), Predictable Surprises (2004, Harvard Business School Press, with Michael Watkins), and You Can’t Enlarge the Pie: Six Barriers to Effective Government (2001, Basic Books, with Jon Baron and Katie Shonk). He is a member of the editorial boards of the American Behavioral Scientist, Perspectives on Psychological Science, Journal of Management and Governance, Mind and Society, Negotiations and Conflict Management Research, and The Journal of Behavioral Finance. Also, he is a member of the international advisory board of the Negotiation Journal.

From 2002 to 2005, Max was consistently named one of the top forty authors, speakers, and teachers of management by Executive Excellence. While at Kellogg, he was named “Teacher of the Year” by the Executive Masters Program of the Kellogg School. In 2003, Max received the Everett Mendelsohn Excellence in Mentoring Award from Harvard University’s Graduate School of Arts and Sciences. In 2006, Max received an honorary doctorate from the University of London (London Business School), the Kulp-Wright Book Award from the American Risk and Insurance Association for Predictable Surprises (with Michael Watkins), and the Life Achievement Award from the Aspen Institute’s Business and Society Program.

His former doctoral students have accepted positions at leading business schools throughout the United States, including the Kellogg School at Northwestern, the Fuqua School at Duke, the Johnson School at Cornell, Carnegie-Mellon University, the Stern School at NYU, Stanford University, the University of Chicago, Notre Dame, Columbia, and the Harvard Business School.

His professional activities include projects with Abbott, Aetna, Alcar, Alcoa, Allstate, Ameritech, Amgen, Apex Partners, Asian Development Bank, AstraZeneca, AT&T, Aventis, BASF, Bayer, Becton Dickinson, Biogen, Boston Scientific, BP, Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Business Week, Celtic Insurance, Chevron, Chicago Tribune, City of Chicago, Deloitte and Touche, Dial, Ernst and Young, First Chicago, Gemini Consulting, General Motors, Harris Bank, Home Depot, Hyatt Hotels, IBM, John Hancock, Johnson & Johnson, Kohler, KPMG, Lucent, The May Company, McKinsey, Merrill Lynch, Monitor, Motorola, National Association of Broadcasters, the Nature Conservancy, Price-WaterhouseCoopers, R. P. Scherer, Sara Lee, Siemens, Sprint, Sulzermedica, Unicredito, Union Bank of Switzerland, Wilson Sporting Goods, World Bank, Xerox, Young Presidents Organization, and Zurich Insurance. Max’s consulting, teaching, and lecturing have spanned over twenty-five countries.

For more information about Max, please go to: http://people.hbs.edu/mbazerman/





NEGOTIATION GENIUS

A Bantam Book / October 2007



Published by

Bantam Dell A Division of Random House, Inc.

New York, New York



All rights reserved.

Copyright © 2007 by Deepak Malhotra and Max Bazerman



Bantam Books is a registered trademark of Random House, Inc., and the colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc.



Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Malhotra, Deepak, 1975-Negotiation genius : how to overcome obstacles and achieve brilliant results at the bargaining table and beyond / Deepak Malhotra and Max Bazerman.

p. cm.

1. Negotiation in business. 2. Negotiation. 3. Miscommunication. 4. Interpersonal communication—Moral and ethical aspects. 5. Conflict management. I. Bazerman, Max. H. II. Title.



HD58.6.M35 2007 2007019718

658.4/052 22



www.bantamdell.com



eISBN: 978-0-553-90494-9





v3.0





