CHAPTER 3




Investigative Negotiation

One of us works closely with a Fortune 500 executive named Chris who is widely regarded within his firm as a negotiation genius. Chris’s reputation has been built on a host of stories like this one: Some years ago, Chris’s firm was negotiating to buy a new health-care product ingredient from a small European company. The parties had agreed to a price of $18 per pound for a million pounds of product per year, but a conflict developed over exclusivity terms. The European supplier would not agree to sell the ingredient exclusively to the U.S. firm, and the U.S. firm would not invest in manufacturing a new product based on an ingredient to which competitors would have access. This issue appeared to be a deal breaker.

The U.S. firm’s negotiators were frustrated and surprised by the small European firm’s reticence on the issue of exclusivity. After all, there was no way the supplier could hope to sell even close to one million pounds of the product elsewhere. Eventually, though with understandable hesitation, the U.S. firm’s negotiators decided to sweeten the deal with guaranteed minimum orders and a willingness to pay more per pound. They were shocked when the supplier still refused to provide exclusivity! As a last resort, the U.S. team called Chris and asked him to fly to Europe to join them.

When Chris arrived and took a seat at the bargaining table, the argument over exclusivity continued. After listening briefly to the two sides, he interjected one simple word that changed the outcome of the negotiation. With it, he was able to structure a deal that both firms found agreeable. The word was “why.”

Chris simply asked the supplier why he would not provide exclusivity to a major corporation that was offering to buy as much of the ingredient as he could produce. The supplier’s answer was unexpected: exclusivity would require him to violate an agreement with his cousin, who currently purchased 250 pounds of the ingredient each year to make a locally sold product. With this information in hand, Chris proposed a solution that helped the two firms quickly wrap up an agreement: the supplier would provide exclusivity with the exception of a few hundred pounds annually for the supplier’s cousin. Chris was on the next plane home.

Chris’s colleagues still tell the story of how Chris (the genius) saved the deal through his amazing detective work and creativity. What does Chris say? “All I did was ask them why they didn’t want to provide exclusivity.” Why didn’t the other U.S. negotiators ask this simple question? Because, based on their prior business experience, they assumed they already knew the answer: either the supplier was holding out for more money, or he was worried that exclusivity would eliminate the possibility of more profitable future business deals. Anchored to these assumptions, the U.S. negotiators tried to “sweeten” the deal at a potentially high cost to their own firm. Of course, the deal was never going to be sweet enough because their assumptions were wrong. Chris succeeded where his team had failed because he was willing to challenge assumptions and gather as much information as possible about the other side’s perspective. In short, Chris employed the first principle of a method we call investigative negotiation.

THE SEVEN PRINCIPLES OF INVESTIGATIVE NEGOTIATION

Investigative negotiation is both a mind-set and a methodology. Investigative negotiators approach negotiations the same way a detective might approach a crime scene: the goal is to learn as much as possible about the situation and the people involved. Here are the key principles for negotiators:

PRINCIPLE 1: DON’T JUST ASK WHAT—ASK WHY

Many experienced negotiators believe that the purpose of listening to the other side is to find out what they want. This sounds reasonable. After all, unless you know what the other side wants, how can you structure a deal that they will be willing to accept? Similarly, negotiators tend to spend most of their own speaking time telling others what they themselves want or need. Unfortunately, this approach—finding out what each side wants—often derails negotiations. The reason: too much focus on what people want distracts your attention from discovering why they want it.

In his negotiation with the supplier, Chris understood that for progress to be made both sides had to stop talking about what they wanted (exclusivity versus no exclusivity) and begin talking about why they wanted it. While there was no room for compromise on what they wanted, a clear solution emerged when the focus shifted to why. Once the supplier explained that he was resisting exclusivity because it would force him to renege on his promise to his cousin, Chris had the information he needed to structure a value-creating deal.

Ambassador Holbrooke employed the same approach in his negotiations with UN member states (see Chapter 2). Rather than accepting their stated demands (“We don’t want an increase in our assessments”), Holbrooke probed further by asking why they did not want an increase. When some states explained that they were constrained by their annual budgeting process, but were otherwise willing to increase their contributions, the outlines of a deal became visible.

The same tactic—asking why—can do wonders even in mundane negotiations. For example, Shikha, Deepak’s wife, recently found herself in a predicament. In downtown Boston on an extremely cold winter day, she needed to hail a cab. But it was rush hour, and as literally dozens of occupied cabs drove by, she began to consider the possibility that she might get frostbite. Finally, she spotted an empty cab waiting at a red light. But there was a problem: the cab’s “for hire” light was off. She asked for a ride anyway. As expected, the cabdriver refused her request with a dismissive wave of the hand. Undeterred, she asked the driver why he would not take her. The driver explained that he was not in service because he needed to get home. “Well, maybe we’re going in the same direction. Would you drop me off if we’re going to the same area?” she asked. As it turned out, their destinations were mere blocks from each other. She jumped into the warm cab and made it home quickly, and the driver made a few extra dollars without having to change his plans.

PRINCIPLE 2: SEEK TO RECONCILE INTERESTS, NOT DEMANDS

One of the biggest mistakes a negotiator can make is to focus exclusively on trying to reconcile the demands of each party. Investigative negotiators move beyond demands and instead focus on each side’s underlying interests. In Chris’s case, the buyer and the supplier were making irreconcilable demands: one wanted exclusivity; the other did not. Only when Chris shifted attention away from stated demands (exclusivity versus no exclusivity) toward each side’s underlying interest (protection from competitors versus a promise made to a cousin) was a deal possible. The demands of the two parties were incompatible, but their interests were entirely reconcilable. Moreover, neither party had to make a substantive concession or compromise to make the deal happen.

The key insight: negotiation geniuses are not discouraged when the demands of each party seem incompatible. Instead, they probe deeper to find out each side’s real underlying interests. This strategy allows them to think more broadly and creatively about agreements that might satisfy the interests of both sides.

This is exactly how some political activists responded to an impending crisis in the 2000 U.S. presidential elections. Democratic candidate Al Gore was in close competition with Republican candidate George W. Bush. Unfortunately for Gore, what would normally have been a two-party battle for votes (with Gore on the political left and Bush on the political right) became a three-party contest when Green Party candidate Ralph Nader entered the race and generated interest from voters on the political far left. Having two contenders on the left clearly benefited the Republicans; every vote for Nader would be a loss for Gore, and Bush faced no serious competition on the far right. Not surprisingly, relations between Gore and Nader supporters quickly soured. Gore supporters berated the Nader campaign for organizing what they viewed as a suicide mission. Nader was polling at less than 4 percent in most of the country and had no chance of winning the election, but his ability to siphon votes from Gore could help elect Bush, the Nader and Gore campaigns’ common enemy.

In the midst of this heated campaign, a small group of supporters from the Nader and Gore campaigns had a brilliant idea. They devised a plan that might simultaneously benefit both Nader and Gore at the expense of Bush. They did so by examining each candidate’s underlying interests.

Clearly, both Gore and Nader wanted as many votes as possible, but they wanted votes for different reasons. Gore was hoping to win the election in 2000. To do so, he did not need to win large majorities of the popular vote in each state; he simply needed majority support in enough states so that his electoral votes exceeded Bush’s electoral votes. (In most states, the candidate with the highest number of popular votes receives that state’s entire share of electoral votes.)

Meanwhile, Nader had no hope of winning the presidency in 2000. However, he knew that if he could obtain 5 percent of the popular vote nationwide (not statewide), his party would qualify for federal matching funds in the next presidential campaign. Knowing that his only chance (albeit slim) of being elected president in the future hinged on receiving matching funds, Nader was campaigning hard in 2000.

On the surface, the conflict between Gore and Nader was irreconcilable—they were competing for votes from the same group of supporters. A closer look, however, revealed that they were actually trying to satisfy very different—and perhaps compatible—interests: Gore wanted electoral votes, whereas Nader wanted popular votes. If Gore supporters who lived in states where Gore was certain to get a large majority of popular votes could “trade” some of their votes with Nader supporters in “battleground states” (i.e., those states where the race between Bush and Gore was extremely tight), both Gore and Nader could benefit. For example, if a Gore supporter in California (where Gore was expected to win) voted for Nader, and if a Nader supporter in Florida (where the Bush-Gore competition was fierce) voted for Gore, then Nader would still receive the popular vote he needed, and Gore would increase his chances of obtaining the additional electoral votes he needed. To facilitate such trades, a number of websites emerged to pair Gore and Nader supporters from different states. Each voter in the pair would commit to vote for the other’s candidate. The entire transaction would be governed by the honor system.

The genius of this strategy is perhaps most evident in the response it garnered from Bush supporters, some of whom began to argue that vote-trading is illegal in the United States. The ensuing threat of prosecution from election officials forced some operators to shut down the vote-trading websites. Both Nader and Gore subsequently failed to accomplish their goals. Although Gore won the most popular votes nationwide, he did not receive enough electoral votes to win the presidency, and Nader fell short of the 5 percent popular vote he needed to receive matching funds in 2004.

Consider a more commonplace example of the same principle: A job candidate demands a high salary from his potential employer, only to find that the employer is constrained by budget restrictions. If the two parties focus only on the demands involved, few options remain; the candidate can accept the job as is, or he can look for a different job. But what happens when the employer focuses on why the candidate is demanding a higher salary? Presumably, it is because he wants a more comfortable lifestyle, greater purchasing power, more freedom and flexibility, higher status, and better health. Once they begin to focus on these underlying interests, the employer and the candidate may discover that they have more options. Instead of an increase in salary, the employer might offer more vacation days, a better job title, a choice of work locations, improved health benefits, and/or a signing bonus.

PRINCIPLE 3: CREATE COMMON GROUND WITH UNCOMMON ALLIES

It is tempting to believe that Gore and Nader supporters were able to negotiate an agreement in 2000 because they shared an overarching goal: defeating Bush. What happened four years later, however, suggests otherwise. In the 2004 presidential campaign, Democratic candidate John Kerry challenged Republican President George Bush. Again Nader entered the fray. Knowing that Nader’s candidacy had likely cost them the 2000 election, Democrats were in an uproar. Many who had supported Nader in 2000 begged him not to run. Nader refused to abandon his campaign, despite polls showing he had the support of less than 2 percent of voters.

In the summer of 2004, it was revealed that Nader had begun to receive—and to accept—a number of large donations. But these donations did not come from his supporters on the far left—they came from Republicans! Clearly, Republicans were supporting Nader’s candidacy to take votes away from their more dangerous competitor, Kerry. As in 2000, the bargain was consummated in the midst of a seemingly zero-sum game between competitors. This time, it was an implicit pact between Nader supporters (who benefited by receiving additional money with which to attract votes) and Bush supporters (who benefited by diminishing the votes available to their primary opponent, Kerry). Despite the clear-as-day nature of this transaction, Nader’s running mate, Peter Camejo, defended the acceptance of Republican donations by saying, “We have no way to know what the intent of the money is.”1

As these two stories from the 2000 and 2004 elections suggest, value-creating opportunities can emerge even between competitors who abhor each other. This fact speaks to the power of understanding and leveraging underlying interests. Professors Adam Brandenburger and Barry Nalebuff coined the term co-opetition to describe the mixed motives we often do (and should) have when engaging with those whom we view as our competitors.2 According to the principle of co-opetition, it is possible to simultaneously cooperate and compete with others. You saw this principle at work in Chapter 2, where we developed a framework for simultaneously creating and claiming value in negotiation. Here the power of co-opetition becomes even clearer: those who view their relationship with the other side as one-dimensional (“He is my enemy”) forgo opportunities for value creation, whereas those who appreciate complex relationships and explore mutual interests are able to create common ground.

It is worth considering what might have occurred if, between 2000 and 2004, Democrats had made an effort to build common ground with Nader and his supporters. For example, Democrats might have promised to work with the Nader candidacy on shared issues and in states that were not hotly contested. In return, Nader supporters could have committed not to campaign as hard in battleground states. If this had happened, it is imaginable that Nader and his supporters would have aimed their fiery rhetoric more at Bush than at Kerry. Instead, a Bush-Nader coalition emerged in 2004.

PRINCIPLE 4: INTERPRET DEMANDS AS OPPORTUNITIES

An executive student, the CEO of a successful construction company, related the following story in one of our classes. The CEO was negotiating a deal in which a buyer would contract with his company to build midsize office buildings. After months of negotiations finally concluded—but just before the contract was signed—the buyer approached the executive with an entirely new and potentially costly demand: a clause in the contract that would require the builder to pay large penalties if the project’s completion was delayed by more than one month. The builder was initially outraged by this sudden demand; it seemed as though the buyer was trying to squeeze some last-minute concessions from him.

The builder weighed his options: he could accept the buyer’s demand and seal the deal; he could reject the buyer’s demand and hope this would not destroy the deal; or he could try to negotiate to reduce the proposed penalties. Then he thought more deeply about the situation. What did the buyer’s demand reveal? At the very least, it revealed that the buyer was concerned about delays and that he valued timely (and perhaps early) project completion. With this in mind, the executive approached the buyer with the following proposal: he would pay even higher penalties than the buyer had demanded if the project was delayed, but the buyer would give the construction company a bonus if the project was completed earlier than scheduled. After working out the details, both parties agreed to this clause, and both were happier with the deal. The builder was confident that he would finish on time and receive the bonus, and the buyer was able to minimize his downside risk.

The genius of the CEO’s approach lay in his ability to focus on the other party’s needs and interests rather than on his own predicament. Typically, when facing demands from the other party, negotiators adopt a defensive posture: “How can I avoid accepting this demand?” Investigative negotiators confront demands the same way they confront any other statement from the other party: “What can I learn from this demand? What does it tell me about the other party’s needs and interests? How can I use this information to create and capture value?”

PRINCIPLE 5: DON’T DISMISS ANYTHING AS “THEIR PROBLEM”

While our own constraints are highly visible to us, it’s easy to overlook those of the other party. In fact, negotiators often adopt the attitude “It’s their problem, not mine.” Unfortunately, in negotiation, their problem quickly becomes your problem. For example, if one party faces a deadline, the amount of time available to negotiate diminishes for both parties. Similarly, if one party is unable to fulfill her responsibilities, she may be legally liable, but both parties may stand to lose profit.

A former student’s experience inspired this example: The CEO of “HomeStuff,” a well-established and profitable producer of household appliances, was negotiating the purchase and delivery of mechanical parts from “Kogs,” a new supplier. The parties discussed two key issues: price and delivery date. HomeStuff wanted to pay a low price and also wanted immediate delivery. Not surprisingly, Kogs wanted a high price and more time to deliver the goods.

Based on prevailing market rates, the parties agreed to a price of $17 million and a three-month delivery date. The supplier, however, voiced some anxiety about the delivery time frame: “This will be costly,” he said, “but I’ll manage.”

The CEO of HomeStuff, aware that delaying delivery beyond three months would cost HomeStuff close to $1 million, offered to accept delayed delivery if Kogs would agree to cut the price by $1 million.

“I appreciate the offer,” the supplier responded, “but I can’t accept such a large price cut.”

Normally, negotiations would end at this point. The CEO had tried to make both sides better off through logrolling and found this was not possible. Nonetheless, the CEO decided to pursue the matter further. “I’m surprised that a three-month deadline for delivery is creating such a problem for you,” she said to the supplier. “I would have thought that you could easily manufacture the parts in a short amount of time. Would you mind telling me more about your production process so that I can better understand your constraints?”

“Actually, manufacturing is not the problem at all,” the supplier said. “It’s the shipping costs that are killing us. The freight rates that we have to pay at such short notice are extremely high.”

When the CEO heard this, her eyes lit up. Had the problem been what she had assumed (no cheap way to manufacture in time), there was little to be done. But this problem (no cheap way to transport in time) was one that HomeStuff could solve for Kogs. HomeStuff had been involved in high-volume shipping for years and often had to ship products at short notice. As a result, the firm had negotiated very favorable terms for this kind of a delivery. Indeed, the CEO could have the parts shipped from the supplier in less than three months at a cost of only $500,000. In comparison, the supplier would have paid more than two times that much ($1.2 million).

The CEO made the following offer, which was immediately accepted:



• HomeStuff would have the parts delivered via its own shippers in 2.5 months.

• The supplier would pay the cost of shipping ($500,000).

• The supplier would lower the price from $17 million to $16.5 million, allowing both parties to share in the cost savings.



Another great result of this arrangement? The supplier now had a relationship with the low-cost shipper and could take advantage of the shipper’s efficiency in the future.

As the HomeStuff story illustrates, when the other party’s constraint destroys value, it is naive to view these constraints as “their problem.” In this case, the supplier was constrained by the high costs of shipping, and this was destroying $700,000 in value for both parties. The HomeStuff CEO’s genius lay in her desire to understand—and solve—the other side’s problems; the CEO leveraged HomeStuff’s cost advantage to fix the transportation dilemma. Similarly, in the UN negotiations, Ambassador Holbrooke was able to leverage his relationship with Ted Turner (who agreed to donate over $30 million to offset the one-year shortfall in UN dues) to solve the budget constraints faced by other member states. In both cases, a problem was solved not out of benevolence or altruism, but because the negotiators understood that an unconstrained “opponent” would have more to offer than would someone whose hands were tied.

PRINCIPLE 6: DON’T LET NEGOTIATIONS END WITH A REJECTION OF YOUR OFFER

How many times have you tried to make a sale, or tried to close a deal, only to have your final offer rejected? What do you do when this happens? If you are like most people, once the other side has said no to the best offer you could conceive, you feel there is little left for you to do. Often, you are correct. Sometimes, however, you are very wrong.

A few years ago, Linda, the CEO of a company that manufactures specialty gift items for many Fortune 500 clients, found herself at the receiving end of a rejection. A very big potential client, whom she had courted for months, had decided that they would purchase from her competitor. The final heartbreak came after both manufacturers had submitted their final offers and the client had picked Linda’s competitor. Linda was surprised, but accepted the loss as a part of life. So she had no illusions of winning the deal when she decided to make one last call to the client. When the VP of purchasing came on the phone, Linda asked whether he would be willing to tell her why her final offer had not been sufficient to win the deal. “This information could help me improve my product and service offerings in the future,” she explained.

Linda was quite surprised when the VP explained why the competitor had beaten her offer. As it turned out, Linda had been under the false assumption that the client cared mostly about price. In her final offer, Linda had done everything possible to reduce the cost to the client; in doing so, she had eliminated features of the product that the client valued significantly. Her competitor, on the other hand, was charging a much higher price, but included the key product features. After listening intently to the VP’s explanation, Linda thanked him for his candor. She then explained that she had misunderstood the client’s position. “Knowing what I know now,” she said, “I’m confident that I can beat their offer.” She then asked the VP whether he was still in a position to entertain a revised offer from her firm. The VP said that he was. One week later, Linda had won the client over—and signed the deal.

The key lesson of this story, one that Linda has applied ever since, is that negotiations should never end with a “no.” Instead, they should either end with a “yes” or with an explanation as to “why not.” You may discover that the other side has needs that you simply cannot meet, or that your competitor creates value in ways that you cannot. If so, you can confidently walk away from the negotiation knowing that no deal was possible. But you might instead discover that there were options you overlooked, needs you did not consider, or issues you did not explore carefully. The very least that an investigative negotiator will do after being rejected is to ask: “What would it have taken for us to reach an agreement?” Even if the answer confirms that you cannot win the deal, you may learn important information that will help you in your future negotiations with this or other potential customers.

In short, there is nothing wrong with “no deal” or with a rejection of your offer—as long as the reason for the “no deal” is that there is no ZOPA (i.e., no mutually agreeable outcome). If you are not the partner who helps the other side create the most value, then you do not deserve the deal. But if you can create the most value, and there is no deal because you were out-negotiated, then that is a tragic, value-destroying outcome. Investigative negotiators do not fear rejection, but they also don’t let things end there; they investigate further to find out if there really is no scope for a deal. Investigative negotiators understand that “why not” is often as important a question as “why.” And above all, investigative negotiators never stop learning—not even when the deal is lost and they have been asked to leave the room.

PRINCIPLE 7: UNDERSTAND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN “SELLING” AND “NEGOTIATING”

Imagine you’re watching a salesperson at work. What do you see? What approach is the salesperson taking? What strategies is he employing? What does the salesperson focus on?

When asked to imagine a salesperson in action, most people envision someone making a “pitch”—arguing the merits of his case and trying to convince a potential target that they should buy what he has to offer.

Now imagine you’re watching a negotiator at work. What do you see? What approach is the negotiator taking? What strategies is he employing? What does the negotiator focus on?

If you again envision someone making a pitch, you are failing to discern the crucial distinction between “selling” and “negotiating.” Selling involves telling people about the virtues of the product or service you have to offer, focusing on the strengths of your case, and trying to induce agreement or compliance. Effective negotiating requires this kind of active selling, but it also entails focusing on the other side’s interests, needs, priorities, constraints, and perspective. Negotiation geniuses—and all great salespeople—understand this difference. They also understand that their ability to structure a deal that maximizes value often hinges not on their ability to persuade, but on their ability to listen.

It is worth noting that most of the negotiated agreements we have considered in this chapter have not only satisfied each party’s interests, but have also done so without requiring either party to make a substantive concession. In the 2000 presidential elections, the agreement between Gore and Nader supporters was designed for Gore to gain electoral votes and Nader to gain popular votes without either party having to give away anything of value. Similarly, in Chris’s negotiation with the European supplier, Chris obtained protection against competitors, the supplier retained his right to sell to his cousin, and neither party had to make a substantive concession. In the cab ride negotiation, the driver made money, Shikha got a ride home, and no one made a concession. These negotiated agreements suggest that if you negotiate with an investigative approach, you may not have to “give a little to get a little,” as the saying goes. Rather, you may be able to get everything you want by giving up nothing—except, perhaps, your mistaken assumption that one of you has to lose for the other to win.

FIVE STRATEGIES FOR ELICITING INFORMATION FROM RETICENT NEGOTIATORS

By now, you may have noticed that all of the principles we have outlined in this chapter, as well as all of the strategies for value creation presented in Chapter 2, assume that it is possible to discover the interests, priorities, and constraints of the other negotiator. For logrolling to occur, parties must understand who values an issue more. Similarly, to reconcile each party’s interests, both parties must be willing to share private information. Unfortunately, negotiators often do not share such information. Typically, they keep their cards close to the vest for fear that if the other side knows what they value highly—or why they want or need something—they will be exploited.

How, then, can you elicit the information necessary to create value, resolve conflicts, and reach efficient agreements? Here are five strategies for dealing with reticent negotiators. The strategies build on each other; if the first one doesn’t work, continue down the list. Of course, the better your relationship with the other side, the more likely it is that one of the earlier strategies will do the trick.

STRATEGY 1: BUILD TRUST AND SHARE INFORMATION

Negotiators are more willing to openly share information regarding their interests, constraints, and priorities when they trust one another. This fact is not surprising. What does surprise us is how rarely negotiators invest in trust building prior to, during, and after their negotiations. Negotiation geniuses do not simply leverage trust when it is present; they build trust when it is absent.

How can you build trust? First, understand that negotiation causes anxiety for everyone—even for that tough, poker-faced negotiator whom you hate to have across the table from you. This anxiety is rooted in the fear that the other party will exploit you if given the opportunity. If you can alleviate this fear, both sides will feel less anxious and will be able to share information more easily. Here are three powerful ways to alleviate fear and build trust:



Understand and speak their language. This advice is not only relevant in cross-cultural negotiations; executives from different firms and industries also speak different languages. In one case that we know of, a consulting firm lost its bid for a multimillion-dollar project because the firm’s representative did not understand just one specific word of technical jargon that the client was using. That one brief moment of linguistic ignorance cost the firm millions in revenue. How could this have been avoided? The consulting firm could have taken the time to more thoroughly study the client’s industry or could have picked as its representative someone with experience in the client’s industry. When you speak the other side’s language, you not only build a sense of kinship; you also signal that you care about their needs and are interested in building a long-term relationship.



Increase the ties that bind. If yours is a purely business or political relationship, the other side has every reason to believe that you will exploit them when it is in your economic or political interest to do so. Learning about the other side’s family and their life, spending time with them in informal settings, sharing common friends, and living or working in the same community will facilitate trust. Even increasing your economic or political ties with the other side can facilitate trust. Imagine a firm that sells one service to a client under a one-year contract. Now imagine a firm that sells multiple services to the same client, with long-term contracts that expire at different times. Both of these firms will want to renew a contract when it expires. But which of these firms has a greater opportunity to cultivate the trust that is necessary for securing future business with the client?



Build trust when you’re not negotiating. Your greatest opportunity to build trust comes when your cooperative, benevolent, or ethical behavior cannot be interpreted as self-serving. Anyone can be nice when they are trying to get the deal; smart negotiators maintain and strengthen relationships with others even when there is no obvious economic or political reason to do so. By keeping in touch with exclients, delivering a better product than promised, passing along unanticipated cost savings, and behaving ethically across the board, you can increase the likelihood that your next negotiation will be with someone who trusts you. This highlights another important point: the best way to build trust is to actually be trustworthy. Negotiators who strategize, economize, or cut corners when it comes to ethical behavior are typically not in a position to build the trust necessary for information exchange and value creation.

STRATEGY 2: ASK QUESTIONS—ESPECIALLY IF YOU ARE SURPRISED OR SKEPTICAL

Negotiators often do not bother to ask questions because they assume the other party will not answer them. This is a colossal mistake. While there is no guarantee that someone will answer your questions, one thing is certain: your questions are more likely to be answered if you ask them than if you don’t. But asking the important questions is not enough; the real trick is in knowing how to ask them.

For example, if you want to know the other side’s reservation value, it is usually futile to ask them for their bottom-line figures; they are unlikely to answer. But you can ask other questions that they will answer—and that will give you essentially the same information. Consider these less-threatening queries:



• “What do you plan to do with the products you’re purchasing from us?”

• “Tell me about your customers.”

• “What do you plan to do if we can’t provide you with the services you need?”

• “How does this deal fit into your overall business strategy?”

• “Tell me more about your organization.”



Unfortunately, many negotiators do not ask such indirect questions because they are too busy arguing the merits of their case.

As we’ve said previously, asking questions is especially important anytime you are surprised or skeptical. The negotiators in Chris’s firm should not have needed him to fly to Europe and ask why the supplier was reluctant to allow exclusivity. The supplier’s refusal—even after significant price concessions and minimum-purchase guarantees were offered—should have been a call to action—that is, a call to questioning. Similarly, in the Moms.com negotiation in Chapter 2, when Kim stated that the show’s projected ratings were low, you should have taken this opportunity to ask a series of important questions: “What do those projections assume? How confident are you of those projections? What would happen if the projections were incorrect?” This line of questioning could lead to the structuring of a contingency contract.

STRATEGY 3: GIVE AWAY SOME INFORMATION

You have tried to build trust and share information. You have exhausted your list of questions. Yet the other party is still unwilling to give you the information you need. Now what?

Leverage the norm of reciprocity and be the first to give away some information. For example, you might say: “I know we have a lot to talk about. If you’d like, I can start by discussing some of the issues that are most important to me. Then you can do the same.” This tactic helps reduce the other party’s anxiety; if both parties are sharing information, both are mutually vulnerable. The key, then, is to share information incrementally, back and forth. In this way you can minimize your own risks: if the other party is still reluctant to discuss matters, you can decide to hold back as needed.

When using this strategy, it is critical for you to know what kinds of information to share and withhold. First, you should rarely give away your reservation value—and certainly not early in the negotiation. If you tell the other party that the lowest you can accept is $15,000, guess what they will offer you? On the other hand, it is generally safe to share information regarding your priorities across different issues. This advice often surprises people because they reason as follows: “If I tell them what I don’t value, I won’t be able to demand large concessions in return for giving it to them.” The key is to share information about your relative priorities without minimizing the absolute importance of any one issue. Compare these two approaches:



What not to say: “Of the five issues we are here to discuss, I only care about Issues 2 and 4. I don’t really care what we decide about the other items.”

How to say it: “The five issues we are here to discuss are all critical because each has a significant impact on my bottom line. It may be difficult for me to offer concessions on any of the issues. But if I had to choose, I would say that Issues 2 and 4 may be the most critical—these are the issues on which I am least flexible.”



Giving away such information provides two important benefits. First, if your counterpart is a skilled negotiator, she will start identifying trades that will allow you to logroll and create value. For example, she might suggest that she can give you what you need on Issue 2 in exchange for what she needs on Issue 1. Second, even if your counterpart is not a negotiation genius, she is still human—and humans tend to reciprocate behavior. When you lie to people, they often lie in return. When you apologize, they often express contrition or regret as well. And when you give them useful and credible information, they often respond by sharing information with you.

STRATEGY 4: NEGOTIATE MULTIPLE ISSUES SIMULTANEOUSLY

As we noted in Chapter 2, logrolling requires that you put all of the issues on the table at the same time and, instead of discussing them one by one, jump back and forth among them. Negotiating multiple issues simultaneously is also a great way to get information regarding the other party’s relative preferences and priorities. If you discuss one issue at a time, the other party is likely to treat each issue as the most important one in the negotiation. To get a clear read on their true priorities, open up the discussion to include multiple issues and put them in a position where they must make an implicit choice about which issue or demand to emphasize. To determine which issues are most important to the other party, look for the following signs:



• Which issue does he want to return to constantly?

• Which issues make him the most emotional or tense?

• While discussing which issues is she most likely to talk rather than to listen?

• Which issues is she most obstinate about when you ask for a compromise?

STRATEGY 5: MAKE MULTIPLE OFFERS SIMULTANEOUSLY

Imagine that you have tried all of the strategies above and the other party is still reluctant to provide the information you need. What you need now is a tactic that elicits information without him even knowing that he is giving it. Try this: Next time you are preparing to make an offer, don’t just make one. Instead, make two offers simultaneously. Specifically, make two offers that are of equal value to you, but that differ slightly from each other.

Consider the following negotiation with a real-estate agent you are hiring to sell your house. The two primary components of the agent’s contract are commission (the percentage of the sale price that the agent will receive) and contract length (the length of time that the agent has exclusivity to sell the house). The agent wants a high commission (6 percent) and a long contract (six months). You want to give the agent a lower commission and keep the contract length to a minimum. How can you find out which issue the agent values more? First, calculate how these two issues trade off for you by creating a scoring system (see Chapter 2). Let’s say that you discover that it would be equally valuable to you to reduce the commission by 1 percent or to reduce the contract length by one month. So, you make the following two offers to the agent:



Offer X: 2.5 percent commission, three-month contract

Offer Y: 3.5 percent commission, two-month contract



The agent responds that, while neither offer is entirely acceptable to her, she prefers Offer X to Offer Y. This gives you important information! Because these offers are equal in value to you, her choice reveals that (relative to commission rate) the agent values additional time (i.e., contract length) more than you do. Thus, if you try to structure a deal with a relatively low commission in exchange for a longer contract, you are likely to make both parties better off. The agent’s stated preference might also tell you something else—something that should be of concern. Why does the agent value additional time so much? Is she very busy these days? Is she not a good salesperson? These are issues you can now investigate. This information may have been hard to obtain without the use of multiple simultaneous offers.

Keep in mind that the other party does not have to accept either of your two offers to signal her relative priorities. Indeed, the agent could respond to your offers by saying that both are entirely unacceptable because you have anchored too aggressively. This is not a problem. You can then ask: “Which offer is closer to something you could accept?” or “Which one is completely off the mark?” or “If I were to consider making some changes, which offer should I start working on?” Answers to any of these questions will give you the information you need to start logrolling.

Making multiple offers simultaneously is a great tactic for other reasons as well. Not only does it allow you to discover the interests of reticent negotiators, but it also allows you to anchor more strongly (with two offers rather than one) and to simultaneously come across as flexible. The fact that you are providing options signals that you are willing to be accommodating and are interested in understanding the other party’s preferences and needs.

THE INFORMATION GAME

Negotiation is an information game. Those who know how to obtain information perform better than those who stick with what they know. In all of the examples presented in Part I of the book, we’ve seen that the decision to challenge assumptions and probe below the surface helped negotiators improve their options and structure more efficient deals. More generally, the investigative negotiation approach can help you transform competitive, zero-sum negotiations into ones that entail the possibility of cooperation, value creation, and mutual satisfaction.

It is not enough, however, to be equipped with a systematic approach for maximizing value creation and value claiming. In Part II of the book, we delve into the mind of the negotiator and expose some of the psychological traps that can derail the strategy of even the savviest of negotiators. Negotiation geniuses understand the workings—and the shortcomings—of the human mind, and are adept not only at overcoming their own psychological biases, but also confronting (and, when needed, leveraging) the biases of others.





