CHAPTER 4




When Rationality Fails: Biases of the Mind

On September 15, 2004, in the midst of a contentious labor dispute, the National Hockey League locked out its players. Five months and hundreds of canceled games later, the NHL officially called off the season. In doing so, it became the first major-league sport in U.S. history to lose an entire season to a labor dispute.

What went wrong?1 Under the leadership of Commissioner Gary Bettman, the NHL expanded ambitiously throughout the 1990s, adding nine new U.S. teams, building new arenas, generating publicity, and increasing television time for the sport. But in its quest to ramp up its visibility and profits, NHL management allowed player salaries to reach unsustainable heights. By 2003, according to the league, salaries were 75 percent of NHL revenues—a 34 percent increase from the 1990–91 season.2 By comparison, the National Football League paid its players 64 percent of revenues; the National Basketball Association paid 57 percent.

By 2004, the NHL could no longer ignore its growing financial dilemma. Nineteen of thirty franchises lost money during the 2003–04 season; the league claimed to have lost $225 million in this same period. The sale of television rights was also disappointing.3 As a result, NHL management decided to take a hard line at the start of the 2004–05 season. The league sought a reduction in average player salary from $1.8 million to $1.3 million. In addition to salary rollbacks, Commissioner Bettman demanded “cost certainty,” a salary cap limiting payrolls to a maximum of 55 percent of team revenues.

On December 9, 2004, the NHL Players’ Association (NHLPA) agreed to a 24 percent rollback of existing salaries but refused to link payroll to revenue. Bettman set a mid-February deadline for reaching agreement or canceling the season. On February 14, 2005, NHL owners proposed a salary cap that did not tie payroll to revenue. After further negotiation, the owners’ salary cap offer stood at $42.5 million per team. The NHLPA came down from demanding a $52-million-per-team cap to $49 million, with certain exceptions.

“To be this close, they have to make a deal,” Mighty Ducks player Mike Leclerc told the Los Angeles Times as Bettman’s deadline approached. “It would be disgraceful to cancel the season.”4 Yet the deadline passed without agreement, and Bettman officially announced that the season had ended before it even began. Almost 400 of the NHL’s 700-plus players defected to European teams for the season; older players found their careers suddenly cut short. Many felt betrayed by both their union and their team owners. Public sentiment was divided early on but quickly turned against the players, who were viewed as unrealistic and greedy.

On July 21, 2005, the NHL and the NHLPA finally ended the 310-day lockout and set the 2005–06 hockey season in motion by ratifying a collective-bargaining agreement. Backed by nearly 90 percent of NHL players, the agreement called for a $39-million-per-team salary cap—a $10 million decrease in the NHLPA’s previous demands—and lower than what the league had offered five months earlier. Other cost-certainty measures were also included: payrolls would not exceed 54 percent of team revenues, all current player contracts were rolled back by 24 percent, and the arbitration clause was changed to make it less advantageous to the players.5 The players received only nominal concessions in return (e.g., a guaranteed salary minimum per team). Major league hockey, a “gate-driven” sport that earns about three-fifths of its revenue from ticket sales, was now faced with the uphill challenge of luring fans back into stadiums in significant numbers.6

Why would the players’ union reject an offer for $42.5 million in February only to accept $39 million in July? Why did they sacrifice a season’s worth of revenues and goodwill to hold out for less? By most accounts, the deal that was eventually signed was achievable before the lockout. Why, then, did the two sides fail to avoid the loss of a season? Were the dispute, the lockout, and the cancellation of the 2004–05 season necessary and inevitable events? It is our view that the whims of fate are not to blame; rather, the negotiation failed in large part due to preventable negotiation mistakes.

WHEN REASON FAILS US

Daniel Kahneman received the 2002 Nobel Prize in Economics for his work with Amos Tversky on the systematic ways that the human mind deviates from rationality. This profound work has led to scientific revolutions in many fields, including economics, psychology, finance, law, medicine, and marketing. This work has also transformed the field of negotiation. Prior to the influence of what is known as behavioral decision research, negotiators were simply urged to approach problems from a rational perspective—in other words, they were told to take certain logical frameworks (e.g., very early versions of what we have developed in Chapters 1–3) and to “go be rational.”

By contrast, behavioral decision research emphasizes that while advising negotiators to be rational is necessary, it is far from sufficient. Negotiators also need to be made aware of the mental habits and biases that might prevent them from following rational advice. Behavioral decision researchers have learned a great deal about the nature of the mistakes that we make in negotiations, how we can avoid such mistakes in our own thinking, and how we can anticipate and leverage them in the behavior of others. In this chapter and the next, we will help you develop the self-awareness and rationality that is often missing when negotiators are unprepared, caught off guard, or shoot from the hip. We will also assist you in anticipating the thoughts and moves of your negotiation opponents and partners.

Of course, it’s not news that people are irrational and sometimes make mistakes. What is news is that, in the context of decision-making and negotiation, many of the mistakes people make are systematic and predictable. In fact, even the brightest of executives fall victim to four critical, systematic errors on a regular basis: the fixed-pie bias, the vividness bias, nonrational escalation of commitment, and susceptibility to framing.

THE FIXED-PIE BIAS

Recall our story from Chapter 3, in which Chris was called in to break an impasse over exclusivity terms between his company’s team of negotiators and the European supplier. The U.S. negotiation team assumed that only one of the two companies could get what it wanted on the issue of exclusivity: either exclusivity would be awarded or it would not be awarded. Luckily, Chris’s very simple question about why the European firm would not allow exclusivity revealed that the supplier only wanted to retain the right to provide small amounts of the product to his cousin. Meanwhile, the U.S. firm did not mind if the supplier sold a few hundred pounds to a local firm, as long as the supplier could guarantee exclusivity otherwise. Thus, what appeared to be one issue (exclusivity) was, in fact, two separate issues: exclusivity over the first few hundred pounds of product and exclusivity over the bulk of the supply. Despite appearances, one party did not have to lose for the other to win.

Sometimes negotiation is about only one issue. As in the Hamilton Real Estate case in Chapter 1, such negotiations are typically zero-sum in nature: one party can gain only at the expense of the other (assuming they reach agreement). Such negotiations are said to have a “fixed pie” of value or resources: the only thing negotiators can do is slice up the pie and try to get a big piece of it.

In contrast, most negotiations involve more than one issue, including delivery, service, financing, bonuses, timing, and relationships. In Chapters 2 and 3, we explained that the presence of multiple issues allows negotiators to create value by making wise trade-offs; we also offered concrete strategies for finding such trade-offs. Here, we add the warning that negotiators often fail to create value because they assume there is a fixed pie of value or resources even when it is possible to increase the size of the pie. In Chris’s story, as in many successful negotiation stories, success required overcoming the fixed-pie bias and moving toward a mutually beneficial trade.

The fixed-pie bias affects even the most seasoned negotiators, causing them to focus exclusively on capturing value for themselves and to ignore approaches that could create value. Congressman Floyd Spence (R-South Carolina) once analyzed a proposed agreement over nuclear disarmament between the United States and the Soviet Union and concluded, “I have had a philosophy for some time in regard to SALT [the proposed agreement], and it goes like this: the Russians will not accept a SALT treaty that is not in their best interest, and it seems to me that if it is in their best interest, it can’t be in our best interest.”7 Spence’s fixed-pie mind-set risked exposing the world to a higher probability of nuclear annihilation; he overlooked the possibility that both nations might benefit from disarmament activities.

One of Max’s previous books, written with Jonathan Baron and Katherine Shonk, documented a multitude of ways in which the fixed-pie assumption leads to conflict between perceived opponents—and to value destruction for society.8 Consider the story of Benjamin Cone, Jr., a forester who inherited 7,200 acres of land in North Carolina in 1982. Cone had tended to and preserved his land by planting fodder, conducting controlled burns, and keeping their timber sales low. Not surprisingly, songbirds, wild turkey, quail, and deer thrived on the property.

In 1991, a biologist hired by Cone informed him that approximately twenty-nine red-cockaded woodpeckers, members of an endangered species, were living in his woods. Responding to the 1973 Endangered Species Act (ESA), the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service took control of the woodpeckers’ habitat—which was 1,560 acres, or about 15 percent of Cone’s property. Following the loss of this property, Cone drastically altered the way he forested the remaining 85 percent of his land. To keep the woodpeckers from taking over his entire property, he switched from the sustainable practices he had learned from his family and began clear-cutting (i.e., eliminating all trees and vegetation) 500 acres of forest every year. As he had hoped, clear-cutting prevented the woodpeckers from expanding their habitat—but this was a Pyrrhic victory. Cone had destroyed significant economic and environmental value in order to “win” the fight against woodpeckers and the ESA.

Cone’s response was clearly not what the authors of the Endangered Species Act had in mind when they wrote the legislation. But Cone decided to clear-cut his forest because he felt he had to choose between destroying his trees and donating them to the woodpeckers. Did this dispute between economic concerns (for Cone) and environmental concerns (for society) have to turn out so badly for both sides? In fact, Cone had alternatives to clear-cutting. At the time, the ESA allowed landowners to create a Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP), which gives private landowners permission to violate aspects of the ESA, as long as the landowners also take certain steps to preserve the endangered species. The HCP provided an opportunity to overcome the fixed-pie assumption by allowing landowners to seek out creative alternatives that serve the interests of both the endangered species and the landowners. Unfortunately, Cone rejected the idea of adopting an HCP; he assumed that if the plan was desirable to environmentalists, it must be bad for his business. His fixed-pie bias led him toward the adoption of a radically defensive, and ultimately self-defeating, strategy.

In another striking example of the power of the fixed-pie bias, researcher Leigh Thompson has shown that even when two sides want the exact same outcome, negotiators often settle for a different outcome because they assume that they must compromise to reach agreement. She developed a negotiation simulation that included two issues that were compatible; the parties had the exact same preference. From an objective standpoint, there was nothing to negotiate on these issues, as no real conflict existed. Yet 39 percent of negotiators did not agree on the mutually preferred outcome on at least one of the two compatible issues! Those who did reach an optimal agreement often did not realize that the other party had also benefited from the arrangement; they believed they had “out-negotiated” the other side on that issue.9

The fixed-pie bias not only makes value creation difficult, it can also lead to reactive devaluation: the tendency of negotiators to denigrate and devalue another party’s concessions simply because these are being offered by an adversary. A study of how U.S. citizens responded to an arms-reduction proposal showed this tendency in action.10 Researchers divided 137 study participants into two groups and then asked how favorable the proposal was to the United States and how favorable it was to the (now former) U.S.S.R. One group was correctly informed that the proposal was made by then–Communist Party secretary Gorbachev. The other group was falsely told that the proposal was made by then-president Reagan. Among those who believed the proposal originated with Gorbachev, 56 percent thought that the proposal favored the U.S.S.R. and only 16 percent felt that it favored the United States. The other 28 percent thought that it favored both sides equally. When participants were told that the proposal came from President Reagan, however, only 27 percent thought that it favored the U.S.S.R., another 27 percent thought it favored the United States, and 45 percent thought that it benefited both sides equally.

As this study demonstrates, even terms that appear mutually beneficial when you advance them may seem disadvantageous when proposed by the other party. Likewise, when the other party concedes on an issue, a negotiator may devalue the issue’s worth: “If she’s willing to make that concession, this issue must not be important.” Or, when the other party seems happy, a negotiator may assume he got a bad deal: “If she is happy, we must have lost.” These tendencies are all rooted in the fixed-pie bias, which mistakenly leads us to believe that “whatever is good for them is bad for us.” The effect of this bias is also visible in the NHL dispute. Both parties focused on divisive issues related to salary, but ignored pie-enlarging issues such as salvaging the season, increasing revenues, and simply playing hockey. Moreover, the players eventually accepted an offer that was remarkably similar to—and perhaps worse than—what they could have received prior to the lockout. Unfortunately, because the offer came from the owners, the players immediately devalued it.

Chapters 2 and 3 outlined a number of strategies for value creation (e.g., negotiating multiple issues simultaneously, making multiple offers simultaneously, using contingency contracts, et cetera). Even before you attempt these strategies, however, it is important to be aware that your initial, automatic response in negotiation may be guided by a fixed-pie mentality and that you may need to adjust your thinking accordingly.

Bottom line: when approaching any important negotiation, enter the process with the goal of looking for areas in which you can create value. It is better to assume that you can enlarge the pie and later find out that you were wrong than to assume the pie is fixed and never find out you were wrong.

THE VIVIDNESS BIAS

Top MBA students from prestigious universities are in a strong position to negotiate with their employers for the issues critical to their career and personal happiness. These students are smart, well trained, and highly valued by the finest firms in the world. Thus, negotiating the right job package should be easy for this group. If this is the case, then why do so many MBA students change jobs very soon after accepting their first position? One important reason is that they are affected by the vividness bias. Specifically, they pay too much attention to vivid features of their offers and overlook less vivid features that could have a greater impact on their satisfaction. This is a potential trap even for seasoned negotiators.

At the Harvard Business School, MBA students spend a lot of time in a student center called Spangler. As recruiting season arrives, the most popular topic of conversation at Spangler revolves around interviews and job offers. Consider the statements that students might make in Spangler about different jobs:



• The medical benefits are very good.

• The company is located within ten miles of where I grew up.

• People seemed very happy during my visit to corporate headquarters.

• I would get to travel to Europe on a regular basis.

• The starting salary is $140,000.

• Employees have significant control over their work assignments.

• The office space is very nice.

• The offer is from McKinsey.

• I will not have to travel much.



Of these statements, which ones stand out? Which will travel fastest through the MBA student grapevine? Which statements convey the highest prestige? We believe that the answers to all of these questions are the high salary ($140,000) and the offer from McKinsey (a top consulting firm). These two items are not only the easiest to communicate quickly, but also the easiest for others to evaluate. Students who receive these offers will notice the impressed reactions of their peers when such information is shared, and these reactions will make the information more prominent in their mind. As conversation after conversation focuses on these two factors, other aspects of the offer will be overshadowed or entirely sidelined. One result: students accept—and soon quit—high-paying jobs with prestigious firms because they overweighted vivid or prestigious attributes of their offers and under-weighted other issues that would affect their professional and personal satisfaction, such as office location, collegiality, and travel. (Notably, some research suggests that this error affects men more than women.)11

More generally, vivid information has a greater effect on negotiators than does dull (but equally valuable) information. Imagine a group of executives discussing where to allocate R&D dollars within their company. The CEO asks each executive in the room for his or her opinion, and each provides arguments that would channel more funds to his or her own division. Why? In part, it may be that the executives are self-interested and seeking to maximize their personal benefits. But on a less conscious level, each executive can vividly imagine how he or she would use the funds in his or her own unit. They will ignore possibilities that are less vivid (but no less valuable), such as how others will utilize the funds. Similarly, the CEO herself is likely to be most influenced by the option that is best on vivid features (e.g., projected sales, cost estimates, and return on investment) and to underweight other important considerations (e.g., time to completion, complexity of implementation, and opportunity costs).

The NHL players and team owners may have also fallen prey to the vividness bias. Certain vivid figures were clearly motivating the hardline approach of both parties—salaries as a percentage of revenues and salary cap chief among them. Other important considerations, such as daily loss of revenues, reputation effects, and changes to the game’s rules that could increase the size of the pie, were overshadowed and seemingly under-weighted. The willingness of players to finally accept terms that were significantly lower than their earlier demands on these vivid issues seems to suggest that other (nonvivid) issues did eventually surface and helped the disputants to reach agreement. By this time, of course, a season had been lost.

What can you do to avoid overweighting vivid information in negotiations? In addition to anticipating the vividness bias, here are two strategies that will help you overcome it:



Create a scoring system. In Chapter 2, we described the process of creating a scoring system and explained how to use one to evaluate offers and structure appropriate counteroffers. A scoring system can also help defend against the vividness bias by keeping you focused on your true interests. If you cross-check your reactions and strategy against the content of your scoring system, you will avoid overweighting vivid issues in your decisions.

A colleague of ours, who now teaches negotiation at Carnegie Mellon University, took this advice to heart when he was looking for a faculty position some years ago. He began to list all of the aspects of an offer that would have some value to him. He ended up with a scoring system that had weights assigned to almost forty separate attributes, ranging from “what my wife likes” (weighted at 50 percent) to the distance to the closest national park and average rainfall. We believe that our friend went a little overboard. On the other hand, an MBA student who does not have at least five to ten issues ranked and weighted in her scoring system is probably not thinking rationally enough about all of the important issues in her job negotiations. Our colleague may have wasted an afternoon of his time; the MBA student may end up wasting a year of her life.



Separate information from influence. In Chapter 1, we introduced the importance of separating information from influence; we revisit this principle here, as it can help you overcome the vividness bias. Consider the fact that the same salesperson who convinces you of a car’s reliability by showing you its rating in Car and Driver can also convince you to purchase an expensive extended warranty for the same car by vividly describing the horrors of high repair costs that were once incurred by someone just like you. Though contradictory, these two pieces of information can both influence you in ways that benefit the salesperson. Given that nearly 50 percent of new-car buyers purchase these (typically overpriced) extended warranties, it seems that many people do not try to reconcile the contradiction; instead, they fall prey to the power of vividness. When faced with a tough decision, negotiation geniuses remember to ask themselves these critical questions: Is this information valuable? Have I learned something new? Am I just being influenced to act in a certain way because of how this information was presented?

NONRATIONAL ESCALATION OF COMMITMENT

Imagine that you are attending an executive class on negotiation with many other experienced managers. The professor takes a $100 bill out of his pocket and announces the following:



I am about to auction off this $100 bill. You are free to participate or just watch the bidding of others. Bidding will start at $5, and people will be invited to call out bids in multiples of $5 until no further bidding occurs, at which point the highest bidder will pay the amount bid and win the $100. The only feature that distinguishes this auction from traditional auctions is a rule that the second-highest bidder must also pay the amount that he or she bids, although he or she will obviously not win the $100. For example, if Maria bids $15 and Jamaal bids $20, and the bidding stops, Jamaal will get $80 (the $100 he wins minus the $20 he bid) and Maria, the second-highest bidder, will pay me $15 (the amount she bid).



Now, what would be your strategy? Would you bid in the auction?

Max has run this auction dozens of times, and previously ran similar $20 auctions hundreds of times. The typical outcome: Max wins lots of money.

Here’s how it happens. The bidding starts out enthusiastically. At around $60–$80, everyone except the two highest bidders usually drops out of the auction. The two bidders then begin to feel the tension. Suppose that one bidder has bid $70 and the other has bid $75. The $70 bidder must either bid $80 or stop bidding and suffer a sure loss of $70 (which he must pay as the second-highest bidder). The uncertainty associated with bidding further seems more attractive than the certain loss, so the $70 bidder bids $80, and the bids continue until they reach $95 and then $100. The room grows quiet as the class focuses on the $95 bidder, who must decide whether to accept a $95 loss or continue bidding past $100 in hopes that the other party will quit first. The class laughs as the $95 bidder inevitably bids $105. Bidding in this auction typically ends somewhere between $100 and $1,000.

Why do people start bidding in this auction? Clearly, it is because they are attracted by the possibility of winning and making money. But why do they continue to bid past $100? Because they are trapped—strategically and psychologically. Strategically, once an individual has entered the $100 auction and is among the final two bidders, it takes only a small additional bid to stay in the auction rather than quit—and it seems reasonable to do so. After all, one more bid may be all that is needed to get the other party to quit first. But if both bidders pursue this seemingly rational strategy, the bidding can increase to extremely high levels, with disastrous results for both parties.

Strategy is not the only pitfall in the $100 auction—nor in the countless other negotiations, disputes, and conflicts where individuals, firms, and nations escalate their commitment to a failing course of action. Research on the nonrational escalation of commitment reveals that negotiators have a strong psychological need to justify (to themselves and to others) their prior decisions and behaviors. It is often difficult for negotiators to admit that their initial strategy was ill conceived or that they may have made a mistake; to avoid acknowledging these facts, they will escalate their commitment even when it is extremely costly, and perhaps disastrous, to do so. Deepak and his colleagues have demonstrated that emotion can compound the escalation problem.12 Their research on competitive arousal reveals that interactions that heighten feelings of rivalry can create in negotiators the desire to “win at any cost.” Of course, as in the $100 auction, “winning” and “making money” may not be the same thing; if bidding continues past $100, even the “winner” loses!

Nonrational escalation of commitment occurs across a wide variety of real-world situations. Custody battles, labor strikes, joint-venture dissolutions, bidding wars, lawsuits, price wars, ethnic conflicts, and countless other disputes all have the potential of spiraling out of control. When all of the escalation forces—the hope of victory, the need to justify initial strategy, and the desire to beat the other side—come together, simple common sense often flies out the window. If disputants are unable to rein in their desire to escalate commitment, what may have seemed like a smart strategy initially (making a bid, threatening litigation, competing on price, et cetera) may lead to disastrous results. Escalation is all the more likely if negotiators believe they have “too much invested to quit now,” if they have already incurred significant losses, if they dislike the other party and want to “win” at any cost, or if they have made a public commitment to their position. Think back to the NHL dispute. In that example, all of these factors were in play!

Imagine that you are a player in the NHL. The lockout was instituted almost five months ago, and the entire season is now in jeopardy. You do not want to see any more of the season (and its revenues) squandered; then again, you do not want to relinquish your demands, either. Will you be able to admit to yourself that your initial strategy has not worked? That you were wrong to have held out for a better deal for so long? That you now should agree to an offer that for months you have been saying is unfair? Will you be able to overcome your animosity toward the team owners and make the concessions they demand? Sounds difficult. Is there any way to avoid falling prey to the nonrational escalation of commitment?

In response to similar disputes in major league sports, Harvard Business School professors James Sebenius and Michael Wheeler devised a very useful strategy:13 They advise disputants to end the strike or lockout and to resume the season immediately—but, important, they stipulate that the team owners should be prohibited from receiving any of the revenue and that the players should not receive any pay. Instead, the revenues and forgone pay are to be placed in an escrow account until a resolution to the conflict is reached. A critical provision of this arrangement is that a sizable portion of the escrow fund would be given to charity if the parties failed to reach agreement in a timely fashion. In other words, either you do whatever it takes to reach a deal, or the size of the pie shrinks! Sebenius and Wheeler argue that watching the funds pile up—and fearing that they could disappear—should provoke both sides to agree on a contract.

If the possibility of reaching such an agreement in the midst of intense conflict seems unrealistic, consider the 2005 dispute involving faulty brakes in the fast-speed ACELA trains on the East Coast of the United States. It became clear that the trains had unacceptable cracks in their brakes and that the brakes would need to be replaced. It was less clear who was responsible for the cracks and who should cover the costs incurred from closing down the ACELA for months. Three companies were potentially responsible: Amtrak, which had purchased the trains; Bombardier, the company that had made the trains; and Knorr, the German company that sold the brakes to Bombardier. Not surprisingly, the parties disagreed about who was to blame. Surprisingly, however, the three parties quickly agreed that they would first solve the brake problem and get ACELA running again as soon as possible; only then would they turn to the question of who would pay for the losses incurred by the failure and for the cost of repairs. The companies saved tens of millions of dollars by agreeing to focus first on common interests—and to avoid an escalation of the conflict.

In their negotiations during the 2004–05 season, why didn’t the NHL and the NHLPA pursue a wise strategy such as the one outlined by Sebenius and Wheeler, or the one implemented by Amtrak, Bombardier, and Knorr? Largely because both parties—and perhaps especially the players—had fallen prey to the nonrational escalation of commitment: they became so locked in to pursuing their initial course of action that they ignored blatant signals that suggested a change in strategy was necessary.

How can you avoid escalating in the heat of battle? Here are three ideas to consider.



Start your negotiation with a preplanned exit strategy. In the $100 auction, since neither party knows when the other party will quit, it is difficult to conclude that bidding “just once more” is clearly a bad decision. Unfortunately, this is a slippery slope—whether for bidders participating in the $100 auction, disputants pursuing litigation, or nations whose presidents have committed them to war. This is why it is important to decide in advance the point at which you will cut your losses and stop bidding, litigating, or fighting, should the situation spiral out of control. Of course, this limit should be adjusted as events unfold if you obtain new information relevant to your strategy (e.g., if you learn that the other side has run out of money).



Assign and reward a “devil’s advocate” whose job it is to criticize your decisions and find faults in your logic. Whom should you pick for this task? The person should have the following three characteristics: they should be trustworthy, they should not have invested in or helped to design the initial strategy, and they should have no conflict of interest regarding the final outcome. In negotiation, it is tempting to surround yourself with like-minded, supportive people who will be easy to deal with and who will boost your confidence. However, when it comes to dealing with the dangerous effects of escalation, you do not need confidence, but rather clarity of thought and good judgment. Since it is not always possible to keep your wits about you, it is a good idea to have someone close at hand whose unbiased judgment you trust.



Anticipate and prepare for the escalation forces you are likely to encounter. For example, if you are concerned about the need to justify your initial decisions to constituents, you might refrain from committing publicly to a specific course of action. Or if you think that personal animosity is likely to fuel your desire to escalate conflict, it may be better to let others in your team or organization (who are less personally invested) take over substantive negotiations when emotions are running high.

In the context of escalation, then, negotiation genius means a number of things: learning to identify competitive traps, understanding the causes and consequences of escalation, and preparing in advance to “de-escalate” or cut your losses as necessary. By understanding how escalation of commitment works, you will not only avoid expensive mistakes, but be better equipped to anticipate the potentially irrational behavior of your opponents.

SUSCEPTIBILITY TO FRAMING

Consider the choices presented in the “Asian Disease Problem,” first discussed by Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman:14



Imagine that the United States is preparing for the outbreak of an unusual Asian disease that is expected to kill six hundred people. Two alternative programs to combat the disease have been proposed. Assume that the exact scientific estimates of the consequences of the programs are as follows. Which of the two programs would you favor?



Program A: If Program A is adopted, two hundred people will be saved.

Program B: If Program B is adopted, there is a one-third probability that six hundred people will be saved and a two-thirds probability that no people will be saved.



Before reading further, choose whether you would prefer to implement Program A or B. Now, for the same problem, decide which of the following two options you would favor:



Program C: If Program C is adopted, four hundred people will die.

Program D: If Program D is adopted, there is a one-third probability that no one will die and a two-thirds probability that six hundred people will die.



If you read carefully, you will discover that Program A and Program C are identical: both result in two hundred lives saved and four hundred lives lost. Program B and Program D are also identical: both lead to a one-third probability of saving everyone and a two-thirds probability of losing everyone. In other words, if people prefer Program A to Program B, then they should also (obviously) prefer Program C to Program D. As it turns out, this is not how people respond. When different groups are given these two sets of options, Program A is favored over Program B (by 72 percent of respondents in Tversky and Kahneman’s initial research), but Program D is favored over Program C (by 78 percent of respondents). Why are people so inconsistent in their preferences?

It turns out that the critical factor is how the options are framed. The two sets of options are identical, but changing the description from “lives saved” to “lives lost” makes people think very differently. Even when the expected values are similar, we tend to be risk averse when thinking about potential gains and risk seeking when thinking about potential losses. In other words, we want the “sure thing” when we have something to gain, but want “all or nothing” when we have something to lose. This is why people choose the less risky program (saving two hundred people with certainty) when thinking about lives saved and the more risky program (saving six hundred people but with only one-third probability) when thinking about lives lost. This problem illustrates the power of framing.

Research on framing effects reveals that most of us will treat risks involving perceived gains (e.g., profits) differently from risks involving perceived losses (e.g., losing a court settlement). This way of thinking can powerfully affect our negotiation behavior. For example, we are much more likely to make concessions and try to compromise when we are negotiating over how to allocate gains (profits, rewards, bonuses, windfalls, et cetera), but more likely to be inflexible and risk reaching an impasse when we are negotiating over how to allocate losses (costs, penalties, and so on). We are also more likely to quit negotiating in favor of the risky path of litigation when involved in a dispute over who is responsible for assuming costs, losses, and liabilities than when the dispute concerns the share of profit that each side is entitled to receive.

Now imagine the following scenario. You have just arrived at a casino and are sitting down to play blackjack. How likely are you to make a $100 bet? Now imagine that you have been playing blackjack for an hour and are already down $600. How likely are you to make a $100 bet? It turns out that people are more willing to take a risk (gambling $100) when they are already in the domain of losses (down $600). Losing your first $100 is much more painful than losing the seventh or even the second $100. Once you are a “loser,” you won’t mind digging yourself into a bigger hole (i.e., losing even more) as long as there is some possibility of digging yourself out entirely.

Now imagine that you have already lost $600—but not at the casino. Instead, the stock market took a slight hit earlier in the week and your investment portfolio lost $600 in value. How will you behave that night at the blackjack table? It turns out you will not want to take the same risks that you took after losing $600 at the casino. In other words, the question is not whether or not you are a loser, but whether or not you feel like a loser in the current situation. Whether or not you feel like a loser depends on your reference point—the comparisons you make to other potential outcomes. If you are comparing your current situation to how much money you had in your pocket when you walked into the casino, you will behave differently than if your reference point is your overall wealth level.

This finding suggests some advice for gamblers: You will take less dangerous risks if you acquire the mental habit of constantly readjusting your reference point. When you’re thinking about when to leave the casino and go home, recall your previously set gambling limit for the night. However, when you are deciding how much to stake on any given bet, think of your current bet as your first bet of the night; remind yourself that the money you lost earlier in the night will not (hopefully!) affect your overall wealth—so it’s silly to think of yourself as being “in the hole.”

The effect of reference points is even more critical for negotiators to understand. In a negotiation, you are not the only one who can manipulate reference points—the other side can, too. If you entered a negotiation imagining that you would extract millions of dollars from the deal, but now it looks as if the ZOPA is much smaller (and you stand to gain only thousands), you may find yourself adopting a loss frame that makes you risk seeking! You may become more aggressive, more likely to issue an ultimatum, and more willing to walk away from the deal. If, instead, you came in expecting to make very little, you will be pleasantly surprised and will adopt a gain frame that makes you risk averse. You will probably become more conciliatory, make less aggressive demands, and be less willing to risk an impasse. Clearly, the two frames lead to very different behaviors—but should they? The value of the deal hasn’t changed across these situations. Your strategy shouldn’t, either.

Understanding the effects of framing and reference points can help you anticipate their powerful consequences and strategize accordingly. In particular, we recommend the following steps:



1. Consider the various reference points that you could be using to evaluate the situation—including the status quo, your aspirations, your expectations, your feared outcome, and so on—and then pick the one that seems most appropriate.

2. Evaluate whether your strategy would still make sense if you were to use a different reference point.

3. Anytime you are considering the use of a risky strategy (such as making an ultimatum or pursuing litigation), think about whether this strategy still makes sense if you change the frame.



For example, note that in the NHL dispute, the owners were asking the players to accept losses in the form of reductions in their pay level. In effect, this made their previous salary the reference point for the players, putting them in a loss frame. But what if, instead, their reference point had been the percentage of revenue that NHL players receive compared with players in other sports leagues (such as the NBA or the NFL)? Thinking about how they would fare relative to players in other leagues, or how they would fare if they pursued their BATNA, might have resulted in a gain frame for NHL players, which in turn might have mitigated their willingness to risk losing the entire season.

BIASES OF THE MIND, BIASES OF THE HEART

As the behavioral decision research summarized in this chapter reveals, negotiators must contend not only with the tactics of the other party, but also with the predictable mental traps that can cloud their own judgment. In the next chapter, we reveal that cognitive biases are only half of the story; negotiator thought and behavior is also powerfully influenced by motivational biases—the mistakes in judgment that we make because of our strong desire to see ourselves and the world in a particular way. Fortunately, would-be negotiation geniuses can learn to appreciate and compensate for not only the peculiar workings of the mind, but also the powerful influences of the heart.





