CHAPTER 5




When Rationality Fails: Biases of the Heart

A few years ago in Manhattan, a dispute arose between residents of one co-op apartment unit and the building’s co-op board. The dispute was over $909. This is the amount that the unit’s residents had spent to install window bars to childproof their apartment. The problem? It was unclear who should be responsible for footing the bill. The residents of the unit argued that the building as a whole should pay for the window bars because this was a safety and liability issue. The co-op board argued that, because the unit’s residents were the only ones who wanted the window bars, they should cover the costs. The dispute escalated and eventually ended up in court.

One year later, the two sides’ combined legal bills exceeded $1,000. This might have been a good time for them to end litigation and to negotiate instead. Yet the parties, both convinced that they would win, continued to litigate.

Another year passed. Now their combined legal bills exceeded $10,000—but the disputants were still unwilling to settle out of court. Their conflict was no longer about the money; it was about the justice that each side felt it deserved.

Finally, the co-op board won the court battle. The residents had to pay for the $909 window bars. Normally, this would be cause for the triumphant party to celebrate. Unfortunately, the ruling came after the litigants had spent close to $20,000 in combined legal costs.

That’s bad. But it gets worse.

The unit’s residents decided to appeal the ruling. The two sides then spent an additional $30,000 on litigation. Ultimately, the appellate court upheld the initial ruling. Now close to $50,000 had been spent on a dispute over $909.

That’s really bad. But it gets worse yet.

The co-op board then sued the unit’s residents to force them to pay the co-op board’s legal fees. The ensuing litigation cost the two parties an additional $50,000. Finally, a judge threw the litigants out of court; the unit’s residents were forced to pay some (but not most) of the co-op board’s legal fees.

The final tally: the window bars dispute, which started with a $909 claim, lasted six years and cost more than $100,000 to resolve.

Not all negotiation errors result from the cognitive biases we discussed in the previous chapter. Emotions can be just as powerful in derailing agreements. Compounding the problem, we human beings are motivated to see ourselves as fairer, kinder, more competent, more generous, more deserving, and more likely to succeed than others. The result of these motivational biases? We tend to make judgments and decisions that are not optimal. In this chapter, we explore a number of motivational biases and their effects on negotiation strategy and outcomes: the problem of conflicting motivations, egocentrism, overconfidence, irrational optimism, the illusion of superiority, self-serving attributions, and regret aversion.

THE PROBLEM OF CONFLICTING MOTIVATIONS

In The Odyssey, Homer’s epic poem, the hero, Ulysses, faced a difficult problem during his long sea voyage. He knew he would soon sail past the Sirens, female “enchanters” who used their beautiful and irresistible singing to lure men to their island—and to their subsequent deaths. No man had been able to listen to—and still resist—the Sirens, whose beach was “piled with boneheaps of men now rotted away.”1 To protect his crewmen, Ulysses had all of them put wax into their ears to block out the tempting voices of the Sirens. But, desperate to hear the Sirens, Ulysses was unwilling to do this to himself. Then again, he also wanted to live. What to do? To solve this dilemma, Ulysses told his men to bind him to the ship with ropes and ordered them not to release him until after they had sailed safely past the Sirens, no matter how much he might beg. The crewmen complied and Ulysses was able to enjoy the Sirens’ song without losing his life.

What is your Sirens’ song? If you are angry with a negotiating counterpart, you may want to do or say something that you know will harm you in the long run. Your statements or actions might end the business relationship, destroy a personal friendship, or get you into trouble with your boss or even with the law. Still, in the heat of the moment, it can be difficult to resist the urge to lash out or retaliate. Similarly, if the other side makes you an attractive offer, you may be so excited that you are tempted to accept right away, though you know it would be smart to try to negotiate a better deal or find a better deal elsewhere. Note that you would not advise a friend to act rashly in either of these two situations—yet, at the time, you might find it hard to do otherwise.

Economist Thomas Schelling argued that each individual behaves like two people: “one who wants clear lungs and long life and another who adores tobacco, or one who wants a lean body and another who wants dessert.”2 People often face internal negotiations between doing what they want to do versus doing what they think they should do.3 Usually the type of creative solution that Ulysses developed is unavailable, and negotiators must make a difficult choice. Too often, the want-self dominates the should-self in important real-world negotiations, leading to behavior and outcomes that you later regret. What can be done?

Many negotiation teachers, executives, and other professionals believe that you need to control your want-self in order to maximize your long-term benefits. According to this view, the should-self is more trustworthy than the want-self, and is better at gauging what is best for you.

There is a contrary view. Behavioral decision researcher George Loewenstein argues that gut-level impulsive responses—the responses of the want-self—are ignored at our peril. “Hunger signals the need for nutritional input,” Loewenstein writes, “pain indicates the impingement of some type of potentially harmful environmental factors, and emotions serve a range of interrupting, prioritizing, and energizing functions.”4 Loewenstein argues that visceral reactions make us aware of issues that we care a great deal about, but that we tend to suppress these reactions because of the desire to be responsible, to be mature, or to otherwise conform to society.

These divergent perspectives simply highlight our dilemma: People who never control their want-selves engage in shortsighted behavior that often creates enormous long-term problems. Conversely, those who always listen to their should-selves ignore the potentially important signals being sent from their want-selves.

Our advice: it is critical for negotiators to anticipate and resolve the conflict between what they want to do versus what they think they should do in advance of an actual negotiation. You will find that your should-self and your want-self are in agreement both before and after the negotiation. The problem only arises during the negotiation; in the heat of the moment, you face strong emotional desires to satisfy your want-self in ways that are inconsistent with what you believe you should do.5 Luckily, you can often predict the impulsive demands of your want-self and plan accordingly. For example, you might anticipate that the other side will make you angry, that you will want to say yes to an offer immediately, or that you will be tempted to behave shortsightedly. The better prepared you are for a negotiation, the less likely is it that you will act on emotional impulses in a way that scuttles your real interests. Thus, once again, we see that preparation is the key to negotiation success.

Think back to the co-op building’s window-bars dispute. What could the disputants have done to resolve the conflict between their desire to “win” through litigation and their desire to minimize economic loss? One smart idea would have been for each disputant to decide, in advance, how much money and time each was willing to spend to try to win the case. If they reached the preset limit, they would end litigation and simply pay for the window bars on their own. It is unlikely that either side would have been willing to budget tens of thousands of dollars on this dispute before the conflict began to escalate. Thus, the pre-negotiation agreement between each side’s want-self and should-self would have likely saved thousands of dollars.

The parties could have also agreed to a one-day arbitration session without attorneys (and to the provision that both sides would give up their rights to appeal the decision). This way, each side could be heard, and each could receive a decision from a neutral party—but without the costs and complexity of the courts.

Yet another way to cope with conflicting internal preferences would be for each party to hand over control of the negotiation process to someone who is less emotionally involved. For example, the co-op residents might have asked a relative to make key decisions regarding whether to hire lawyers, whether to appeal the decision, how much to spend on litigation, and so on. Similarly, the residents of the building would have been better served if non–board members (or board members who were not involved in the initial dispute) were asked to take control of the situation once it had spiraled out of control. This strategy is akin to that used by Ulysses: by giving up your ability to pursue what you want, you can ensure that you will do what you should. (This also explains why keeping little or no junk food in the house may be a good idea for some people who are trying to lose weight. Often, when temptation strikes, the only way to keep yourself from eating what you want is to make it unavailable.)

EGOCENTRISM

Consider these results of a survey conducted by U.S. News & World Report:6



• Question: “If someone sues you and you win the case, should he pay your legal costs?”



Percentage of respondents who answered yes: 85 percent

• Question: “If you sue someone and lose the case, should you pay his costs?”



Percentage of respondents who answered yes: 44 percent



What is going on here?

It is hard for any of us to escape egocentrism, or the tendency for our perceptions and expectations to be biased in our favor. Typically, negotiators first decide on a certain interpretation, belief, or outcome that would benefit them—or make them feel good—and then look for ways to justify this preference on the basis of fairness.7 Thus, when faced with the possibility of having someone else pay for their court costs, people are likely to argue that this would be fair because such a policy discourages frivolous lawsuits and ensures that only the guilty party suffers. When the tables are turned, however, and people are confronted with the possibility of having to pay for someone else’s court costs, they are likely to argue that the ruling could have gone either way, that it is unfair for one party to bear all the costs, and that such a policy discourages legitimate justice seeking. And there is every reason to believe that actual disputants would be even more biased than the survey respondents.

Egocentrism not only afflicts disputants, it abounds within organizations as well. Max once collaborated in the creation of a negotiation simulation that involved two departments of the same corporation.8 The departments had different strengths: one had higher revenue, and the other had higher profitability. Participants in the simulation were asked to represent one of the departments and then were given either high or low resources from those in top management. What was the response? Participants viewed unequal allocations to be much fairer when their own department received the greater amount, regardless of whether their division was stronger on sales or profits.

As these examples suggest, there are many different ways to think about what is right and wrong (or fair and unfair), and people are resourceful enough to find the justification that best suits their purpose. As we all struggle to view ourselves in the best possible light, we downplay certain factors that should affect our judgments and heighten the importance of other factors; as a result, we can begin to see the exact same phenomenon quite differently from others. Consider the perceptions of Frederick Banting and John Macleod, cowinners of the 1923 Nobel Prize for the discovery of insulin. Both had a bit of an egocentrism problem. Banting contended that his partner, Macleod, had been more of a hindrance than an asset in their research. Meanwhile, in multiple speeches, Macleod forgot to mention that he even had a research partner.9

If you think this problem would go away if we liked and cared about the other side, consider this: If you ask a husband and wife to estimate the percentage of household work that they do, and then add up the two percentages, you will get a number that is significantly higher than 100 percent. Both are likely to believe that they do more than is actually the case.10

Of course, negative emotions tend to exacerbate the egocentrism bias. Case in point: divorcing couples who are dividing up their shared assets. Even if each spouse claims to want only what is “fair,” it is quite likely that one will ask for 55 percent, while the other tries to claim 65 percent. Egocentrism causes all parties to believe that they deserve more of a shared resource than a neutral adviser would judge as fair; this discrepancy can easily start a conflict that escalates out of control. When someone demands more than you believe is fair, your reaction probably will not be “Gee, we must have different perceptions.” More likely, you will decide that the other person is unethical and trying to cheat you.

Egocentrism is not only common, but also robust and resilient. It can also be extremely costly. We personally know of two companies that have been fighting over a series of legal issues for more than a decade. While both are highly respected in the market and in society, each views the other firm as truly “evil.” Their legal battles have already cost literally hundreds of millions of dollars. At the center of the dispute is a poorly written contract that was drafted many years ago. Our assessment is that this ongoing dispute began with an ambiguous contract and escalated as a result of egocentric interpretations of its ambiguous clauses.

While many of us want to be fair, even well-intentioned people can act in seemingly unethical ways when we are motivated to claim more than we deserve. This doesn’t make us bad, but merely human—and humans make biased judgments. By understanding the egocentrism bias and trying to correct it in our own behavior, we can move from wanting to be fair to actually being fair, and in doing so, make it less likely that we will initiate or escalate disputes and disagreements.

How might we overcome our egocentrism? Negotiation geniuses do so by following the advice of the philosopher John Rawls, who recommends that when you are trying to assess what is fair (regarding allocations, contributions, claiming value, et cetera), try doing so under the “veil of ignorance.” That is, try to imagine what you would believe to be fair if you did not know your role in a given negotiation or dispute.11 In other words, what would you believe or decide to be fair if you did not yet know whom you represented in the dispute? By overcoming our own egocentrism in this way, we eliminate a source of conflict in our negotiations. And by understanding the potential for this bias in the behavior of others, we can make more sympathetic and accurate attributions of their intentions.

OVERCONFIDENCE, IRRATIONAL OPTIMISM, AND THE ILLUSION OF SUPERIORITY

In her research, psychologist Shelley Taylor of UCLA has demonstrated that students have unrealistic expectations about their likelihood of graduating at the top of the class, getting a good job, obtaining a high salary, enjoying their first job, getting written up in the newspaper, and giving birth to a gifted child. They also assume that they are less likely than their classmates to become alcoholics, be fired, divorce, become depressed, or suffer physical problems.12 Confidence in our negotiation ability tends to be similarly inflated: Rod Kramer of the Stanford Business School found that 68 percent of the MBA students in his negotiation class predicted that their bargaining outcomes would fall in the upper 25 percent of the class.13 These MBA students also had positive, distorted expectations regarding their ability to learn more than their peers and add more to the class experience. More generally, overconfidence in our abilities and irrational optimism regarding our fate lead most of us to believe that our futures will be better and brighter than those of other people.

Why is this a problem? When a football team is running a play, it helps if the quarterback has as much confidence as possible. Similarly, when a salesperson is selling a product, it helps if she believes that the product is fantastic. Indeed, many social psychologists view positive illusions regarding our abilities and our future as evolutionarily adaptive.14 According to this view, these illusions contribute to our psychological and material well-being by protecting our self-esteem and helping us persevere when faced with difficult tasks. In addition, overconfidence and irrational optimism can help us cope with negative life events. Undoubtedly, they also help to motivate the kind of risk-taking that creates entrepreneurs. Psychologist Martin Seligman goes as far as to recommend that firms base their selection of salespeople on the magnitude of their positive illusions—what he calls learned optimism.15

However, we take a contrarian position when it comes to negotiation. Overconfidence may help the quarterback execute a practiced play and the salesperson deliver a rehearsed pitch, but when you are making decisions, including decisions about your negotiation strategy, you need to take off the rose-tinted glasses. Unrealistic optimism can lead you to turn down the best job offer that you are likely to receive, reject an offer on your house when no better offer is forthcoming, and to hold out for contract terms that your counterpart is unlikely to accept. Overoptimistic negotiators are also likely to enter into negotiations with only one strategy for reaching agreement or resolving the dispute; they assume that their negotiation plan will work, and they devote all of their energy to developing and executing this one strategy. A more realistic negotiator realizes that an initial strategy may not work and is ready with a contingency plan.

We can also see the effects of overconfidence and irrational optimism away from the negotiating table. Too many people invest their life savings in new businesses that have little chance of success. Too many employees assume that they are indispensable to their organization, and are caught off guard when they are laid off or fired. Others apply for too few jobs because they believe falsely—and contrary to all available objective evidence—that they are great potential hires. And far too many people take their disputes to court, believing falsely that they have an airtight case—or at least a “very strong” case—a belief that many lawyers are more than happy to help you maintain. Would the litigants in the co-op dispute over window bars have been so willing to go to court if they had accurate, objective assessments of their likelihood of prevailing, of the costs associated with litigation, and of the time it would take to complete the process? Not likely.

Why, then, are positive illusions useful for quarterbacks and salespeople? Because, unlike negotiators, they are not making decisions so much as they are implementing decisions that have already been made. Overconfidence and irrational optimism may well provide them with the motivation and inspiration they need to improve their performance—at relatively low cost. But such illusions are extremely costly for negotiators, who must make decisions constantly—before, during, and after the negotiation.

Negotiators not only see their future prospects as better than they actually are, they also see themselves as better than a realistic assessment would suggest. This illusion of superiority leads people to view themselves as more flexible, competent, rational, honest, fair, and cooperative than their opponents.16 One unfortunate result of this illusion of superiority is that far too many mediocre negotiators do not recognize the need to improve their inferior negotiation skills.

Interestingly, the illusion of superiority not only affects our self-judgments, but also our judgments regarding the groups to which we belong. We tend to view members of our group—whether our country, our firm, our department, or our family—as more honest, cooperative, trustworthy, diligent, and industrious than members of other groups.17 If we believe that our fellow group members are above average, then how do we view our adversaries and opponents? In independent studies, management researchers Kristina Diekmann and Ann Tenbrunsel found that while MBA students rate themselves above the mean of their class on a variety of positive attributes, they rate their negotiation opponents below the mean.18

The tendency to denigrate our opponents and adversaries can be quite detrimental to negotiation success. If you view your opponent as uncooperative, unfair, or untrustworthy, you are less likely to share information with them—and hence less likely to create value. In addition, negotiators who think they are smarter, better prepared, or more honest than others often devalue or ignore the ideas and proposals of their counterparts. Doing so can decrease the likelihood of reaching efficient agreements and increase the likelihood of conflict.

SELF-SERVING ATTRIBUTIONS

Egocentrism, overconfidence, irrational optimism, and the illusion of superiority exist because we are motivated to see the world and ourselves in a positive light. But why do such biases persist? Why don’t we learn from our experience and adjust our beliefs about our contributions, our abilities, and our likelihood of success? The answer is that, even as we try to learn from our experiences, we tend to evaluate the past in self-protective ways: the stories we tell ourselves, and the attributions that we make about ourselves and others, are the kind that will keep us feeling good about ourselves.

John F. Kennedy once said, “Victory has a thousand fathers, but defeat is an orphan.”19 This is certainly true of negotiators: we are quick to take credit for success and deny responsibility for failures. When negotiators are asked to explain their successful results, they usually give personalized internal reasons—e.g., the skill, perseverance, or creativity with which they handled the situation. In contrast, when asked about a failure, most negotiators cite external reasons: the difficult context in which they were negotiating, the incompetence of the other side, or plain bad luck.20 One serious problem with this tendency is that external attributions for failure inhibit learning from experience.

Negotiators are even more likely to distort their beliefs regarding their shortcomings when their adversaries are more successful than they are.21 For example, business school students who perform less well in negotiation simulations and exercises are more likely to attribute the success of other students to uncooperative and unethical bargaining tactics and to rate them as excessively competitive and self-interested.22 What happens when we view successful others as unethical or hypercompetitive? First, we will not try to learn from them. Also, to the extent possible, we will avoid negotiating with them. Finally, when we have no choice but to negotiate with them, we will find it easy to justify our own unethical behavior.

This self-serving attitude can also be triggered when our “in-group” negotiates with an “out-group.” For example, when two firms meet to negotiate the terms of a deal, both sides will inevitably need to make concessions. When our firm (the in-group) makes a concession, it is because we are being generous or because we are smart enough to understand the need for logrolling. When the other side (the out-group) makes a concession, it is because they have seen the wisdom of our argument or because they have no other choice!

Why is this problematic? Because when we attribute the cooperation of others to the constraints of the situation (e.g., their legal obligations or the mandates of a contract), rather than to their goodwill or integrity, it becomes difficult to build trust.23 To build trust, negotiators need to see the cooperative actions of others as behaviors that they have chosen, not behaviors that they were unable to avoid. And, in the absence of trust, negotiators become reluctant to make concessions, share information, or take the risks inherent in building mutually rewarding relationships.

Negotiation geniuses understand the value of building trust with their negotiation partners, even in competitive or adversarial environments, and so seek to accurately gauge the reasons for others’ behavior. Negotiation geniuses understand that mistaking a kind gesture for weakness is no more helpful than mistaking miscommunication for malice. And so they take the time necessary to understand the behavior of others before they react.

REGRET AVERSION

Imagine that you are an Olympic athlete. Which would you rather win: a silver medal or a bronze medal? Few people (if any) would prefer a bronze.

Now, which medal makes actual Olympic athletes happier, silver or bronze? As it turns out, Olympians are happier when they win bronze than when they win silver! Three clever psychologists, Vicki Medvec, Scott Madey, and Tom Gilovich demonstrated this phenomenon by having viewers watch video footage of various Olympic athletes as they received their medals.24 The viewers were then asked to rate the facial expressions of the athletes. Because sound was eliminated from the footage and the medals were not shown, viewers could not know which medal had been presented. The result? Bronze-medal winners appeared much happier to the viewers than did silver-medal winners. Why might this be?

Once again, we see the power of reference points, or the comparisons we make to other potential outcomes that are salient to us. And what could be more salient than the “what-might-have-been” scenario? It seems that bronze-medal winners—who were close to winning no medal at all—are thrilled simply to be medal winners. Meanwhile, silver-medal winners—who were close to winning the gold—are disappointed not to have come in first. Objectively, they have achieved more, but they experience greater regret.

Because regret is such a painful psychological state, people try to avoid situations that might cause it. If you got a B+ in class and you could not change your grade through negotiation, would you really want to know how many points you were shy of receiving an A? If you were on a game show and failed to win the grand prize, would you really want to know what that prize would have been? If you were bidding in a sealed-bid auction, would you rather find out that you were the second-highest bidder (and almost won) or that you were the fifth-highest bidder (and were not close to winning)? In negotiation, would you want to accept an offer that you might later find out was not the best one you could have received? In fact, research shows that negotiators often contort their decisions to avoid facing any clear evidence that would cause regret.25 Furthermore, we tend to feel greater regret about acts of commission (what we did do) than about acts of omission (what we did not do).26

This desire to avoid regretful decisions can induce negotiators to hold out longer—and for more—than they reasonably should. Again, consider the litigants in the co-op dispute. After having spent thousands of dollars, they would almost certainly view the decision to end litigation (and pay for the window bars) with a high degree of regret. “What might have happened if I’d persevered just a little longer?” they are likely to wonder. If “what might have been” will actually be revealed in the future, our decisions often become even more geared toward avoiding regret. For example, the seller of a house may reject reasonable offers in the belief that prices in the area could go up after the sale. Likewise, an investor may hold on to a seemingly weak stock too long out of fear that the stock price will go up shortly after he places his “sell” order.

Too many negotiators place too much emphasis on what might have been. The fact is, uncertainty is a fact of life; in hindsight, we will often see results that we could not have predicted in advance. While such hindsight can drive us crazy, the solution is not to ignore it. The way to leverage hindsight—without overemphasizing it—is to focus on what can be learned from the past about how to make better negotiation decisions in the future. If thinking about “what might have been” helps us improve our future negotiation behaviors, we should analyze the past carefully. If our regrets could only have been avoided with a crystal ball, then we should remind ourselves that if we make good decisions most of the time, our net outcomes in life will be good as well.

TOWARD DE-BIASING

As you’ve probably recognized, this chapter is as much about the human condition as it is about negotiation. It’s important to remember that even highly educated, intelligent people who have a desire to be fair and objective are susceptible to psychological biases. We are biased because we are human, not because we are mean or stupid. This means that we need to be vigilant in our efforts to overcome our biases. It also means that we should be more understanding of the biases exhibited by others—and that we may even want to help others overcome them. The following chapter shows you how.





