CHAPTER 6




Negotiating Rationally in an Irrational World

Biases of the heart and mind affect even the best and brightest. You may have superb people skills and great instincts for when to push and when to hold back, but your intuition will not protect you from the kind of systematic and predictable errors we have been documenting. Neither, surprisingly, will extensive experience. While experience can be valuable, experience without a clear understanding of potential negotiation pitfalls can be dangerous.

Our own experience teaching tens of thousands of executive students suggests that people trust their intuition and their experience. But learning from experience alone can be a disastrous mistake for executives.1 The problem is that people who are extraordinarily successful—or lucky—tend to conclude from their “experience” that they are invulnerable. This belief leads them to insufficiently monitor or correct their own behavior and to overgeneralize their experience from one context to another. But consider the fact that many people are very good at negotiating in one domain but not in others. Someone may be great at negotiating sales contracts, but suffer from constant conflict in his personal life. A person may know how to negotiate mergers and strategic alliances but be lousy at negotiating her compensation package. Why? Because a negotiator can have significant experience in one domain, yet lack a thorough understanding of what she does well. As a result, she cannot generalize her experience—and success—to another context.

Our skeptical view of the value of experience grows out of extensive evidence that psychological biases afflict even highly trained and experienced professionals of all kinds, including investors, analysts, real-estate agents, medical doctors, politicians, and so on. Margaret Neale and Greg Northcraft, who are leading scholars of organizational behavior, argue that such biases can be overcome—not through the development of experience, but through the development of expertise.2 According to Neale and Northcraft, individuals gain experience when they conduct a similar type of negotiation many times; by contrast, they develop expertise when they form a “strategic conceptualization” of what constitutes effective negotiation. This view of expertise is closely aligned with our view of negotiation genius. To overcome bias and negotiate effectively, you need a framework for thinking about, preparing for, and executing negotiations systematically and strategically. When it comes to biases, negotiation geniuses are aware of their limitations—and those of others—and work vigilantly to address them.

This chapter offers you the tools and framework you need to overcome your own biases and to effectively confront the biases of your negotiation counterparts. It is not enough to anticipate your own decision biases; you must also set up systems and processes that will help you overcome them. Similarly, you cannot always benefit from the mistakes your counterpart makes; sometimes, to improve your own outcomes, you need to help them overcome their own irrationality.

CONFRONTING YOUR OWN BIASES

Three powerful strategies can help you confront and manage your own biases in negotiation: using “System 2” thinking, applying analogical reasoning, and adopting the “outsider” lens.

STRATEGY 1: USE “SYSTEM 2” THINKING

What accounts for the difference between the times when we are susceptible to cognitive and motivational biases and the times when we think and behave rationally? One important answer lies in the distinction between “System 1” and “System 2” thinking, as proposed by researchers Keith Stanovich and R. F. West.3 System 1, which corresponds to intuition, is typically fast, automatic, effortless, implicit, and emotional; we make most decisions in life using System 1 thinking. The biases described in Chapters 4 and 5 are also much more common when we are using System 1. By contrast, System 2 corresponds to reasoned thought and is slower, conscious, effortful, explicit, and logical.4 When we are facing time pressures, we are more likely to use System 1. In other words, busy professionals are likely to rely on System 1 thinking most of the time—and more often than they should.5

This does not mean that a full System 2 process is necessary for every decision that you make. If you are buying groceries in the supermarket, responding to unimportant e-mails, or driving to work, System 1 will suit you fine. Ideally, however, System 2 thinking should influence your most important decisions and negotiations. (Of course, in the early stages of practicing to become a negotiation genius, it might be useful to stay in System 2 for even more mundane negotiations.) As a negotiator, you need to learn to identify situations in which you should move from the intuitively compelling System 1 to the more logical System 2. How can you do this?

The following negotiation techniques can help facilitate System 2 thinking in an otherwise System 1 world:



Make a System 2 list. At the beginning of each month or year, make a list of all of the upcoming negotiations that you think should be subject to System 2 thinking. These might be negotiations in which you are dealing with high stakes, complex issues, multiple parties, high-priority clients, or high degrees of uncertainty. Having planned in advance to be more prepared for and engaged in these negotiations will help you to allocate your time more appropriately. It will also help you think more carefully about when you should schedule these negotiations and will remind you to actively participate in the pre-negotiation discussions that will set the agenda for substantive negotiations; there is nothing worse than having a negotiation thrust upon you when you are not ready for it.



Avoid negotiating under time pressure. System 1 thinking takes over when we have little time and are feeling rushed. Smart negotiators anticipate this problem and avoid negotiating under time pressure, or at least recognize when the pressure is real versus when it is artificially created as a negotiation tactic. To avoid time pressure, instead of negotiating during a one-hour lunch, set aside an entire afternoon. If someone initiates substantive discussions with an unexpected phone call or visit, and you are unprepared, politely ask to reschedule the conversation for a later time or date. Some negotiators are extremely fond of forcing others to negotiate, make commitments, or respond to requests under immense time pressure. Unfortunately, many people fall prey to this tactic because they are worried about losing the deal or offending the other party. How should you respond to such tactics? In the vast majority of cases, there is little reason not to postpone your negotiation or decision—at least for a little while. Unless the other party has given you specific, credible information that time truly is of the essence, you should avoid giving in to their pressure tactics. This comes back to the principle (discussed in Chapter 1) of separating information from influence. For example, if a potential employer extends you a job offer and tells you that “we will need your answer by Friday”—and this does not give you enough time to make a wise decision—it is okay to probe a bit and find out whether this is a serious ultimatum. After articulating your gratitude and enthusiasm for the opportunity to work for the company, you might add a query such as one of these:



• “Is this a firm deadline?”

• “If, for personal reasons, I needed more time to make this decision, what would be the process for doing so?”



Partition the negotiation across multiple sessions. You do not have to complete an entire negotiation in one session. No matter how prepared you are, in most complex negotiations you will encounter information, issues, and tactics that you did not anticipate. If you want to avoid falling back on System 1 thinking at such times, you will need to structure a process that allows you to rethink or re-strategize as needed. For example, you might schedule breaks every hour or two so that you can spend time evaluating and organizing everything that you heard that was unexpected. Or you might negotiate over multiple days, such that you exchange preliminary information over e-mail on Day 1, have an initial telephone discussion on Day 2, and set aside time on Days 3 and 4 for substantive negotiations. This will give you the time you need to apply System 2 thinking throughout the negotiation process.

STRATEGY 2: LEARN THROUGH THE USE OF ANALOGIES

It is often said that we learn more from our mistakes and failures than we do from our successes. If this is true, then negotiators should be able to learn from the negative consequences of their decision biases and to adjust their subsequent behavior accordingly. However, it is often quite difficult for negotiators to learn from past mistakes; we tend to fall prey to the same biases time and time again.6 Why? In the real world, where negotiation outcomes are determined by a host of factors, it can be difficult to assess whether a mistake was due to flawed strategy or to misfortune. Even if you acknowledge that your strategy was to blame, you may be uncertain which aspect of the strategy was flawed.

How, then, can negotiators maximize their learning from experience? People learn far more from an example, case study, exercise, or real-world experience when they are able to extract an abstract principle from it.7 In other words, it does negotiators little good if they are told in retrospect how they should have behaved in a specific situation they recently encountered, but it is very useful for them to discover what factors to consider when facing similar situations in the future. Because no two situations are identical, negotiators are better off extracting the correct principle from past experience rather than the correct answer. The key is to figure out how to draw principles out of experiences and examples.

One way to do this is to apply analogical reasoning—the conscious comparison of different situations on dimensions that are similar. Extensive research has shown the power of this approach.

In studies by psychologists Jeffrey Loewenstein, Leigh Thompson, and Dedre Gentner, participants were provided with summaries of two complex negotiation problems that had the same underlying lesson (i.e., the same type of solution to the negotiator’s problem). Half of the participants were asked to explain what lesson they had learned, one exercise at a time. The other half was asked how the two exercises were related and what lessons they had in common. Negotiators were much more able to draw out the critical lesson—and to overcome similar problems in their own subsequent negotiations—when they had been asked to compare the two exercises. In short, when we try to learn from one experience at a time, we too often focus on “surface” elements of the situation, whereas the process of comparing and contrasting different experiences helps us draw out similar “structural” elements.

Consider, for example, an executive who is reflecting on the recent dissolution of a business partnership. He might conclude that negotiating such dissolutions is very difficult and requires third-party mediation. Though intuitively appealing, this lesson may be minimally useful. It is also possible for partnerships to be dissolved without severe conflict, in which case the lesson is simply wrong. In contrast, another executive who reflects on multiple prior negotiations might conclude that, whatever the underlying situation, nonrational escalation of commitment is more likely when lawyers are involved and when emotions are running high. This executive might decide to bring in a third party to mediate whenever she encounters such conditions—a far more useful conclusion.

How can you use analogical reasoning to your advantage in negotiation? Try the following techniques:



Debrief multiple negotiations simultaneously. Negotiation geniuses make it a habit to review important negotiations after they are completed. Better yet, you should review multiple negotiations at the same time. As you are doing this, ask yourself how the negotiations were similar and how they were different. Having other members of your team or organization help you to think critically about your experiences, strategies, and outcomes may be especially useful, because they will be able to weigh in with their own experiences as well.

When firms hire us to train their employees in negotiation, we often conduct a “group-debrief” exercise, in which we set up groups of four to six people. Each employee is asked to discuss a recent or current negotiation situation, then all members of the group try to extract important lessons and insights from the various experiences. This exercise is extremely effective at promoting learning because it encourages negotiators to make comparisons across negotiations and form analogies.



Focus on the principles, not particulars. When reviewing past negotiations, try to understand the structural and conceptual aspects of what occurred. Rather than focusing on the uniqueness of the specific negotiation situation, dissect your recent experience into elements that map onto the negotiation concepts described in this book. While all negotiations are unique, they all have BATNAs, reservation values, ZOPAs, underlying interests, information exchange, and so on. Examining these concepts will help you better generalize learning from recently completed negotiations to the future.

STRATEGY 3: ADOPT THE OUTSIDER LENS

Why are we so overconfident in our own judgments and abilities, but more accurate in our assessments of the likely success of others? Daniel Kahneman and Dan Lovallo explain this inconsistency by arguing that people make decisions using two different perspectives, or “lenses”: an insider lens and an outsider lens.8 A negotiator usually adopts the insider lens when making judgments while immersed in the context or situation. By contrast, we usually adopt the outsider lens when removed or detached from the situation. The outsider lens is the cleaner lens. Obviously, it is better to use the cleaner lens than the dirty one; unfortunately, the outsider lens is typically not the default option when we are engaged in negotiation or embroiled in conflict. Thus, a negotiator might well be aware that the time it takes to go from an initial sales pitch to a signed contract is six to twelve weeks, yet still believe that he can close the deal within three weeks. More dangerously, the negotiator is likely to continue being overconfident despite having been proven wrong in the past. This is because the insider lens tends to focus on only the current situation, while the outsider lens is better at integrating information across multiple episodes.

Consider the case of homeowners negotiating with a contractor about building a new house. The homeowners know from their friends that such projects typically end up being 20–50 percent over budget and take much longer to complete than originally planned (the outsider view). Yet most homeowners believe that their experience will be different—that their home will be completed on time and close to the projected cost (the insider view). As a result of their poor planning, they end up needing to get last-minute financing for cost overruns, to give up features that they really wanted, and to scrounge for a place to live because the house is not yet ready for them to move in.

Nobel Laureate Kahneman tells his own story about the insider lens. Kahneman was working with a group of colleagues on defining a new curriculum and writing a book to encapsulate it.9 The curriculum team estimated that the project would take eighteen to thirty months to complete. Kahneman approached a member of the team, a distinguished expert in curriculum design, and asked the following question: “We are surely not the only team to have tried to develop a curriculum for a new area of study. Please try to recall as many cases as you can. Think of them as they were in a stage comparable to ours at present. How long did it take them, from that point, to complete their project?” Having adopted the outsider perspective, the curriculum design expert said that the minimum completion time was seven years and that 40 percent of the projects were never completed. In fact, it ended up taking Kahneman’s team eight years to finish the project!

Surely, would-be entrepreneurs should decide whether to go into business using the outsider lens—with a realistic understanding of the risks involved—rather than using the more tempting insider lens. Yet, in one study, more than 80 percent of entrepreneurs viewed their personal chances of success to be 70 percent or higher, and one-third of them described their success as certain.10 This is clearly the insider speaking. The outsider can easily find out that the five-year survival rate for new businesses is only about 33 percent!11 Why would smart and motivated individuals be willing to stake large sums of money, their reputations, and years of their lives on a decision made using the biased insider lens? As we discussed in Chapter 5, people have a strong urge to see the world and themselves in a positive light, a tendency that can have powerful effects on decision-making.

The insider-outsider distinction leads us to another set of techniques that you can use to de-bias your judgment. Consider the following:



Bring in an outsider. When preparing for an important negotiation, bring an outsider to the preparation session. This may mean reaching out to experts within your firm, hiring a consultant with unique expertise, or talking to a friend. Remember that you are more likely to anticipate cost overruns when a friend is having her house built than when your own home is being built. When it comes to your own house, you anticipate that things will turn out better for you than a rational analysis would suggest. The same is true when you negotiate a deal. Others will see factors that you have ignored, weight negative information more appropriately than you do, and preserve an objective view of the situation in ways that are difficult for you to do.



Take the outsider perspective. It is often equally effective—and less costly—to ask yourself how you would assess a situation if you were not immersed in it. This might require you to think back to a time when someone else was faced with a similar situation or to collect data on what you can rationally expect in the current situation (e.g., data on industry averages). Or you might ask yourself this simple question: if someone I cared about asked me for advice in a negotiation such as this, what advice would I give?



Collectively, using System 2 thinking, applying analogical reasoning, and adopting the outsider lens are viable strategies for reducing the likelihood that decision biases will sabotage your next negotiation. If you are serious about becoming a negotiation genius, you must make the use of these strategies habitual. Too often, executives who attend negotiation courses (or read negotiation books) discover interesting ideas, but do not actually change their behavior. Gathering information is not enough. Real change requires you to “unfreeze” existing decision-making processes, understand the ideas and techniques that will help you make the desired change, and then “refreeze” the new ideas and techniques into your thoughts and behavior.12 In other words, you must become aware of biases, consider how to avoid or overcome them, and work hard to integrate new and more effective strategies into your habitual approach to negotiation.

CONFRONTING THE BIASES OF OTHERS

The biases that others bring to the table can have serious implications for your negotiated outcomes. In the remainder of the chapter, we explore how to incorporate an understanding of the biases of others into your strategy, why and how to help others be less biased, why and how to adjust the information you receive from others, and how to respond to the other party’s decision biases through contracting.

STRATEGY 1: INCORPORATE THE CONSEQUENCES OF THEIR BIASES IN YOUR STRATEGY

General managers of baseball teams spend a great deal of time deciding how to evaluate the talent they are considering acquiring and deciding with whom to negotiate a contract. Billy Beane, the general manager of the Oakland Athletics, found a way to do this better than anyone else—and succeeded in transforming his team from losers to winners. From 1999–2002, with a very limited budget, Beane led the Athletics to the second-best record in Major League Baseball (MLB). The team’s players earned, on average, less than a third of the amount earned by the New York Yankees. Yet, during this four-year period, they still won more games than the Yankees.13

How did Beane accomplish this amazing feat? By studying the mistakes of other baseball managers and, with the help of a recent Harvard economics graduate, Paul DePodesta, using this knowledge to develop wiser negotiation strategies. In his book Moneyball, Michael Lewis argues that other MLB managers were consistently guilty of three systematic mistakes that Beane and DePodesta were able to identify and exploit: 1) they overgeneralized from their personal experiences, 2) they were overly influenced by players’ recent performances, and 3) they were overly influenced by what they had personally seen, even though players’ multiyear records provided far better data. In other words, most baseball managers were relying on System 1 thinking.

Beane and DePodesta decided instead to look at the hard data. They found that players drafted out of high school were much less likely to succeed than players drafted out of college. Yet baseball executives systematically overvalued high-school players and systematically undervalued college players. Armed with this knowledge, Beane stopped drafting players out of high school. In addition, Beane and DePodesta learned that certain players had a dramatically higher tendency than others to be “walked,” but that baseball professionals inappropriately undervalued this data.14

At the simplest level, the success of Beane and DePodesta’s approach reveals that the use of systematic and rigorous analysis can be superior to the System 1 thinking on which many experienced negotiators rely. But much more was actually happening: Beane and DePodesta used their understanding of the decision biases of others to make trades with other teams. In doing so, they were able to get players who were more successful in exchange for players who would be less successful. Thus, they combined their System 2 thinking with an understanding of the consequences of the other side’s System 1 thinking to make value-creating trades.

The lesson for negotiators? Use your System 2 thinking, but be ready to adapt to the other side’s System 1 mistakes. If someone is obsessed with selling his company at a certain price point (perhaps because a broker mentioned a high number, or because a sibling sold her company for that amount), recognize the vividness of that number to him. Then, rather than fight it, see if you can creatively meet this vivid need. How? Offer the desired number in exchange for concessions on other issues that you value highly. For example, you might have him throw in related real estate or accept better financing terms. Indeed, too many negotiators focus excessively on salient dollar figures. If the other side will accept “not a penny less than $40 million,” he may still accept $40 million paid to him over a very long period of time. When you start thinking about the decision biases of others, you can custom-design negotiation strategies that adapt to their errors.

STRATEGY 2: HELP OTHERS BE LESS BIASED

Our students often ask us, “Would you rather negotiate with a good negotiator or a bad negotiator?” Our answer is simple: we’d rather negotiate with good negotiators; bad negotiators will usually just get in the way of good deals. Unfortunately, many people falsely assume that bargaining with an incompetent or irrational (i.e., biased) partner gives them a valuable competitive advantage. While this is sometimes true (as the Moneyball example shows), biased negotiators also have tremendous potential for entirely derailing the negotiation. For example, if your counterpart is overconfident, she might wait for deals that you can never give her. If he irrationally escalates commitment to a course of action, he may become overly competitive and unwilling to compromise. If she is afflicted with the fixed-pie bias, she may refuse to share information and thus eliminate opportunities to create value. In these cases, the other party’s biases hurt not only their own interests, but also yours.

For these reasons, it is often in your best interest to help your counterpart think more clearly. How can you promote careful, reasoned, and systematic thinking? Consider again that negotiators tend to be far more biased under time pressure than when they have time to think through a proposal or idea. Thus, when you have provided the other side with an offer that you believe to be better than your competitor’s proposal, give him time to think it through rather than pushing for an immediate answer. Under pressure, negotiators who are overconfident in their ability to get a better deal often say no when they should say yes. If you are confident that you are offering more than he can get elsewhere, you’d be wise to encourage him to explore alternatives and get back to you after comparing your offer with others.

Most of us also assume that we want the other side to be less prepared. However, ill-prepared negotiators typically want to bargain over one issue at a time and to withhold information. They are also less able than prepared negotiators to evaluate or propose multi-issue (package) deals. All of these behaviors inhibit value creation. When dealing with an ill-prepared negotiator, encourage her to think through the relative importance of each issue to her. In addition, take the lead in negotiating multiple issues simultaneously and in making package offers—and encourage her to do the same. It is also important that you clarify for her that you value some issues more than others and that you are happy to jointly explore mutually beneficial trade-offs.

Finally, the best thing you can do to help an ill-prepared negotiator (and to help yourself) is to encourage her to be more prepared. If the negotiation is not going smoothly, you might suggest that both parties would benefit from thinking more about the issues that have surfaced during the recent discussion. You might then create a time line with the other party that includes milestones that encourage preparation and the sharing of information. For example, you might agree that, after one week, each of you will send an e-mail that lists your top priorities and concerns; after three more days, one of you will be responsible for making an initial package proposal; then, after the other party has a few days to consider this proposal, both parties will meet for further substantive discussions. While most people believe that giving the other party this much time to prepare is dangerous, a negotiation genius recognizes that your counterpart can only make wise trades, expand the pie, and accept your creative offers if she knows what she values—and that such knowledge requires preparation. So, the next time you run into a well-prepared negotiator, you should be encouraged about the potential to create an excellent agreement rather than nervous about being exploited or outperformed.

STRATEGY 3: CALIBRATE INFORMATION PROVIDED BY OTHERS

Imagine that you are moving to a new city and that you have interviewed a number of real-estate agents about selling your current home. While you want your agent to be a good salesperson, you also want him or her to provide an accurate estimate of your house’s value. Unless you know how much your home will realistically sell for, you cannot be certain how expensive a home you can afford in your new location. Here is a dilemma that might arise. The agents know that you desire a high sales price and that providing you with a high estimate (within certain limits) will make you more likely to hire them. Unfortunately, the more inflated their estimates, the less accurate they could be, and the worse off you will be when assessing which new home to purchase.

How can you identify whether an agent is being overly optimistic and trying to pass on that optimism to you? Try this: instead of negotiating with one agent, ask four different agents for their opinions on the appropriate listing price. Then ask each agent to bring you computer printouts of the original listing prices of the last ten houses they sold as well as the final selling price of each of these ten homes. This is information that is readily available to them. (To verify the accuracy of the data they provide, you can even ask the agents to cross-check each other.) Armed with the agents’ recommendations for your home, and also the data on historic differences between their listing prices and sales prices, you are in a far better position to estimate the true worth of your own house. You also have the data you need to hire the best agent of the bunch—the one who is not only selling high, but also is more realistic (or more truthful).

Undoubtedly, you’d choose different data in other types of negotiations. Imagine that you are an executive of a retail organization and that a group of regional managers reports to you. Each regional manager is in charge of roughly one-eighth of the country. You are meeting to negotiate the region-specific advertising budgets for the coming year. As the meeting begins, the managers of last year’s two most successful regions suggest to you that the available resources should be allocated in proportion to last year’s sales. They argue that last year’s sales are the best predictor of next year’s sales, and that sales are a good indicator of where advertising will be most effective. What is wrong with this logic?

First, some regions will have higher sales than other regions regardless of advertising (for example, you will sell more snow shovels in the northern than in the southern United States). Thus, the managers may be choosing the “appropriate measure of success” self-servingly. If so, perhaps you should ask each manager instead to report on an analysis of the marginal impact of advertising dollars on increases in sales over the past ten years. A second problem with their logic is that it fails to account for the fact that many outcomes “regress to the mean” over time.15 Fantastic students frequently have less successful younger siblings. Extremely tall parents tend to have children that are shorter than them. Spectacular rookies tend to have mediocre second years (the “sophomore jinx”). And regions that have just had a fantastic year will tend to perform less well the next year. Why? Because every successful outcome is due in part to the factor you suspect (skill, advertising dollars, genetics, et cetera) and in part due to chance (or unknown factors). Furthermore, extremely successful outcomes are likely to be high on both of these factors. Unfortunately, you cannot count on chance to work strongly in your favor every year. Thus, you need to adjust your estimates downward. Regression to the mean does not mean that the past has no predictability for the future. Rather, it means that the past may predict the future less reliably than we assume.

Armed with an understanding of these biases, the executive is better prepared to negotiate with the regional managers—and to expect that the two high-performing regions from last year may continue to perform above the mean, but not necessarily by the same amount as the previous year. The key lesson: thinking about the decision biases of others allows you to calibrate, quantitatively and qualitatively, the information, data, and arguments that you hear from them.

STRATEGY 4: USE CONTINGENCY CONTRACTS TO RESOLVE CONFLICTS STEMMING FROM BIASES

“Curing” your negotiation counterpart’s biases is not always the answer. Your opponent may be extremely confident about his view of the future, while you are confident that he is wrong. Rather than arguing the point, it sometimes pays to leverage the other side’s biased expectations. How? Using a contingency contract. In Chapters 1 and 2, we discussed the use of contingency contracts, which allow both sides in a negotiation to bet on their beliefs about the future. When you know that the other side is biased, you can draft a contract that allows him to bet on the information that you believe to be inaccurate. In doing so, you make a bet that you expect to be favorable to you and costly to your counterpart.

Suppose that a salesperson claims that her product is measurably better than that of her competitor. You are fairly sure that her claim doesn’t apply to your intended use of the product, and you don’t want to run the risk of being disappointed if the product performs at less than her expectations. Instead of calling the salesperson a liar or trying to disprove her claim, propose a contingency contract instead. Specifically, offer to pay her asking price if the product performs at the level she promises, but insist upon a very large discount if it fails to meet her targeted performance level. If she has been overselling intentionally, she will back away from your proposal. But if she is simply overconfident, she’ll say yes, and you’ll get a very good deal. Of course, if it turns out that she is right, you will end up paying more—but for a better product than you expected. You will also find out that she is better informed and more credible than you believed.

MOVING FORWARD

Many smart people are faced with situations in which they are suspicious of another negotiator’s decision-making process but lack the vocabulary to articulate the flaws in the other side’s logic. In Chapters 4–6, we’ve summarized clearly defined and rigorously researched concepts to help you recognize and understand the biases you confront. If you would like to practice spotting others’ biases, you need simply to read the newspaper or watch a sporting event on television. Journalists, politicians, sportscasters, and other “expert” information providers constantly make statements that exemplify the biased decision-making processes that we have outlined. But they are not the only ones who are biased. The worst mistake you can make right now is to think that you have just read three chapters that explain to you how others are biased.

Negotiation geniuses do not assume that they are immune from bias. Rather, they accept the fact that their intuition, like that of other smart people, is fundamentally flawed. They attempt to reduce the degree to which they are affected by biases and, when necessary, adopt more systematic decision processes to avoid bias. In addition, rather than expecting rationality from their counterparts, negotiation geniuses anticipate bias in others and use the strategies we have highlighted to respond to these biases.

Taken together, Parts I and II of this book (Chapters 1–6) should provide you with the tools you need to negotiate more effectively in the wide variety of negotiation contexts that you will encounter. In Part III, we will build on this knowledge and equip you to handle even the most difficult and complex negotiations.





