CHAPTER 9




Confronting Lies and Deception

When we’ve asked groups of executives or MBA students whether they have ever lied in a negotiation, most of them admit that they have. When we’ve asked the same group whether they have ever been lied to in a negotiation, all of them claim that they have been. Indeed, many of our students and clients tell us that deception is simply part of negotiating in their industry. In other words, as much as we may wish otherwise, every negotiator has to deal with lies and deception. Fortunately, there is a lot you can do to prepare for this.

Consider the following three stories. How many of them ring true to you? How often have you found yourself in a similar situation?





STORY 1: THE OBVIOUS LIE

Rafael, the founder and president of a small firm that manufactures lighting equipment, was negotiating the sale of a large order with a potential customer. After Rafael quoted his price, which he felt was in line with prevailing market rates, the customer asked for some time to consider the offer. Two days later, the customer called back and told Rafael that he had another offer that was 5 percent lower than the one Rafael had made. If Rafael could beat this other offer, the customer was ready to make the purchase. Rafael was not sure what to do. On the one hand, he seriously doubted that another firm would have beaten his price by 5 percent. On the other hand, he could not simply call the customer a liar. Furthermore, even if Rafael was sure that the customer did not have a better offer, if he refused to lower his price, the customer would have to walk away in order to save face—to accept Rafael’s price would make it obvious that there was no other offer and that the customer had been lying. Caught in this dilemma, and quite confident that he was being lied to, Rafael lowered his price and made the sale.





STORY 2: THE DECEPTION YOU DISCOVERED TOO LATE

Stacy, who had twenty years of industry experience, was a highly successful executive at a Fortune 500 company. When she decided to switch jobs, she had a number of lucrative job offers from some of the most prestigious firms in the country. But Stacy was particularly attracted to an offer made by the CEO of a small start-up company to whom she was introduced through a mutual acquaintance. The compensation package was not particularly stellar—she would make much more money at a larger firm—but she would have the opportunity to try something different and to make a big impact in a fledgling niche of the industry. More than anything else, Stacy was sold on the breadth of decision-making authority she would have in shaping and growing the business. Stacy accepted the job. Less than a year later, Stacy left the firm disappointed, disgruntled, and in disbelief. It turned out that the CEO had not been straightforward with her regarding the role she would play and the authority she would have. Instead, he had simply wanted to hire a high-profile executive with contacts in the industry; once hired, Stacy had been relegated to the role of salesperson. Stacy felt that she had been lied to from the beginning.





STORY 3: THE DECEPTION YOU NEVER DISCOVERED

Thomas, the purchasing agent for a manufacturing firm, was in negotiations with a supplier. Typically, when purchasing components from outside vendors, Thomas’s firm would hold an auction and buy from the lowest-price supplier. Because of the unique nature of this particular component, however, Thomas found himself in the uncomfortable position of having to negotiate with the one and only supplier that could meet the firm’s specifications by the required deadline. To make matters worse, the supplier knew that no other supplier could meet Thomas’s current needs. After much discussion, the supplier quoted Thomas a price. It was higher than Thomas had expected, and higher than his firm had budgeted for the component. Hoping to get at least a slight concession from the supplier, Thomas asked, “My firm is making a big purchase, and we are likely to make purchases from you in the future. Is this really the lowest price at which you can sell this component to us?” The supplier looked Thomas straight in the eye and responded, “I appreciate your business now, and I would appreciate it in the future, but this is the lowest price at which we have ever sold this component.” Still somewhat disappointed with the price, but satisfied with the supplier’s response, Thomas accepted the deal. He had no idea that the supplier could have lowered the price by another 20–25 percent.



As these stories demonstrate, deception can take many different forms. Sometimes your counterpart will tell you something that she knows is untrue (a lie); sometimes she will craft technically correct statements that are designed to mislead and misinform you. Sometimes the deception is big, sometimes it is small; sometimes it is obvious, sometimes it is difficult to discover; sometimes it is expected, and sometimes it catches you completely by surprise.

Before we go further, it is worth noting that the reasons people lie in negotiation can also vary. People might tell “benevolent” lies to make others feel good (“You look great today!”), to help others save face (“I’m glad you accepted our offer, since I couldn’t have moved another inch”), or to avoid unnecessary conflict (“You represented us well in that negotiation”). More often, however, lies and deception are designed to fulfill entirely self-serving ends: to make more money and to get a better deal.

While no one can ever be entirely safe from the lies and deceptions of others, negotiation geniuses understand what it takes to tackle and diffuse a wide variety of nefarious tactics. In this chapter, we will confront the darker side of negotiation head-on and present the following strategies:



• how to make it less likely that people will lie to you;

• how to detect when someone is lying to you;

• what to do when you catch someone in a lie;

• how to eliminate your own desire—and need—to lie.



Many of our students and clients have complained to us that they would like to be more ethical in their dealings with others, but admit that sometimes the temptation to lie is irresistible. They would be willing to be truthful—as long as honesty would not cost them thousands or millions of dollars. This chapter will also help you understand how you can be ethical without losing your shirt at the bargaining table.

PRE-EMPTING LIES AND DECEPTION

The best defense against lies and deception is to eliminate your counterpart’s temptation to lie. Typically, the other side has certain motivations to lie—for example, they may get a better deal by lying. But the other side also has certain motivations not to lie—if the lie is discovered, they risk losing the deal or damaging their reputation. To eliminate their motivations to lie, you need to make salient to them the reasons they should not lie to you. This can be done in a number of ways.

DEFENSE STRATEGY 1: LOOK PREPARED

Throughout this book, we have exalted the merits of preparation—the more prepared you are, the better you will negotiate. But that is not the whole story. It not only pays to be more prepared, it also pays to look more prepared! Put simply, the more prepared you seem, the less people will want to lie to you. Why? Because if you look prepared, it makes them think that you might be able to detect when they are lying—thus making it risky for them to lie to you.

Consider Story 1, in which the customer came to Rafael with “a better offer” from a competitor. Imagine what would have happened if, in their earlier discussions, Rafael had (truthfully) mentioned to the customer that he knows, on a personal level, most of his competitors, or that his firm keeps an eye on the rates competitors are charging. Either of those statements would have made the customer reconsider the strategy of coming to Rafael with a fake offer from an alleged competitor.

It is easy to see why it helps to look prepared when it comes to issues related to price. But negotiators often overlook the value of appearing prepared more generally. Consider these other ways in which Rafael—or you—could signal to the other side that you have done your homework and are prepared:



• Arriving on time for all meetings and negotiations.

• Being well prepared to discuss details regarding the myriad of issues that are involved.

• Being well organized and efficient.

• Speaking intelligently on issues related to their business and the industry—including issues that are not directly relevant to the current negotiation.

• Remembering the finer details of prior discussions with the other side and/or referring explicitly to notes you made during an earlier meeting.

• Responding expeditiously to requests for information or to the other side’s offers.



All of these tactics will not only help you to negotiate more effectively, but also make it less likely that others will lie to you. If you present yourself as someone who is always prepared and who is systematic in her approach to negotiations, you will garner respect and discourage deception at the same time.

DEFENSE STRATEGY 2: SIGNAL YOUR ABILITY TO OBTAIN INFORMATION

Imagine that you have no idea whether the other side is lying—and he knows that you are clueless. Does this mean that you are in serious jeopardy? Not necessarily. You may not know whether he is lying right now, but what if you could discover his deception tomorrow? If you can signal that you have the ability to discover (in the future) whether someone lied to you, you may dissuade him from lying in the first place.

How might this work? Think about Thomas (from Story 3), to whom the supplier suggested that it was impossible to obtain a lower price on the component. How would the supplier have responded if Thomas had stated his request for a concession differently? Consider these two variations:



Original script: “My firm is making a big purchase, and we are likely to make purchases from you in the future. Is this really the lowest price at which you can sell this component to us?”



Revised script: “My firm is making a big purchase, and we are likely to make purchases in the future. As you know, we need the supplies quickly this time around, which puts you in a unique position to fill the order. But, as you also know, other vendors have the resources to fulfill our need for future orders. As such, I will be meeting with them to discuss how low a price they will charge for these components in the future. Perhaps they will not be able to beat your price. But I would like to know from you before I talk to them: Is this really the lowest price at which you can sell this component to us? Can you find a way to lower the price, or should I assume that if the other vendors can beat this price we should go with them in the future?”

DEFENSE STRATEGY 3: ASK LESS THREATENING, INDIRECT QUESTIONS

What do you suppose will happen if you ask someone to reveal her reservation value? Unless considerable trust exists between you and her, she will either refuse to tell you her reservation value—or she will lie about it. This should come as no surprise, yet negotiators often ask questions that are almost guaranteed to motivate the other side to lie. There is a better way to get essentially the same information: ask less threatening, indirect questions.

Imagine that you are interested in finding out the production costs of a vendor with whom you are dealing. If you ask her directly to reveal her company’s costs, you are inviting her to lie to you because she knows that as soon as you know these costs, you are in a position to make an offer just above cost. Here are some alternative questions she would be more likely to answer truthfully:



• Can you please give me some information regarding your production process?

• Can you explain to me how your supply chain operates?

• Do you purchase your materials domestically?

• Who are your primary suppliers?

• What are the characteristics of your typical buyer?

• Can you provide me with a list of some of your other customers?

• How much would I need to increase the size of my order to qualify for a price concession?



While no one of these questions gives you all of the information you need to calculate their costs, if you know your industry well, the combined responses should help you make a very accurate estimate.

DEFENSE STRATEGY 4: DON’T LIE

If we asked you to never again lie to anyone during a negotiation, would you agree to be truthful forevermore? If not, why not? If you’re like most people we’ve asked, one reason is that you do not want to be the only sucker at the bargaining table. You’d love to be entirely honest, you might say, but, unfortunately, you live in a world where other people lie. Being the only truthful person would put you at a disadvantage. Sounds reasonable.

But there’s a problem with this perspective: what if everyone else is justifying their own lies using the same logic? What if most people would love to live in a world without deception, but each is stuck telling lies in self-defense? Unfortunately, many of us face this vicious cycle in negotiation. We are face-to-face with other negotiators who might prefer to be honest, but who do not trust us enough to risk it. In response, we, too, become more willing to lie.

Fortunately, this logic also yields a potential solution: we can make it easier for others to be truthful if we make it a point not to lie. This strategy will not dissuade those who want to exploit your honesty, but it will dissuade those who are lying out of self-defense. As time goes on, and your counterpart discovers that you have been honest with him, he will find it easier to be more honest with you.

How can you signal your desire for this kind of relationship? By revealing information that makes you somewhat vulnerable. In other words, reveal something that the other side recognizes is somewhat costly to you. What kind of message would this move send? It is possible that your counterpart will view you as naive or unprepared, but it is also highly likely that she will appreciate the trusting gesture and reciprocate in kind. You can help your cause by making your intentions explicit: “I know that there is a lot at stake in this relationship and that this is likely to make everyone more guarded and skeptical. But I also know that the more open and honest we are with each other from the start, the easier it will be for us to develop a mutually rewarding long-term relationship. With that in mind, I would like to share with you some information related to our cost structure.” Someone must take the first step, and it may as well be the one who is aspiring to become a negotiation genius.

LIE DETECTION

Do you think you can tell when someone is lying to you? Many people believe they can. Unfortunately, most of these people are wrong. Too many of us trust our intuition when our intuition is not trustworthy. To make matters worse, many “experts” tell us that we should trust our intuition (for example, Malcolm Gladwell in his popular book Blink), when the evidence suggests serious limitations in our intuitive judgments.1 Psychologist Paul Ekman, who has spent decades measuring the ability of people to distinguish truth from lies, has concluded that the average person is actually a very bad lie detector.2 Ekman has also developed expert techniques for lie detection; his research suggests that negotiators should focus on telltale signs such as pupil dilation, changes in voice pitch, and facial “micro-expressions.”

We take a different approach. Unlike participants in Ekman’s laboratory experiments, negotiators find themselves in complex, dynamic environments where it is difficult to focus on the subtle telltale signs of lying. You would not be well advised to ask your negotiation counterpart to repeat what he just said so that you can lean forward and peer into his eye sockets in hopes of seeing his pupils dilate. Instead, we recommend the following tactics:

DETECTION STRATEGY 1: GATHER INFORMATION FROM MULTIPLE SOURCES

The first thing to remember is that deception depends upon information asymmetry. Inevitably in negotiation, there will be some facts and data that the other side knows that you don’t—and can’t—know. This information asymmetry makes you vulnerable to deception. But there are also many facts and pieces of data that you don’t know, but which you can learn about—from your counterpart, or from others. To reduce your vulnerability, you must rely on your preparation.

Negotiation geniuses exhaust all sources of information prior to, during, and after negotiation. The more information you have, the easier it will be for you to detect lies. For example, Stacy (from Story 2) did not know that the CEO who hired her was planning to sideline her on issues of substance and to use her only for the purposes of networking. It may have been possible for her to learn this, however. For starters, she could have spoken with the last person who held her position in the firm. She could also have tried to gather information about the CEO’s management style from other employees of the firm. Finally, she could have asked the person who introduced her to the CEO what he knew about the CEO’s interests in hiring her. None of these conversations would guarantee that Stacy would detect the CEO’s deception, but each would increase her odds of diagnosing the CEO’s dishonesty.

DETECTION STRATEGY 2: SET A TRAP

Some seasoned negotiators tell us that they have a very simple way of testing the honesty of the other party: they ask a question to which they already know the answer, and then evaluate the response. Of course, for the trap to work, the question must concern an issue about which the other side has an incentive to lie.

For example, a student of ours who worked as a buyer in the textile industry once asked a seller whether the price he had quoted was the lowest price at which the particular material could be sold. The seller, who was aware that the buyer was new to the industry, swore that he had never sold the material to anyone for a lower price. Unfortunately for the seller, the buyer had come prepared; she had spoken with a friend in the industry who had recently purchased the material for a lower price from the same seller. As a result of that initial interaction, the buyer decided never to work with that seller again.

DETECTION STRATEGY 3: TRIANGULATE ON THE TRUTH

Centuries ago, when ships were the primary means of travel, navigators had to rely on star charts and basic trigonometry to determine their position on the open seas. By considering their ship to be the third point in a triangle whose other two points were stars that maintained a constant distance, the navigators were able to “triangulate” their way to discovering the ship’s location.

What does this have to do with lie detection in negotiation? The point is that you may never discover a lie if you ask only one question (especially if you don’t know the answer to it). Instead, you need to ask many questions and “triangulate” on the truth. The more questions you ask, the more difficult it becomes for the other party to come up with consistent answers—unless they are telling the truth. To find out whether his customer truly had another offer from a competitor, Rafael (in Story 1) could have triangulated on the truth by asking questions such as these:



• When did you receive this offer?

• What exactly did my competitor offer?

• Did he provide you with specific product information?

• What was that information?

• Did my competitor give this offer to you in writing?

• If not, why do you think that is? Did you ask for it in writing?

• If you did get it in writing, may I see it?



What if your customer is unwilling to answer any such questions? This should make you at least a little suspicious. He may not wish to reveal his reservation value to you, but if he is completely tight-lipped about the most straightforward questions regarding his alternatives—and if he has no reasonable explanation for his secrecy—then you should proceed as if he has been bluffing.

DETECTION STRATEGY 4: LOOK OUT FOR RESPONSES THAT DO NOT ANSWER THE QUESTION YOU ASKED

Our most useful advice regarding lie detection stems from this critical insight: most people do not like to lie, but they are usually very comfortable with you being deceived. In other words, people will often go to great lengths to avoid saying something that is technically untrue (i.e., a lie), but they will be happy to mislead you indirectly with their response. Let’s consider a classic example.

Recall the dialogue (from Story 3) between Thomas and the supplier:



Thomas: “My firm is making a big purchase, and we are likely to make purchases from you in the future. Is this really the lowest price at which you can sell this component to us?”



Supplier: “I appreciate your business now, and I would appreciate it in the future, but this is the lowest price at which we have ever sold this component.”



If you read carefully, you will realize that the supplier never answered Thomas’s question! He had asked whether this was the lowest price at which the supplier could sell. The supplier responded that he had never before sold the component at a lower price. That sounds like an answer to Thomas’s question (it implies that “we can’t sell any cheaper”), but it clearly is not. It is quite possible that the supplier has never sold the specific component to someone else at a lower price—technically, the supplier may have told the truth—but that is quite irrelevant.

If Thomas had been more perceptive, he would have spotted the nonresponse and questioned the relevance of prior sale prices in the current situation. He could reiterate, for example, that he is making a large purchase (perhaps the largest that the supplier has ever received for this component) and that he will be a repeat customer. Furthermore, it is possible that even though the supplier has not sold the exact same component at a lower price, he may have sold similar components more cheaply. Facing this more intense scrutiny, the supplier would have found it much more difficult to justify his position.

As it is, the supplier is unlikely to feel any guilt about this transaction. In addition to the host of self-serving justifications he could give for his behavior, he could also remind himself that he “never lied.” That’s the key. Instead of lying outright, people tend to make sure that they have technically told the truth—while at the same time trying to mislead you. This maneuver is a boon to would-be lie detectors. Negotiation geniuses ask clear, focused questions that make it incumbent upon the other party to respond transparently. Since people are more likely to deceive indirectly than to explicitly lie, negotiation geniuses who listen carefully to the answers provided (and to the answers that are not provided) are in a great position to catch “nonlying deceivers” in the act.

DETECTION STRATEGY 5: USE CONTINGENCY CONTRACTS

One of the authors has a large consulting client in the retail business. When the retailer buys goods overseas, it often purchases in very large quantities. For one key agreement that we heard about, the contract was so specific that it included the name of the ship that would bring the goods to the United States. After the contract was signed, but before the boat was loaded in the foreign country, the retailer learned that the United States government had created an embargo against this particular group of goods that was to go into effect at approximately the same date the goods would reach the United States. The ship might arrive by the embargo deadline, or it might not.

The U.S. retailer told the foreign manufacturer about the embargo, asked for the goods to be sent by air, and asked the manufacturer to pay for the greatly increased costs of shipping by air. The manufacturer told the retailer to relax, assured them that the ship would arrive before the embargo, and suggested that the Americans were being unnecessarily nervous. The retailer responded that if the goods were not sent by air, there would be no deal. The manufacturer pointed out that they would have been happy to accommodate the retailer if there was some actual risk that the goods would not reach the United States in time; however, as things stood, there was no risk—but there was a signed contract—and they would be happy to fax the retailer a copy of it. The negotiation was becoming quite heated, and the time pressure was mounting.

Then the retailer had a stroke of (negotiation) genius. He proposed to the manufacturer that the goods be sent by air and that the extra shipping costs be borne by the party whose claim turned out to be wrong. Although the ship would be carrying no goods of interest to either party (because the goods would be shipped by air), both parties would track when it actually reached the United States. If the ship beat the embargo, the retailer would pay the entire excess shipping costs of sending the goods by air; if the ship was late, the manufacturer would bear the costs. The retailer thought this was a wonderful contingency contract. Both sides could stand by their assessments, the goods would get to the United States on time, and, given current technology, both sides could check the Web daily to see how they were doing on the “bet.” The arrangement seemed perfect—until the manufacturer’s representative called to say that they would not accept the contingency contract. “This is getting way too complicated,” the manufacturer’s rep said. “Why don’t we just split the extra costs 50–50?”

What did the retailer learn from this response? That the manufacturer never believed its claims! If it had, it would have jumped at the opportunity to accept a clause that allowed it to avoid additional shipping costs. As we discussed in Chapters 1 and 2, when the other side makes a dubious claim regarding some future prospect, you do not have to take their word for it, nor do you have to argue about who is right. Instead, ask them to “put their money where their mouth is” by proposing a contingency contract. Contingency contracts are an excellent device for allowing honest people to stake financial outcomes on their differences in expectations (see Chapter 2). They are also an excellent device for diagnosing when the other side is lying about their beliefs and expectations. If they are unwilling to agree to a contingency contract, you can be more certain that they do not believe their own claims.

You may be curious about what happened next in our client’s negotiation with the manufacturer: The retailer needed the goods badly and agreed to the 50–50 split. The boat arrived one day late!

YOU CAUGHT THEM IN A LIE…NOW WHAT?

It’s hard to detect lies. It’s not much easier to know what to do after you have detected a lie. For one thing, you are likely to experience a range of emotions: anger, anxiety, disappointment, and surprise. In addition, you likely will have multiple conflicting motivations: Should you take revenge or try to salvage the relationship? Should you walk away from the deal or try to maximize your value from it? Should you tell the other party to stop lying or wait to see what they will say next? Should you call him a liar and stay true to your principles or hide your outrage and focus on your profits?

While there is no single right answer to any of these questions, there are systematic ways to think about how to resolve these conflicts. The first thing to do in such a situation is to stay calm and treat the deception like any other negotiation problem—something that needs to be better understood and carefully resolved. Then, answer the following three questions, which will help you make the best decision for you.

QUESTION 1: WAS IT REALLY A LIE?

Is it possible that your counterpart does not even know that what she said was untrue? In other words, she may not have intended to lie, but was simply uninformed. In most negotiations, it is best to give the other side the benefit of the doubt—but to also be more careful as you move forward. If you think you were lied to, but aren’t sure, investigate using the strategies outlined above. But unless you are certain that the other side lied, you will likely gain little by calling her a liar. Almost certainly, she will deny the allegation, and you will find yourself in an escalating conflict.

In addition, keep in mind that what sounds like a lie to you may not sound like a lie to your counterpart. In Story 3, Thomas and the supplier are likely to characterize the supplier’s remarks very differently. If Thomas discovers that a lower price was possible, he will think that the supplier lied. The supplier will certainly think otherwise. Similarly, when our executive and MBA students engage in negotiation simulations, it is common for one student to claim that her counterpart lied during the negotiation, and for the counterpart to strongly deny the accusation. Typically, the “liar” never actually uttered an untrue statement, but did allow the other side to be deceived. What should you do in such a situation? Don’t call your counterpart a liar, but explain that you feel you were misled or deceived, then discuss whether the deception was intentional or not.

Finally, note that not all lies are considered “unethical” in all contexts and cultures. If you are haggling for a piece of art with a street vendor in India, you can be certain that you will hear lots of prices, justifications, and stories that are based in fiction. Few people would consider these claims unethical; rather, that is the “language” in which the vendor’s business is conducted. Similar behavior in other contexts would be highly unethical, however. Before labeling your negotiation counterpart dishonest, audit your cultural assumptions. Was it a lie? Or are you negotiating in a context where you do not understand the norms?

QUESTION 2: DO I WANT TO CONTINUE WITH THIS NEGOTIATION?

If and when you are certain that someone has deliberately lied, you must decide whether to simply walk away from the negotiation or whether you have too much to lose by doing so. If you are willing to walk away on principle, your task is easy. You will decide whether or not to confront the liar and give voice to your emotions; then you will revert to your BATNA. Often, however, it is not easy to walk away.

QUESTION 3: DO I NEED TO WARN THEM OR CONFRONT THEM?

If you would like to continue the negotiation, you probably should not scream “Liar!” Instead, you need a strategy that allows you to signal that you are aware of the lie, while also giving the other side the opportunity to save face. There are two ways of doing so; the strategy you choose depends on what you are trying to accomplish. If you are not particularly upset about the lie, but want to discourage your counterpart from lying in the future, you should use a “warn” script. If the lie was more egregious, and you want to extract an apology or concession in exchange for your willingness to continue negotiations, you should use a “confront” script. Here is how each of these strategies sounds:



Warn Script: “You mentioned that the cost of these materials is $1.05 per unit. I think that you may need to check your data. We have strong ties with a number of suppliers and are certain that the cost is $0.90. Perhaps you are working with old data or were misinformed along the way. In any case, let’s try to be more careful about facts and figures as we go forward with this deal.”



Confront Script: “You mentioned that the cost of these materials is $1.05 per unit. I feel the need to point out to you that, unlike some of your other customers, we have strong ties with a number of suppliers. Because of this, we know when someone is inflating costs. For example, the cost of the materials in question is actually $0.90. We have been negotiating in good faith with you and are taking part in this negotiation to create value for both sides. But we are now a little uneasy about the way in which you have negotiated with us. Perhaps there is a simple explanation for the discrepancy in our numbers; perhaps you were misinformed. But I would just like to make you aware that we are disappointed with this exchange. Can you help us understand your perspective and suggest some way for us to overcome the anxiety we are now feeling?”



As you will notice, the second script contains much stronger language and also implies the need for an apology or concession. In some instances, it may even be appropriate for you to ask for a specific concession as reparation. You will also notice that both scripts provide an opportunity for the other side to save face. This is critical if you have already decided that you wish to continue the negotiation or the relationship.

It is often tempting—but not always judicious—to retaliate quickly when you feel you have been deceived. Negotiation geniuses take the time to evaluate whether the other side might have been misinformed or had considered their behavior to be appropriate to the context. They also keep an eye on their own interests, which may require a response that is powerful enough to fix the problem but controlled enough to allow the other side some room to navigate.

SMART ALTERNATIVES TO LYING

Lies and deception do not simply emanate from those sitting on the other side of the table. How often do we say things in negotiations (and in everyday life) that we know are not the most precise versions of the truth? How often do we say things that are ambiguous, and that we hope will conceal the truth to our benefit? Obviously, ethical questions surround this issue—and most people we know wish that they were more honest and ethical. If you are one of these people, the strategies that follow will help you. But even if you have no interest in being more ethical, there are reasons for you to heed this advice. For lies are not only potentially unethical; they are also, very often, poor strategy.

Most negotiators have at some point felt the pain of being trapped by their own lies. Consider what happens if you are willing to pay up to $15,000 for a purchase, but during the negotiation, you strenuously argue that you “cannot pay a dollar more than $13,000.” As negotiations continue, you eventually discover that the other side will accept nothing less than $14,000. In other words, your “final offer” does not fall in the ZOPA. What will you do now? Unfortunately, you must either walk away from the deal (which could have been consummated at a price between $14,000 and $15,000) or admit that you were lying about your reservation value. Or consider what happens when, during a negotiation, you pretend that you value an issue greatly, when in fact you place very little value on it. Your hope is that by overstating its value to you, you will be able to extract greater concessions in return for giving it up. But what if the other side gives in to you on that issue? You may end up with something you do not really value, while the other side waits for you to reciprocate on other issues.

Whether your motivation is to improve your own character or to reduce the costs associated with ill-conceived lies, the strategies that follow will help you negotiate more honestly without putting you at a disadvantage against others who are dishonest, corrupt, or—more likely—complex individuals with virtues and vices just like you.3

STRATEGY 1: INCORPORATE REPUTATION AND RELATIONSHIP COSTS IN YOUR CALCULUS

When we ask our MBA students whether it is acceptable to lie in negotiations to get what you want, a disappointingly large minority says that it is. When we ask our executive students the same question, very few (if any) say that lying is acceptable. In large part, this difference in perspective is attributable to the fact that our executive students have many more years of negotiation experience than our MBA students. They have witnessed and experienced the consequences of negotiating in bad faith. Whether they have learned from their own experiences or those of others in their organizations and industry, they have discovered how easy it is to destroy a relationship or a reputation—and how hard it is to build these up again.

Unfortunately, most negotiators are myopic; they do not see past the current deal or the current relationship. Those who do adopt a more long-term perspective find it much easier to be truthful and honest—even if this costs money in the short run—because the long-term payoff is worth it.

STRATEGY 2: PREPARE TO ANSWER DIFFICULT QUESTIONS

One of the biggest reasons people lie in negotiation is that they do not know how to answer tough questions. Caught off guard, and worried that they will say something that puts them at a disadvantage, they opt to lie. You can learn to avoid this reaction. Those who anticipate the tough, probing questions the other side will ask can prepare truthful responses that will not hurt them. Consider these two responses to the question that a potential employer might ask a candidate who has no other job offers: “Do you have any other job offers?”



Unprepared Response: “Yes, I do. I have a few other offers that I am considering.”



Prepared Response: “No, this is the only offer that I currently have. But I only recently sent out my resumes, and I have many interviews scheduled.”



A job candidate is more likely to resort to the first response (a lie) when he or she is unprepared. When someone asks you about your other job offers, your likely immediate reaction is to worry that having none makes you seem desperate; the most obvious way to avoid this perception is to lie. But such lies are very risky. If the employer probes further about these other offers, your lie may be discovered. The prepared response not only avoids the lie, but also mitigates the perception that you are desperate.

STRATEGY 3: TRY NOT TO NEGOTIATE OR RESPOND TO QUESTIONS WHILE UNDER TIME PRESSURE

Regardless of how prepared you are, there will be times when a question catches you off guard. What to do? To the extent possible, avoid answering the question until you have had an opportunity to think more carefully about your response. This is not as difficult or awkward as it sounds. There is usually nothing wrong with making one of the following statements:



• “I don’t have that information with me, but I’m sure I can get it for you later today.”

• “That’s an interesting question. I’ll have to think about the answer and get back to you.”

• “I’ve never been asked that before. I could try to give you a partial answer right now. But if it’s okay with you, I’d like to take some time to find out our company’s stance on that issue and give you a more complete response later.”



Another way to avoid answering tough questions under time pressure is to structure your negotiation differently. For example, you may have some preliminary discussions aimed at raising difficult questions over e-mail; this will give you the opportunity to respond at your own pace. Similarly, instead of negotiating by phone (which may make you feel compelled to answer questions immediately), you could set up an informal lunch meeting where you would feel less pressure to answer every question as soon as it is “your turn” to speak.

STRATEGY 4: REFUSE TO ANSWER CERTAIN QUESTIONS

You do not need to answer every question that your counterpart asks. If he asks you to reveal your reservation value, for example, you should not feel compelled to answer. Suppose that the other party asks, “What’s the lowest price you will accept for this shipment?” One way to respond, and to defuse the awkward moment with humor, is to say: “I think you already know the answer—it happens to be the most you are willing to pay for it!” More generally, it is often acceptable to respond to a question that you do not wish to answer with one of the following remarks:



• “This is a discussion that we can have later on, once we have both committed to the deal. I don’t feel comfortable divulging this information at the moment.”

• “As you undoubtedly understand, we cannot share that information for strategic reasons.”

• “The answer to your question depends on many other factors that we need to discuss.”

STRATEGY 5: OFFER TO ANSWER A DIFFERENT QUESTION

If you feel uncomfortable about refusing to answer a direct question, you can mitigate your unease by offering to answer a different, related question. Here, the idea is to be up front about your inability or unwillingness to respond to the specific question, then to offer a concession by providing other useful information. For example, if someone asks you to tell them the production cost of the goods you are selling, and you are tempted to lie in order to secure a higher margin, you can instead say the following: “Unfortunately, I’m not at liberty to divulge specific cost information, but I can appreciate why you’re asking for it. You want to make sure that you’re getting a high-value product for the price you’re paying. Well, let me provide you with some information that will give you that confidence. I can share a lot of specific information regarding our production process and some information regarding our pricing model.”

By providing information that the other side values, and which does not put you at a disadvantage, you serve multiple purposes simultaneously: you avoid lying, you give them information that is of value to them, you appear reasonable and forthcoming, and you make it more likely that a deal will be consummated.

STRATEGY 6: CHANGE REALITY TO MAKE THE TRUTH MORE BEARABLE

Why, fundamentally, are human beings tempted to lie? We often lie because reality is not what we want it to be. Returning to our job interview story, the candidate is tempted to lie because reality (having no offers) differs from what he desires (having multiple offers). We earlier resolved this dilemma with the following “prepared response”:



Prepared Response: “No, this is the only offer that I currently have. But I only recently sent out my resumes, and I have many interviews scheduled.”



But what if the candidate does not even have any interviews scheduled? Worse yet, what if all of the resumes he sent out have already been rejected? Must he now reveal his desperation by telling the truth? Is “No, this is the only offer that I currently have” the only truthful response?

Not quite. If the candidate can change the reality of the situation before he is asked the tough question, he has another option. For example, the day before his one-and-only interview, the candidate might send out another dozen resumes to another set of companies. Then, during his interview, he can truthfully respond to the employer’s question as follows:



Changed-Reality Response: “No, this is the only offer that I currently have. But I only recently sent out a dozen resumes and am looking forward to hearing back from those companies in the next few weeks.”



With this response, the candidate is able to be truthful because he has made lying unnecessary. More generally, when you are tempted to lie or to deceive, take some time to think about why you feel the need to portray a false reality. Is it because you are embarrassed or ashamed of your situation? If so, can you do something to change your reality instead of lying about it?

STRATEGY 7: ELIMINATE CONSTRAINTS THAT TEMPT YOU TO LIE

Dan, a manager at a large consumer-products firm, was asked by his VP to submit a detailed annual budget request for his department. Unfortunately, Dan had an incentive to overstate anticipated costs; in the event of cost overruns, it would be useful to have a little surplus to fall back on. His department’s projected costs for the coming year were close to $14 million, but Dan instead submitted a report with cost estimates totaling $16 million. Of course, the managers of other departments in the firm had similar incentives to lie about (or “inflate”) their cost estimates. As a result, the company’s total budget exceeded the amount earmarked for departmental budgets. Without an accurate understanding of who needed how much money, the VP did his best to apportion the funds efficiently. Not surprisingly, some departments received less than they needed and others ended up with much more. Those that got the most (including Dan’s department) felt compelled to spend the surplus money frivolously in order to justify their initial demands.

Consider a possible solution to this problem. Dan’s least predictable costs each year were related to the hiring of subcontractors. The budget request was due in February, but many of the subcontractors could not be hired until March. If Dan had asked the VP to be allowed to submit a second, revised budget a month later, and if the VP had agreed, he would not have had to lie in the first place. Instead, Dan could have used the extra time to gather more precise cost estimates, thereby eliminating the need to inflate his figures.

Often, our own honesty (and that of others whom we label unethical) is constrained by rules, policies, time pressures, and incentive systems. It is fine to argue that a “truly” ethical person would be honest despite these constraints. Nonetheless, it behooves us—and our organizations—to try to create the kinds of environments that encourage rather than discourage truthful and honest behavior.

DO NEGOTIATION GENIUSES EVER LIE?

We have both been asked (often!) whether it is okay to lie in negotiation—or, in a variant of the same question, when is it okay to lie in negotiation? Our answer is very simple. Don’t do it. Don’t ever lie. Lying is not worth the costs. Instead, spend your time and energy honing your skills as an effective negotiator. It is our belief that negotiation geniuses do not feel the need to lie. Of course, a philosophical question remains: is it okay to lie if the lie would help others, save lives, or make someone feel good? In our experience, you do not need help answering this question. If your motives are genuinely benevolent—and are not in the least self-serving—your answer to the question will be at least as good as ours.





