ALSO BY ALLAN & BARBARA PEASE




Why Men Don't Listen and

Women Can't Read Maps



Why Men Lie and Women Cry



Why Men Can Only Do One Thing at a

Time and Women Never Stop Talking



The Little Book of Men and Women





This book is dedicated to all people who have good eyesight but who cannot see.





CONTENTS





Acknowledgments

Introduction

All Things Are Not What They Seem

How Well Do You Know the Back of Your Hand?

How Well Can You Spot Body-Language Contradictions?

How We Wrote This Book

Your Body-Language Dictionary

1. Understanding the Basics

In the Beginning…

Why It's Not What You Say

How Body Language Reveals Emotions and Thoughts

Why Women Are More Perceptive

What Brain Scans Show

How Fortune-Tellers Know So Much

Inborn, Genetic, or Learned Culturally?

Some Basic Origins

Universal Gestures

Three Rules for Accurate Reading

Why It Can Be Easy to Misread

Why Kids Are Easier to Read

Can You Fake It?

True-Life Story: The Lying Job Applicant

How to Become a Great Reader

2. The Power Is in Your Hands

How to Detect Openness

Intentional Use of the Palms to Deceive

The Law of Cause and Effect

Palm Power

Our Audience Experiment

An Analysis of Handshake Styles

Who Should Reach First?

How Dominance and Control Are Communicated

The Submissive Handshake

How to Create Equality

How to Create Rapport

How to Disarm a Power Player

The Cold, Clammy Handshake

Gaining the Left-Side Advantage

When Men and Women Shake Hands

The Double-Hander

Handshakes of Control

The Blair-Bush Power Game

The Solution

The World's Eight Worst Handshakes

The Arafat-Rabin Handshake

Summary

3. The Magic of Smiles and Laughter

Smiling Is a Submission Signal

Why Smiling Is Contagious

How a Smile Tricks the Brain

Practicing the Fake Smile

Smugglers Smile Less

Five Common Types of Smiles

Why Laughter Is the Best Medicine

Why You Should Take Laughter Seriously

Why We Laugh and Talk, but Chimps Don't

How Humor Heals

Laughing Till You Cry

How Jokes Work

The Laughter Room

Smiles and Laughter Are a Way of Bonding

Humor Sells

The Permanent Down-Mouth

Smiling Advice for Women

Laughter in Love

Summary

4. Arm Signals

Arm Barrier Signals

Why Crossed Arms Can Be Detrimental

Yes… but I'm Just “Comfortable”

Gender Differences

Crossed-Arms-on-Chest

The Solution

Reinforced Arm-Crossing

Arm-Gripping

The Boss vs. The Staff

Getting the Thumbs-Up

Hugging Yourself

How the Rich and Famous Reveal Their Insecurity

The Coffee Cup Barrier

The Power of Touch

Touch Their Hand, Too

Summary

5. Cultural Differences

We Were Having Pizza at the Time

Take the Cultural Test

Why We're All Becoming American

Cultural Basics Are the Same Almost Everywhere

Greeting Differences

When One Culture Encounters Another

The English Stiff-Upper-Lip

The Japanese

“You Dirty, Disgusting Pig!”—Nose-Blowing

The Three Most Common Cross-Cultural Gestures

To Touch or Not to Touch?

How to Offend Other Cultures

Summary

6. Hand and Thumb Gestures

How the Hands Talk

On the One Hand…

On the Other Hand, Gestures Improve Recall

Rubbing the Palms Together

Thumb and Finger Rub

Hands Clenched Together

The Steeple

Using Steepling to Win at Chess

Summary

The Face Platter

Holding Hands Behind the Back

Thumb Displays

Thumbs-Protruding-from-Coat-Pocket

Summary

7. Evaluation and Deceit Signals

Lying Research

The Three Wise Monkeys

How the Face Reveals the Truth

Women Lie the Best and That's the Truth

Why It's Hard to Lie

Eight of the Most Common Lying Gestures

Evaluation and Procrastination Gestures

Boredom

Evaluation Gestures

The Lying Interviewee

Chin Stroking

Stalling Clusters

Head Rubbing and Slapping Gestures

Why Bob Always Lost at Chess

The Double Meaning

8. Eye Signals

The Dilating Pupils

Take the Pupil Test

Women Are Better at It, as Usual

Giving Them the Eye

The Eyebrow Flash

Eye Widening

The “Looking Up” Cluster

How Men's Fires Get Lit

Gaze Behavior—Where Do You Look?

How to Keep Eye Contact in a Nudist Colony

How to Grab a Man's Attention

Most Liars Look You in the Eye

How to Avoid Being Attacked or Abused

The Sideways Glance

Extended Blinking

Darting Eyes

The Geography of the Face

The Politician's Story

Look Deep into My Eyes, Baby

The First Twenty Seconds of an Interview

The Solution

What Channel Are You Tuned To?

How to Hold Eye Contact with an Audience

How to Present Visual Information

The Power Lift

Summary

9. Space Invaders—Territories and Personal Space

Personal Space

Zone Distances

Practical Applications of Zone Distances

Who Is Moving In on Whom?

Why We Hate Riding in Elevators

Why Mobs Become Angry

Spacing Rituals

Try the Luncheon Test

Cultural Factors Affecting Zone Distances

Why Japanese Always Lead When They Waltz

Country vs. City Spatial Zones

Territory and Ownership

Car Territory

Take the Test

Summary

10. How the Legs Reveal What the Mind Wants to Do

Everybody's Talking About a New Way of Walking

How Feet Tell the Truth

The Purpose of the Legs

The Four Main Standing Positions

Defensive, Cold, or “Just Comfortable”?

How We Move from Closed to Open

The European Leg Cross

The American Figure Four

When the Body Closes, so Does the Mind

Figure Four Leg Clamp

The Ankle Lock

The Short Skirt Syndrome

The Leg Twine

Parallel Legs

Put Your Right Foot In, Put Your Right Foot Out

Summary

11. The Thirteen Most Common Gestures You'll See Daily

The Head Nod

Why You Should Learn to Nod

How to Encourage Agreement

The Head Shake

The Basic Head Positions

The Head Duck

Picking Imaginary Lint

How We Show We're Ready for Action

The Cowboy Stance

Sizing Up the Competition

The Legs-Spread

Leg-Over-the-Arm-of-Chair

Straddling a Chair

The Catapult

Gestures That Show When a Person Is Ready

The Starter's Position

Summary

12. Mirroring—How We Build Rapport

Creating the Right Vibes

Mirroring on a Cellular Level

Mirroring Differences Between Men and Women

What to Do About It if You're Female

When Men and Women Start to Look Alike

Do We Resemble Our Pets?

Monkey See, Monkey Do

Matching Voices

Intentionally Creating Rapport

Who Mirrors Whom?

Summary

13. The Secret Signals of Cigarettes, Glasses, and Makeup

The Two Types of Smokers

Differences Between Men and Women

Smoking as a Sexual Display

How to Spot a Positive or Negative Decision

Cigar Smokers

How Smokers End a Session

How to Read Glasses

Stalling Tactics

Peering-Over-the-Glasses

Wearing Glasses on the Head

The Power of Glasses and Makeup

A Little Lippy, Lady?

Briefcase Signals

Summary

14. How the Body Points to Where the Mind Wants to Go

What Body Angles Say

How We Exclude Others

Seated Body Pointing

Foot Pointing

Summary

15. Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals

The Emergence of the Colorful Male

Graham's Story

Why Women Always Call the Shots

Differences Between Men and Women

The Attraction Process

The Thirteen Most Common Female Courtship Gestures and Signals

What Men Look at in Women's Bodies

How Beautiful People Miss Out

Is He a Butt, Boobs, or Leg Man?

Male Courtship Signals and Gestures

Men's Bodies—What Turns Women On the Most

Is She a Chest, Legs, or Butt Gal?

Summary

16. Ownership, Territory, and Height Signals

Body Lowering and Status

He's a Big Man Around Town

Why Some People Seem Taller on TV

Try the Floor Test

The Downsides of Height

How Body Lowering Can Sometimes Raise Status

How TV Politicians Can Win Votes

How to Placate Angry People

What's Love Got to Do with It?

Some Strategies for Gaining Perceived Height

Summary

17. Seating Arrangements—Where to Sit and Why

Take the Table Test

It's Not What You Say, It's Where You Sit

King Arthur's Concept

Keeping Two People Involved

Rectangular Board Tables

Why Teacher's Pet Sits on the Left

Power Plays at Home

How to Make an Audience Cry

The Attention Zone

An Experiment in Learning

Getting a Decision Over Dinner

Summary

18. Interviews, Power Plays, and Office Politics

Why James Bond Looked Cool, Calm, and Collected

The Nine Golden Keys to Making Great First Impressions

When Someone Keeps You Waiting

Fake It Till You Make It?

Seven Simple Strategies for Giving You the Extra Edge

Summary

Office Power Politics

How to Switch Table Territories

Seated Body Pointing

How to Rearrange an Office

Summary

19. Putting It All Together

How Well Can You Read Between the Lines?

How Did You Rate?

Summary

The Seven Secrets of Attractive Body Language

References





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS





These are some of the people who have directly or indirectly contributed to this book, whether they knew it or not:

Dr. John Tickel, Dr. Dennis Waitley, Dr. Andre Davril, Professor Phillip Hunsaker, Trevor Dolby, Armin Gontermann, Lothar Menne, Ray & Ruth Pease, Malcolm Edwards, Ian Marshall, Laura Meehan, Ron & Toby Hale, Darryl Whitby, Susan Lamb, Sadaaki Hayashsi, Deb Mehrtens, Deb Hinckesman, Doreen Carroll, Steve Wright, Derryn Hinch, Dana Reeves, Ronnie Corbett, Vanessa Feltz, Esther Rantzen, Jonathan Coleman, Trish Goddard, Kerri-Anne Kennerley, Bert Newton, Roger Moore, Lenny Henry, Ray Martin, Mike Walsh, Don Lane, Ian Lesley, Anne Diamond, Gerry & Sherry Meadows, Stan Zermarnik, Darrel Somers, Andres Kepes, Leon Byner, Bob Geldof, Vladimir Putin, Andy McNab, John Howard, Nick & Katherine Greiner, Bryce Courtney, Tony & Cherie Blair, Greg & Kathy Owen, Lindy Chamberlain, Mike Stoller, Gerry & Kathy Bradbeer, Ty & Patti Boyd, Mark Victor Hansen, Brian Tracy, Kerry Packer, Ian Botham, Helen Richards, Tony Greig, Simon Townsend, Diana Spencer, Princes William and Harry, Prince Charles, Dr. Desmond Morris, Princess Anne, David & Jan Goodwin, Iven Frangi, Victoria Singer, John Nevin, Richard Otton, Raoul Boielle, Matthew Braund, Doug Constable, George Deveraux, Rob Edmonds, Gerry Hatton, John Hepworth, Bob Heussler, Gay Huber, Ian McKillop, Delia Mills, Pamela Anderson, Wayne Mugridge, Peter Opie, David Rose, Alan White, Rob Winch, Ron Tacchi, Barry Markoff, Christine Maher, Sallie & Geoff Burch, John Fenton, Norman & Glenda Leonard

and

Dorie Simmonds, whose encouragement and enthusiasm

drove us to write this book.





Introduction



___________________________________________________



By a man's fingernails, by his coat-sleeve, by his boots,

by his trouser-knees, by the calluses of his forefinger and

thumb, by his expression, by his shirt-cuffs, by his

movements—by each of these things a man's calling is plainly

revealed. That all united should fail to enlighten the

competent enquirer in any case is almost inconceivable.



SHERLOCK HOLMES, 1892

___________________________________________________





As a young boy, I was always aware that what people said was not always what they meant or were feeling and that it was possible to get others to do what I wanted if I read their real feelings and responded appropriately to their needs. At the age of eleven, I began my sales career selling rubber sponges door-to-door after school to make pocket money and quickly worked out how to tell if someone was likely to buy from me or not. When I knocked on a door, if someone told me to go away but their hands were open and they showed their palms, I knew it was safe to persist with my presentation because, despite how dismissive they may have sounded, they weren't aggressive. If someone told me to go away in a soft voice but used a pointed finger or closed hand, I knew it was time to leave. I loved being a salesperson and was excellent at it. As a teenager, I became a pots-and-pans salesperson, selling at night, and my ability to read people earned me enough money to buy my first piece of property. Selling gave me the opportunity to meet people and study them at close range and to evaluate whether they would buy or not, simply by watching their body language. This skill also proved a bonanza for meeting girls in discos. I could nearly always predict who would say yes to a dance with me and who wouldn't.

I joined the life insurance business at the age of twenty, and went on to break several sales records for the firm I worked for, becoming the youngest person to sell over a million dollars’ worth of business in my first year. This achievement qualified me for the prestigious Million Dollar Round Table in the U.S.A. As a young man, I was fortunate that the techniques I'd learned as a boy in reading body language while selling pots and pans could be transferred to this new area, and was directly related to the success I could have in any venture involving people.





All Things Are Not What They Seem




The ability to work out what is really happening with a person is simple—not easy, but simple. It's about matching what you see and hear in the environment in which it all happens and drawing probable conclusions. Most people, however, only see the things they think they are seeing. Here's a story to demonstrate the point:

Two men were walking through the woods when they came across a big deep hole.

“Wow… that looks deep,” says one. “Let's toss a few pebbles in and see how deep it is.”

They threw in a few pebbles and waited, but there was no sound.

“Gee—that is a really deep hole. Let's throw one of these big rocks in. That should make a noise.”

They picked up two football-sized rocks and tossed them into the hole and waited, but still they heard nothing.

“There's a railway sleeper over here in the weeds,” said one. “If we toss that in, it's definitely going to make some noise.” They dragged the heavy sleeper over to the hole and heaved it in, but not a sound came from the hole.

Suddenly, out of the nearby woods, a goat appeared, running like the wind. It rushed toward the two men and ran right between them, running as fast as its legs could go. Then it leaped into the air and disappeared into the hole. The two men stood there, astonished at what they'd just seen.

Out of the woods came a farmer who said, “Hey! Did you guys see my goat?”

“You bet we did! It was the craziest thing we've ever seen! It came running like the wind out of the woods and jumped into that hole!”

“Nah,” says the farmer. “That couldn't have been my goat. My goat was chained to a railway sleeper!”





How Well Do You Know the Back of Your Hand?




Sometimes we say we know something “like the back of our hand” but experiments prove that less than 5 percent of people can identify the back of their hands from a photograph. The results of a simple experiment we conducted for a television program showed that most people are generally not good at reading body-language signals, either. We set up a large mirror at the end of a long hotel lobby, giving the illusion that, as you entered the hotel, there was a long corridor going through the hotel and out the back of the lobby. We hung large plants from the ceiling to a distance of five feet above the floor so that, as each person entered the lobby, it looked as if another person was entering at the same time from the other end. The “other person” was not readily recognizable because the plants covered their face, but you could clearly see their body and movement. Each guest observed the other “guest” for five to six seconds before turning left to the reception desk. When asked if they had recognized the other “guest,” 85 percent of men answered no. Most men had failed to recognize themselves in a mirror, one saying, “You mean that fat, ugly guy?” Unsurprisingly, 58 percent of the women said it was a mirror and 30 percent said the other “guest” looked “familiar.”

Most men and nearly half of all women

don't know what they look like from the neck down.





How Well Can You Spot Body-Language Contradictions?




People everywhere have developed a fascination with the body language of politicians because everyone knows that politicians sometimes pretend to believe in something that they don't believe in, or imply that they are someone other than who they really are. Politicians spend much of their time ducking, dodging, avoiding, pretending, lying, hiding their emotions and feelings, using smoke screens or mirrors and waving to imaginary friends in the crowd. But we instinctively know that they will eventually be tripped up by contradictory body-language signals, so we love to watch them closely, in anticipation of catching them out.

What signal alerts you that a politician is lying?

His lips are moving.





For another television show, we conducted an experiment with the cooperation of a local tourist bureau. Tourists entered the bureau to ask for information about local sightseeing and other tourist attractions. They were directed to a counter where they spoke with a tourism officer, a man with blond hair, a mustache, wearing a white shirt and tie. After a few minutes discussing possible itineraries, the man bent down out of sight below the counter to get some brochures. Then another man with a clean-shaven face, dark hair, and wearing a blue shirt appeared from beneath the counter holding the brochures. He continued the discussion from exactly where the first man had left off. Remarkably, around half the tourists failed to notice the change and men were twice as likely as women to completely miss the change, not only in body language but in the appearance of a completely new person! Unless you have an innate ability or have learned to read body language, the chances are you're missing most of it, too. This book will show you what you've been missing.





How We Wrote This Book




Barbara and I have written The Definitive Book of Body Language using my original book, Body Language, as our base. Not only have we considerably expanded on that one, we have also introduced research from new scientific disciplines such as evolutionary biology and evolutionary psychology, as well as technologies such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), which shows what happens in the brain. We have written it in a style that means it can be opened and read on almost any page at random. We've kept the content mainly to the movement of the body, expressions, and gestures, because these are the things you need to learn to get the most out of every face-to-face encounter. The Definitive Book of Body Language will make you more aware of your own nonverbal cues and signals, and will show you how to use them to communicate effectively and how to get the reactions you want.

This book isolates and examines each component of body language and gesture in simple terms to make it accessible to you. Few gestures are made in isolation of others, however, so we have also, at the same time, tried to avoid oversimplifying things.

There will always be those who throw up their hands in horror and claim that the study of body language is just another means by which scientific knowledge can be used to exploit or dominate others by reading their secrets or thoughts. We feel, however, that this book seeks to give you greater insight into communication with your fellow humans, so that you can have a deeper understanding of other people and, therefore, of yourself. Understanding how something works makes living with it easier, whereas ignorance and lack of understanding promote fear and superstition and make us more critical of others. A bird-watcher doesn't study birds so that he can shoot them down and keep them as trophies. In the same way, the knowledge and skills in body language serve to make every encounter with another person an exciting experience.

For the purpose of simplicity, and unless otherwise stated, the use of “he” or “him” will apply equally to both genders.





Your Body-Language Dictionary




The original book was intended as a working manual for salespeople, managers, negotiators, and executives, but this one can be used for any aspect of your life, be it at home, on a date, or at work. The Definitive Book of Body Language is the result of over thirty years of our cumulative knowledge and involvement in this field and we give you the basic vocabulary you need to read attitudes and emotions. This book will give you answers to some of the most puzzling questions you've ever had about why people use some of the behaviors they do, and it will change forever your own behavior. It will seem as if you've always been in a dark room and, while you could always feel the furnishings, the wall hangings, and the door, you've never actually seen what they look like. This book will be like turning on the lights to see what was always there. But now, you'll know exactly what things are, where they are, and what to do about them.

Allan Pease





