Chapter 15



COURTSHIP DISPLAYS AND

ATTRACTION SIGNALS





1. A man and woman approaching on a beach





2. They see each other





3. They pass



Dr. Albert Scheflen, author of Body Language and the Social Order, found that when a person enters the company of the opposite sex, certain physiological changes take place. He found that high muscle tone became evident in preparation for a possible sexual encounter, “bagging” around the face and eyes decreased, body sagging disappeared, the chest protruded, the stomach was automatically pulled in, potbellied slumping disappeared, the body assumed an erect posture, and the person seemed to become more youthful in appearance. He noted that both men and women walked with a livelier, springier gait as a display of health and vitality and to convey their suitability as a partner. A man will stand taller, protrude his jaw, and expand his chest to make himself appear dominant. A woman who is interested will respond by emphasizing her breasts, tilting her head, touching her hair, exposing her wrists, thereby making herself appear submissive.

The ideal place to observe these changes is on a beach when a man and a woman approach each other from a distance. The changes take place when they are close enough to meet each other's gaze and will continue until after they have passed each other, at which time their original posture returns.

Body language is a fundamental part of courtship because it reveals how available, attractive, ready, enthusiastic, sexy, or desperate we are. While some courtship signals are studied and deliberate, others, such as those just mentioned, are completely unconscious. It is still unclear how we learn these signals, but research now shows that many may be inborn.





The Emergence of the Colorful Male




In the majority of mammals, it's the male that “dresses up” to impress the less-than-colorful females. Humans, however, do it the other way around. For centuries, women have done most of the sexual advertising by decorating themselves in colorful clothing and jewelry and painting their faces. The exception to this was during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in Europe, when men adorned themselves with beautiful wigs and colorful clothing and outdressed the average woman. Keep in mind also that, historically, while women have dressed to attract men, men have dressed in clothing to either show status or to frighten away enemies. Today we see the re-emergence of the self-obsessed male who is again beginning to decorate himself like a peacock. We see footballers having facials and manicures, and wrestlers tinting their hair. In the U.S.A. we have seen the emergence of the “metrosexual” male—a heterosexual male who copies women's behavior patterns—he has manicures, pedicures, and hair coloring, wears fancy clothes, goes to the jacuzzi, eats organic vegetarian food, has Botox, a face-lift, and is in touch with his “feminine side.” While the metrosexual male seems an oddity to many straight men, our observation shows metrosexuals fall into three categories: gay men; effeminate men; and men who realize that assuming traditional female behaviors is a great way to meet lots of women.





Graham's Story




Graham was a man who developed a skill that most men would kill to have.

He would attend a social function and somehow quickly scope out the available women, make his choice, and, in almost record-breaking time, would be seen heading toward the exit with her, escorting her to his car, and driving back to his apartment. He would return to the function and repeat this process, sometimes several times in the same evening. He seemed to have a built-in radar for finding the available women at the right time and getting them to go with him. No one knew how he did it.

Research by animal courtship behavior zoologists and behavioral scientists reveals that male and female animals use a series of intricate courtship gestures, some obvious and others subtle, and that most of this is done subconsciously. In the animal world, courtship behavior in each species follows specific and predetermined patterns. For example, in several species of bird, the male struts around the female giving a vocal display, puffing up his feathers, and performing many intricate body movements to gain her attention, while the female appears to display little or no interest. This ritual is similar to that performed by humans when courtship begins.

Human flirtation involves sequences of gestures and expressions not unlike the courtship dances of birds and other animals, as seen on wildlife programs.

The bottom line is that when a person wants to attract the opposite sex, they do so by emphasizing sexual differences. To discourage the opposite sex, we play down or hide these differences.

Highlighting gender differences is

what makes a person look “sexy.”





Graham's technique was first to spot women whose body language indicated they were available and then to respond with his own male courtship gestures. Those who were interested would return the appropriate female signals, giving him the nonverbal green light to proceed to the next stage.

The success women have in intimate encounters is directly related to their ability to send courtship signals to men and to decode those being sent back. For a man, success in the mating game relies mainly on his ability to read the signals being sent to him, as opposed to being able to initiate his own moves. Most women are aware of courtship signals, but men are far less perceptive, often being completely blind to them, which is why so many men have difficulty finding potential mates. Women's difficulty in finding partners is not about reading signals, it's more about finding a man who'll match their criteria.

Graham somehow knew exactly what to look for and women would describe him as sexy, masculine, humorous, and “someone who makes me feel feminine.” This was their reaction to the constant attention he'd give them and the courtship signals he used. Men, on the other hand, described him as aggressive, insincere, arrogant, and not particularly funny— their reaction to the competition Graham represented. Consequently, Graham had few male friends for obvious reasons—no man likes a potential rival for the attentions of his woman. This chapter is devoted to the female signals Graham could see and to the body language he used in return.





Why Women Always Call the Shots




Ask any man who usually makes the first move in courtship and he will invariably say that men do. All studies into courtship, however, show that women are the initiators 90 percent of the time. A woman does this by sending a series of subtle eye, body, and facial signals to the targeted man, who, assuming he is perceptive enough to pick them up, responds to them. There are men who will approach women in a club or bar without being sent the green light but, while some of these men are regularly successful with finding partners, their overall statistical success rate is low because they weren't invited first— they're simply playing the numbers game.

In courtship, women call the tunes most of

the time—men do most of the dancing.





In these cases, if a man detects that his approach will be unsuccessful, he's likely to pretend he's come to talk to her about other unrelated things and he will use corny lines like “You work at the National Bank, don't you?” or “Aren't you John Smith's sister?” To be successful in courtship by playing the numbers game, a man has to approach a lot of women to make a sale—unless, of course, he looks like Brad Pitt. Any man who crosses the floor to chat up a woman has usually done so at her request after picking up her body-language signals. It just looks as if he made the first move because he made the walk across the floor. Women do initiate up to 90 percent of flirtatious encounters, but it is done so subtly that most men think they are the ones taking the lead.





Differences Between Men and Women




Men find it difficult to interpret the more subtle cues in women's body language and research shows that men tend to mistake friendliness and smiling for sexual interest. This is because men see the world in more sexual terms than women; men have ten to twenty times more testosterone than women, which makes them see the world in terms of sex.

To some men, when a lady says “no”she means

“maybe;” when she says “maybe”she means “yes;” but

if she says “yes” she's no lady.





When they meet a possible partner, women send out subtle, but often deceptive, courting signals to see whether he's worth pursuing. Women tend to bombard men with courting rituals in the first minutes of meeting them. Men may misinterpret these signals and make a clumsy pass. By sending erratic and ambiguous signals in the early stages, women manipulate men into showing their hand. This is one reason why many women have trouble attracting men—men become confused and won't make an approach.





The Attraction Process




As with other animals, human courtship follows a predictable five-step sequence that we all go through when we meet an attractive person.


Stage 1. Eye contact: She looks across the room and spots a man she fancies. She waits till he notices her, then holds his gaze for about five seconds and then turns away. He now keeps watching her to see if she does it again. A woman needs to deliver this gaze, on average, three times before the average man realizes what's happening. This gaze process can be repeated several times and is the start of the flirting process.


Stage 2. Smiling: She delivers one or more fleeting smiles. This is a quick half smile that is intended to give a prospective man the green light to make an approach. Unfortunately, many men are not responsive to these signals, leaving the woman feeling that he's not interested in her.


Stage 3. Preening: She sits up straight to emphasize her breasts and crosses her legs or ankles to show them to best advantage or, if she's standing, she tilts her hips and tilts her head sideways toward one shoulder, exposing her bare neck. She plays with her hair for up to six seconds—suggesting she is grooming herself for her man. She may lick her lips, flick her hair, and straighten her clothing and jewelry. He'll respond with gestures such as standing up straight, pulling his stomach in, expanding his chest, adjusting his clothing, touching his hair, and tucking his thumbs into his belt. They both point their feet or entire bodies toward each other.


Stage 4. Talk: He approaches and attempts to make small talk, using clichés such as, “Haven't I seen you somewhere before?” and other well-worn lines that are purely intended to break the ice.


Stage 5. Touch: She looks for an opportunity to initiate a light touch on the arm, either “accidental” or otherwise. A hand touch indicates a higher level of intimacy than a touch on the arm. Each level of touch is then repeated to check that the person is happy with this level of intimacy and to let them know that the first touch was not accidental. Lightly brushing or touching the shoulder of a man is done to give the impression that the woman cares about his health and appearance. Shaking hands is a quick way to move to the touch stage.


These first five stages of courtship may seem minor or even incidental, but they are critical to starting any new relationship and are the stages that most people, especially men, find difficult. This chapter will examine the signals that are most likely to be sent by men and women—and Graham—during these stages.





The Thirteen Most Common Female Courtship Gestures and Signals




Women use most of the same basic preening gestures as men, including touching the hair, smoothing the clothing, one or both hands on hips, foot and body pointing toward the man, extended intimate gaze, and increasing eye contact. Some women will also adopt the Thumbs-in-Belt gesture, which, although it's a male-assertion gesture, is used more subtly: usually only one thumb is tucked into a belt or protrudes from a handbag or pocket.

Women become more sexually active in the middle of their menstrual cycle, when they are most likely to conceive. It's during this time that they are more likely to wear shorter dresses and higher heels, to walk, talk, dance, act more provocatively, and to use the signals we are about to discuss. What follows is a list of the thirteen most common courtship gestures and signals used by women everywhere to show a man that she could be available.





1. The Head Toss and Hair Flick


This is usually the first display a woman will use when she's around a man she fancies. The head is flicked back to toss the hair over the shoulders or away from the face. Even women with short hair will use this gesture. It's a way for a woman subtly to show that she cares about how she looks to a man. This also lets her expose her armpit, which allows the “sex perfume” known as pheromones to waft across to the target man.





Preening the hair and letting pheromones in the armpit work their magic





2. Wet Lips and Pouting, Mouth Slightly Open


At puberty, a boy's facial bone structure alters dramatically as testosterone gives him a stronger, protruding jawline, larger nose, and more pronounced forehead—all the essentials for protection to the face during encounters with animals or enemies. Girls' bone structure remains largely unchanged and childlike, with more subcutaneous fat, which makes the female adolescent face appear thicker and fuller, particularly the lips. Larger, thicker lips therefore become a signal of femaleness because of their contrast in size to male lips. Some women have collagen injected into their lips to overstate this sexual difference and thereby make themselves more appealing to men. Pouting simply increases the lip display.

A woman's outer genital lips are proportionately the same thickness to her facial lips. Desmond Morris describes this as “self-mimicry,” as it is intended to symbolize the female genital region. The lips can be made to appear wet either by the use of saliva or cosmetics, giving a woman the appearance of sexual invitation.

When a woman becomes sexually aroused, her lips, breasts, and genitals become larger and redder as they fill with blood. The use of lipstick is an Egyptian invention that is four thousand years old and is intended to mimic the reddened genitals of the sexually aroused female. This explains why, in experiments using photos of women wearing various lipstick colors, men consistently find the bright reds the most attractive and sensual.





Sex sirens instinctively know how to use mouth and lip displays to get attention





3. Self-Touching


As stated earlier, our minds get our bodies to act out our secret desires—and so it is with Self-Touching. Women have dramatically more nerve sensors for experiencing touch than men, making them more sensitive to touch sensations. When a woman slowly and sensually strokes her thigh, neck, or throat it implies that, if a man plays his cards right, he may be able to touch her in these same ways. At the same time, her self-touch lets her imagine what it Most pictures of women in sensual poses might feel like if the man include plenty of Self-Touching was initiating the touch.





Most pictures of women in sensual poses include plenty of Self-Touching





4. The Limp Wrist


Walking or sitting while holding a Limp Wrist is a submission signal used exclusively by women and gay men. In a similar way, a bird feigns a damaged wing to distract prey away from its nest. In other words, it's a great attention-getter. It's very attractive to men because it makes them feel as if they can dominate. In business situations, however, a Limp Wrist seriously detracts from a woman's credibility and others will fail to take her seriously, although some men will probably ask her for a date.





Birds will feign an injured wing to get attention; women use a Limp Wrist





5. Fondling a Cylindrical Object


Fondling cigarettes, a finger, the stem of a wineglass, a dangling earring, or any phallic-shaped object is an unconscious indication of what may be in the mind. Taking a ring off and on the finger can also be a mental representation of having sex. When a woman does these things, a man is likely to symbolically try to possess her by fondling her cigarette lighter, car keys, or any personal item she has nearby.





The stem of the wineglass suggesting things that may yet come





6. Exposed Wrists


An interested woman will gradually expose the smooth, soft underside skin of her wrists to the potential male partner and will increase the rate she flashes her wrists as her interest grows. The wrist area has long been considered one of the highly erotic areas of the female body because it is one of the more delicate skin areas; it's uncertain whether this is a learned behavior or is innate, but it certainly operates on an unconscious level. The palms are also usually made visible to the man while she's speaking. Women who smoke cigarettes find this wrist-palm exposure simple to do while smoking by simply holding the palm up beside the shoulder. The Exposed Wrist and Head-Toss gestures are often mimicked by homosexual males who want to take on a feminine appearance.





Exposing the soft underside of the wrists is a powerful attraction signal



Women put perfume on the underside of the wrist believing it has something to do with the wrist pulse distributing the perfume. But its real purpose is to thrust the wrist forward toward a potential partner. The perfume simply draws attention to the woman and lets the man see her underwrists.





7. Sideways Glance Over Raised Shoulder


The Raised Shoulder is self-mimicry of the rounded female breasts. With partially drooped eyelids, the woman holds the man's gaze just long enough for him to notice, then she quickly looks away. This action produces the feeling of peeping in the woman who does it and being peeped at by the man who receives it.





Raising the shoulder highlights the femaleness of roundness and curves





8. Rolling Hips


For childbearing reasons, women have wider hips than men and have a wider crotch gap between the legs. This means that when a woman walks she has an accentuated roll that highlights her pelvic region. Men can't walk like this, so it becomes a powerful sex difference signal. It also explains why few women are good runners, because their wider hips make their legs splay out to the side when they run. Rolling of the hips is one of the subtle female courtship gestures that has been used for centuries in advertising to sell goods and services. Women who see these advertisements have the desire to be like the model depicted, which results in an increased awareness of the product being promoted.





Wiggling when you walk highlights the differences between men and women





9. The Pelvic Tilt


Medical evidence shows that a woman in excellent health and most capable of successfully bearing children has a waist-to-hips ratio of 70 percent; that is, her waist is 70 percent the size of her hips. This gives her what's known as an hourglass figure. Throughout recorded history this is the body ratio that has proved the most dramatic male attention-grabber. Men begin to lose interest when the ratio exceeds 80 percent and, for most men, the greater or lesser the ratio, the less attentive he will be. He completely loses interest when her ratio reaches 100 percent but still maintains a level of interest even when it drops below 70 percent, but 70 percent still remains the perfect ratio for reproductive success. The way a woman highlights this ratio is simple—she simply tilts her pelvis when she stands.

Tilting the pelvis while standing highlights a

woman's ability to bear children successfully.





Professor Devendra Singh, an evolutionary psychologist at the University of Texas, studied the physical attractiveness of Miss America beauty contestants and Playboy centerfolds over a period of fifty years and found that the hips-to-waist ratio that holds the greatest appeal for men is between 67 percent and 80 percent.





Kylie Minogue with a cocktail of the things all men love— long hair, neck display, 70 percent hips-to-waist ratio, open wet mouth, pouting, drooping eyelids, protruding breasts and rounded buttocks, self-touching, and Hand-on-Hip gestures



Professor Singh conducted a test using images of women who were underweight, overweight, and of average weight and showed them to groups of men who were asked to rate them in terms of their attractiveness. Women of average weight with a hips-to-waist ratio of around 70 percent were found to be the most alluring. In the overweight and underweight groups, the women with the narrowest waist got the vote. The experiment's remarkable finding was that men gave the 70 percent hips-to-waist ratio the highest rating even when the woman's weight was quite heavy. This means a woman can be physically larger but will still turn male heads if she has this ratio.





10. Handbag in Close Proximity


Most men have never seen the contents of a woman's handbag and studies show that most men are afraid even to touch her handbag, let alone open it. A woman's handbag is a personal item that's treated by her almost as if it's an extension of her body and so it becomes a strong signal of intimacy when she puts it close to a man. If she finds him particularly attractive, she may slowly fondle and caress her handbag. She can ask him to pass the handbag or to even retrieve something from it. Placing the handbag near him so he can see it or touch it is a strong signal she's interested; keeping it away from him indicates emotional distance.





Placing her handbag close to a man is a sign of acceptance





11. The Knee Point


One leg is tucked under the other and points to the person she finds the most interesting. This is a relaxed position, which also takes the formality out of a conversation and gives the opportunity for a fleeting exposure of the thighs.





Pointing her knee at the most interesting person





12. The Shoe Fondle


Dangling the shoe on the end of the foot also indicates a relaxed attitude and has the phallic effect of thrusting the foot in and out of the shoe. This action unsettles many men without them knowing what is happening.





The shoe gives a clue





The Leg Twine: men's number one female sitting position





13. The Leg Twine


Most men agree that the Leg Twine is the most appealing sitting position a woman can take. It's a gesture that women consciously use to draw attention to their legs. Albert Scheflen states that one leg is pressed firmly against the other to give the appearance of high muscle tone, which, as previously mentioned, is a condition that the body takes when a person is ready for sexual performance.

Other leg signals used by women include crossing and uncrossing the legs slowly in front of the man and gently stroking the thighs with her hand, indicating a desire to be touched.





Without referring back to what you have just read, how many courting signals and gestures can you see?





What Men Look at in Women's Bodies




In Why Men Lie and Women Cry (Orion) we summarized the research about which body parts men and women look at on each other. The research was clear—men's brains are wired to be attracted to women who show the most healthy reproductive ability and sexual availability. When it comes to body shape, both men and women prefer someone with an athletic body shape. To men, this signals high levels of health and a woman's ability to successfully reproduce his genes.

Evidence shows that men are more attracted to women with a childlike face—large eyes, small noses, full lips and cheeks— because these signals evoke paternal, protective feelings in most men. This is why most advertising for cosmetic surgery places so much emphasis on these features. Women, conversely, prefer men with adult faces that show the ability to defend—strong jaws, larger brows, and strong nose.

Women with childlike faces cause the release of hormones

in men that make them want to protect females.





The good news is that a woman doesn't need to be naturally beautiful to attract a man—beauty certainly gives her an initial edge over competitors—she mainly needs to be able to display the signs that she could be available. This is why some women who are not particularly physically attractive always seem to have plenty of suitors. Overall, a man is more attracted to a woman by the signs of her availability than by her physical attractiveness, and you can learn and practice availability signals. Some women are appalled at the idea of modern men being initially attracted to a woman based on her appearance and availability instead of wanting her for her ability to nurture, communicate, be a domestic goddess, or play the piano. They see discussions on this subject as degrading to modern women.

But almost every study into attraction conducted over the last sixty years reached the same conclusions as the painters, poets, and writers over the past six thousand years—a woman's appearance and body and what she can do with it is more attractive to men than her intelligence or assets, even in the politically correct twenty-first century. The twenty-first-century man wants the same immediate things in a woman as his forefathers did at first sight, but, as we said in Why Men Lie and Women Cry, he has different criteria for a long-term partner.

The reality is that you need to attract a man first before he can find out about all your inner virtues. When you go fishing you bait the hook with what the fish likes, not with what you like. Have you ever tasted a worm? You might be repulsed by the thought but, for a fish, it's his favorite dish.





How Beautiful People Miss Out




Most people are tempted to believe that physical appearance is the key to attracting a potential partner, but this is largely an idea promoted by television, films, and the media. Extremely attractive people are rare, and are erroneously promoted as the standard to which we should all aspire, but studies show that most of us are skeptical about beautiful people. The studies found that we prefer to find mates who are roughly as attractive as we are, which means they are more likely to stay and not look for a better offer. This preference appears to be inborn, as babies show a preference for looking at average faces rather than at beautiful ones.





Is He a Butt, Boobs, or Leg Man?




When it comes to a man's favorite female body part, men are universally split into three fairly even groups—boobs, butts, and legs.

In this section, we will be analyzing only the physical characteristics of the female body and why each part has such an impact on the male senses. A woman's body has evolved as a permanent, portable sexual signaling system that is purpose-built to attract male attention for reproduction, and butts, breasts, and legs play the most significant part in this process. This may not be politically correct, but it is biologically correct.





1. Butts


Men find rounded, peach-shaped buttocks the most attractive. Female human buttocks differ from other primates in that other primate females display enlarged, protruding buttocks only when they are ready for mating. Human females display enlarged buttocks permanently and are almost always sexually available to males. This is because one of the main purposes of regular human sexual activity is to encourage long-term pair-bonding for the successful rearing of children.

Humans are the only primates that mate face-to-face —in other primate species, the males approach females from the rear and use her swollen red buttocks as a signal that she's ready for mating. And therein lies the key to men's attraction to women's butts—they always give the impression that she's available for him. Women's buttocks also have two other purposes: they store fat for breastfeeding and act as an emergency food storage in lean times, similar to a camel's hump.





Female humans are the only primates with permanently enlarged buttocks



Wearing designer jeans has also become popular because they highlight the buttocks and give them a firm, rounded look. High-heeled shoes make the wearer arch her back, push out her buttocks, and make her wiggle when she walks, which invariably draws male attention. Marilyn Monroe reputedly chopped three-quarters of an inch off the heel of her left shoe to emphasize her wiggle. The females of several species of beetle also wiggle their rears in front of potential mates to attract attention.





2. The Breasts


Most of the world has developed an obsession with breasts in recent years and cleavage and cosmetic breast enhancement is now a multibillion-dollar business. This is remarkable considering that human breasts are little more than enlarged sweat glands.

Most of the breast consists of fat tissue. This gives them their rounded shape and most of this tissue is not involved in milk production.





Overall, breasts serve one clear purpose—sexual signaling. Breasts mimic a woman's rear view—a relic from the days when humans walked on all fours. If a monkey or chimp walked toward you on two legs you'd be unable to tell whether it was male or female. Humans walk upright on two legs and enlarged female breasts evolved as a mimic of the female rear. Tests conducted with pictures of butt cracks and breast cleavage convincingly show that most men are unable to differentiate one crack from the other.





Tests show that most men can't tell the difference between a butt crack and cleavage



Low-cut dresses and push-up bras emphasize this signal by creating cleavage. Fortunately, nearly all sex research surveys show that men love breasts in most shapes and sizes—it's the cleavage that stimulates men the most. It doesn't matter whether a woman's breasts are the size of a small lemon or look like watermelons—most men are keenly interested in them all and love a cleavage. A woman who is attracted to a man is likely to lean forward and bring her arms closer to her body, which presses her breasts together and makes a cleavage.





Mona Lisa after two weeks in the U.S.A.



Men's favorite breasts are those of a woman at her sexual and reproductive peak—in her late teens and early twenties. These are typical of the breasts seen in men's magazine centerfolds, on erotic dancers, and in advertisements that trade on sex appeal. Researchers at Purdue University in America found that a woman hitchhiker can double the number of lifts she is offered by increasing her bust size by adding two inches of padding.





When Someone Is “Hot Stuff”


The core temperature for the human body is 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit, but the skin temperature varies depending on our emotional state. As mentioned earlier, people who are described as “cold” and “standoffish” are usually also physically cooler people because their blood is drawn into the leg and arm muscles for the “fight or flight” response created by tension. So when you call someone a “cold fish,” you are correct on both the emotional and physical levels. Conversely, when one person is attracted to another, their blood rises to the surface of the skin, making them warmer. This is why lovers who are in the “heat of passion” give a “warm embrace,” have “steamy encounters” and can be “hot stuff.” In many women, this increase in body temperature can be seen as their chests will become flushed or covered in red blotches and their cheeks also flush.

If you're a man, you just got your

money's worth in the last section.





3. The Lure of Long Legs


There is a biological reason why men love women's long legs. When a girl reaches puberty, her legs undergo rapid lengthening as hormones flood her body and change her into a woman. Her extra long legs become a powerful nonverbal signal telling males she is sexually maturing and is now capable of childbearing. This is why long legs have always been associated with potent female sexuality.





Supermodels and film stars have disproportionate bodies that have retained their pubescent long legs



Men love high heels on a woman because it gives her the illusion of having fertile-looking legs. High heels enhance a woman's sexual shape by lengthening her legs, arching her back, forcing her buttocks to protrude, making her feet appear smaller, and thrusting her pelvis forward. This is why the shoe with the highest heel—the stiletto—with its bondage straps, is by far the most efficient sex aide on the market.

High heels lengthen a woman's legs, make her

buttocks sway and her breasts protrude.





Most men also prefer a woman with shapely, thicker legs over those with thinner, spindly legs, because additional fat in the legs highlights the sex difference between male and female legs and is an indicator of better lactation. Men like women's legs to look athletic but will be turned off if she looks like she could play football for England.





Models such as Elle MacPherson and Rachel Hunter turned female attraction signals into a multimillion-dollar business





Male Courtship Signals and Gestures




Male displays involve the show of power, wealth, and status. If you're a woman, you'll probably be disappointed with our summary of male courtship signals because, compared to those of women, there aren't too many. While a woman will dress sensually, wear makeup, and use a wide range of courtship gestures, men rev their car engines, brag about how much they earn, and challenge other men. When it comes to courtship rituals, most men are as effective as someone standing in a river trying to catch fish by hitting them on the head with a big stick. Women have more lures and fishing skills to land their fish than any male could ever hope to acquire.

In this section we'll cover the most common male body-language signals you're likely to see, much of which is focused around his crotch. Men are generally not good at sending or receiving the signals used in the mating game and, as we mentioned earlier, women not only control the game and make the rules, they own the scoreboard. Most of the time, men simply react to signals they see.

Some magazines try to convince readers that men's courtship skills are improving because of the increase in the numbers of men who are paying more attention to their appearance. Men now have facials, do their nails and toenails, tint their hair, straighten their teeth, use hair conditioner and face creams, and wear face powder. In the U.K. in 2004, a study by Gillette showed that Scotsmen were Britain's most vain men, spending an average of sixteen minutes a day in front of a mirror preening themselves. But most of this behavior is an increase in male vanity levels—not in men's ability to read women's courtship signals.

An American survey found the three words women

would most like to hear from their male partner were

not “I love you.” They were: “You've lost weight.”





As with most male animals, the human male displays preening behavior as a potential partner arrives on the scene. In addition to the automatic physiological reactions already mentioned, he will straighten his tie, smooth his collar, brush imaginary dust from his shoulder, touch his cufflinks or watch, and rearrange his shirt, coat, and other clothing.





Male tie-preening gesture





Why Men Talk to Women at the Beginning of a Relationship


Many men understand that talking at length to a woman about the personal intimate details of his or her life wins points and can open her mind—and more—to him. At the beginning of a new relationship a man will often use the talking strategy, but after the honeymoon period he's likely to go back to his stereotypical behavior of not talking—sticking only to facts, information, and solutions to problems when he does talk.





The Male Crotch Obsession


The most direct sexual display a man can make toward a woman is the aggressive Thumbs-in-Belt gesture that highlights his crotch. He may also turn his body toward her and point his foot at her, use an intimate gaze, and hold her gaze for longer than usual. When he's seated or leaning against a wall, he may also spread his legs to display his crotch.

In troops of baboons, and with several other primates, males display their dominance by using a penis display. By spreading their legs to give others a full view of the size of their wedding tackle and giving it the occasional adjustment from time to time, they can constantly assert and reassert their dominant status. This same display is used by human males to assert their manhood, though it is more subtle than the baboons, mainly because of the hefty prison sentence the baboon display would carry.

The fifteenth century saw the introduction of the not-so-subtle codpiece, which purported to display the size of a man's masculinity and therefore his social status. In the twenty-first century, New Guinea natives still employ penis displays, while Western men can achieve the same effect with tight-fitting pants, small-size Speedo swimming trunks, or dangling a large bunch of keys or the long end of a belt in front of their crotch.





These hanging objects give a man the opportunity to reach down from time to time for any necessary adjustments. Most women can't imagine being in a public place and reaching down to scratch their crotch and are amazed that men will do this nonchalantly and with regularity. It's the same message for all male primates; they just use different approaches.





Belt- and crotch-grabbing while dancing are some of the less subtle forms of crotch display





This Mek warrior from Irian Jaya with his traditional penis sheath leaves no one confused about the message





The Crotch Adjust


The most common form of public male sexual display is the Crotch Adjust. Women everywhere complain that they will be talking with a man and suddenly, for no apparent reason, he will begin adjusting or handling his crotch. The implication is that his genitalia are so large and cumbersome that they need constant attention to prevent the cutoff of blood circulation.

The great thing about being a man is you don't

have to leave the room to adjust yourself.





Watch any group of young males together, especially where macho attitudes are encouraged, such as in sporting teams, and you will see continual crotch adjustment as each male unconsciously tries to assert his masculinity in front of the others. Women are horrified when a man then proceeds to get her a drink using the same hand he just used for his adjustments and he then greets people with a handshake.





Wearing a Tie to One Side


If you're a man and you want to find out which women like you, wear a neatly pressed suit and tie, but wear the tie slightly off to one side and put a little lint on one shoulder. Any women who find you attractive can't resist brushing the lint off and straightening your tie so that you look just right.





Wearing the tie slightly off center gives interested women the opportunity to straighten it





Men's Bodies—What Turns Women On the Most




Surveys show that women continually express a preference for men with deeper, smoother voices because deep tones are directly linked to testosterone levels. The change in voice tone is noticeable in boys because, when they reach puberty, their bodies flood with male hormones as they begin to change into men and their voices “crack” virtually overnight. When a man is around a woman he fancies he's likely to start speaking in deeper tones to highlight his masculinity, while a responsive woman is likely to start talking in higher-pitched tones to contrast her femaleness. Since the feminist movement began in the 1960's, women have taken on male job roles and tasks that require the production of testosterone, the hormone that drives us to achieve and that has been described as the “success hormone.” Research now shows that in countries such as the U.S.A., United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand, where feminism has been more influential, women's voices have become deeper because women have become more assertive and authoritative. Hopefully, the hairy chest won't follow.





Is She a Chest, Legs, or Butt Gal?




Women's sexual responses to men are triggered visually by certain aspects of the male body. When it comes to a woman's favorite male body parts, women are also universally split into three groups—legs, butts, and chests/arms with butts taking 40 percent of the votes for first prize. In this section, we will be analyzing only the physical characteristics of the male body and why each part has such an impact on the female senses.

Overall, women also look for athletic body shape, broad shoulders, muscular chest and arms, and a tight butt. Even in the twenty-first century, surveys overwhelmingly show women still want a man who looks as if he can wrestle animals and fight off invaders.

Male bodies are purposely built to chase, catch, and

wrestle animals, carry heavy things, and kill spiders.





1. Broad Shoulders, Chest, and Muscular Arms


The upper torso of the hunting male is wide and tapers to narrow hips, whereas a woman's body is narrower at the shoulders and widens at the hips. Men evolved these features to allow them to lug heavy weapons over long distances and carry home their kills.

The male chest developed to house large lungs enabling more effective distribution of oxygen and allowing him to breathe more efficiently when running and chasing. In past generations, the bigger his chest, the more respect and power a man commanded, and this is still the case with most surviving primitive tribes.





Women are attracted to a well-defined male upper body, but most dislike the “muscle man” bodybuilder look; a woman feels he is likely to be more interested in his own beauty than in hers





2. The Small, Tight Butt


A small, compact butt is the favorite of women everywhere, but few understand its magnetic attraction. The secret is that a tight, muscular rear is necessary to make the strong forward thrusting motion needed for successful sperm transfer during sex. A man with a fat or flabby derrière has difficulty with this forward movement and has a tendency to throw his entire body weight into the thrust. For women, this isn't ideal, as the man's weight can be uncomfortable on her and make it difficult to breathe. By contrast, the small, tight rear promises a greater chance of doing an effective job.





The Internet has many sites for women to rate men's butts





3. Narrow Hips and Muscular Legs


Men's legs are attractive to women only insofar as they are symbols of masculine power and endurance. The powerful, angular legs of the human male are the longest of all primates and his narrow hips allow him to run swiftly over long distances to chase and hunt. Women's wide hips cause many women to have difficulty running, as their lower legs and feet often splay out to the side to balance body weight. Leading U.S. neuropsychology professor Dr. Devendra Singh discovered that women find male hips with a 90 percent waist-to-hips ratio the most appealing.





Summary




The world is in the grip of a singles epidemic. In all Western countries, marriage rates are the lowest they've been in one hundred years—half the rate of twenty-five years ago. In places such as Australia, 28 percent of adults have never married.

The fact that men and women are initially motivated by body features may be disheartening to some but, on the plus side, everyone has the chance to improve their appearance and make a conscious decision to increase their attractiveness to the opposite sex. For those who choose to stay as they are, online dating, IT matchmaking, flirt-a-thons, and speed-dating events are booming everywhere and the New York Times estimated that it had an annual turnover of three billion dollars worldwide in 2003. And because men have more difficulty than women in meeting the opposite sex, most flirting classes worldwide have more male attendees than women.





