Chapter 5



CULTURAL DIFFERENCES





How would a Brit, a German, or an American interpret this gesture?



Imagine this scene—you are inspecting a house with the possibility of purchasing it and you open a bathroom door to see a woman sitting naked in a bathtub. How would you expect the surprised woman to react? A British or American woman would cover her breasts with one hand and her genitals with the other, while a Swedish woman would cover only her genitals. A Muslim woman would cover her face; a Sumatran woman would cover her knees; and a Samoan, only her navel.





We Were Having Pizza at the Time




As we are writing this chapter, we are in Venice, Italy, speaking at a conference on cultural differences. If we had never traveled to Italy, we would have been shocked by what we'd experienced. All cultures walk on the same side of the pavement as they drive on the road. This means if you're British, Australian, South African, or a New Zealander, you drive and walk to the left. The consequence is that you'd find the Italians constantly bumping into you as you walk on the pavement because, as they approach and you step to your left, they step to their right. Wearing sunglasses in foreign countries is the single biggest cause of pavement collisions between cultures because no one can see the other person's gaze to know which way they intend to step. But it's a novel way of meeting new and interesting foreigners.

You'd also be stunned when you go to shake hands to say good-bye to an Italian but, instead, you get a kiss on both cheeks.

“As I departed, the Italian man kissed me on both cheeks.

I was tying my shoelaces at the time.”

WOODY ALLEN





As you talk with local Italians, they seem to stand in your space, continually grabbing you, talking over the top of you, yelling, in fact, and sounding angry about everything. But these things are a normal part of everyday friendly Italian communication. Not all things in all cultures mean the same things.





Take the Cultural Test




How aware are you of cultural differences in body language? Try this exercise—hold up your main hand to display the number five—do it now. Now change it to the number two. If you're Anglo-Saxon, there's a 96 percent chance you'll be holding up your middle and index fingers. If you're European, there's a 94 percent chance you'll be holding up your thumb and index finger. Europeans start counting with the number one on thumb, two on the index finger, three on the middle finger, and so on. Anglo-Saxons count number one on the index finger, two on the middle finger and finish with five on the thumb.

Now look at the following hand signals and see how many different meanings you can assign to each one. For each correct answer, score one point and deduct one point for an incorrect answer. The answers are listed at the bottom of the page.





For each correct answer you get, allocate yourself one point.

A. Europe and North America: OK

Mediterranean region, Russia, Brazil, Turkey: An orifice

signal; sexual insult; gay man

Tunisia, France, Belgium: Zero; worthless

Japan: Money; coins

B. Western countries: One; Excuse me!; As God is my witness; No! (to children)

C. Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Malta: Up yours!

U.S.A.: Two

Germany: Victory

France: Peace

Ancient Rome: Julius Caesar ordering five beers

D. Europe: Three

Catholic countries: A blessing

E. Europe: Two

Britain, Australia, New Zealand: One

U.S.A.: Waiter!

Japan: An insult

F. Western countries: Four

Japan: An insult

G. Western countries: five

Everywhere: Stop!

Greece and Turkey: Go to hell!

H. Mediterranean: Small penis

Bali: Bad

Japan: Woman South America: Thin

France: You can't fool me!

I. Mediterranean: Your wife is being unfaithful

Malta and Italy: Protection against the Evil Eye (when pointed)

South America: Protection against bad luck (when rotated)

U.S.A.: Texas University Logo, Texas Longhorn Football Team

J. Greece: Go to hell!

The West: Two

K. Ancient Rome: Up yours!

U.S.A.: Sit on this! Screw you!

L. Europe: One

Australia: Sit on this! (upward jerk)

Widespread: Hitchhike; good; OK

Greece: Up yours! (thrust forward)

Japan: Man; five

M. Hawaii: Hang loose

Holland: Do you want a drink?

N. U.S.A.: I love you

O. The West: Ten; I surrender

Greece: Up Yours—twice!

Widespread: I'm telling the truth

What did you score?

Over 30 points: You are a well-traveled, well-rounded, broad-thinking person who gets on well with everyone regardless of where they are from. People love you.

15-30 points: You have a basic awareness that others behave differently from you and, with dedicated practice, you can improve the understanding you currently have.

15 points or less: You think everyone thinks like you do. You should never be issued a passport or even be allowed out of the house. You have little concept that the rest of the world is different from you and you think that it's always the same time and season all over the world. You are probably an American.





Why We're All Becoming American




Due to the wide distribution of American television and movies, the younger generations of all cultures are developing a generic form of North American body language. For example, Australians in their sixties will identify the British Two-Fingers-Up gesture as an insult, whereas an Australian teenager is more likely to read it as the number two and will recognize the American Middle-Finger-Raised as a main form of insult. Most countries now recognize the Ring gesture as meaning “OK,” even if it's not traditionally used locally. Young children in every country that has television now wear baseball caps backward and shout “Hasta la vista, baby,” even if they don't understand Spanish.

American television is the prime reason cultural

body-language differences are disappearing.





The word “toilet” is also slowly disappearing from the English language because North Americans, who are rugged pioneers and log splitters, are terrified to say it. North Americans will ask for the “bathroom,” which, in many parts of Europe, contains a bath. Or they ask for a “restroom” and are taken to where there are lounge seats to relax. In England, a “powder room” contains a mirror and washbasin, a “little girls' room” is found in a kindergarten, and “comfort stations” are positioned on the motorways of Europe. And a North American who asks to “wash up” is likely to be gleefully led to the kitchen, given a tea towel, and invited to wash the dishes.





Cultural Basics Are the Same Almost Everywhere




As discussed in Chapter 3, facial expressions and smiles register the same meanings to people almost everywhere. Paul Ekman of the University of California, San Francisco, showed photographs of the emotions of happiness, anger, fear, sadness, disgust, and surprise to people in twenty-one different cultures and found that in every case, the majority in each country agreed about the pictures that showed happiness, sadness, and disgust. There was agreement by the majority in twenty out of the twenty-one countries for the surprise expressions; for fear, only nineteen out of twenty-one agreed; and for anger, eighteen out of twenty-one agreed. The only significant cultural difference was with the Japanese, who described the fear photograph as surprise.

Ekman also went to New Guinea to study the South Fore culture and the Dani people of West Irian who had been isolated from the rest of the world. He recorded the same results, the exception being that, like the Japanese, these cultures could not distinguish fear from surprise.

He filmed these stone-age people enacting these same expressions and then showed them to Americans, who correctly identified them all, proving that the meanings of smiling and facial expressions are universal.

The fact that expressions are inborn in humans was also demonstrated by Dr. Linda Camras from DePaul University in Chicago. She measured Japanese and American infants' facial responses using the Facial Action Coding System (Oster &c Rosenstein, 1991). This system allowed researchers to record, separate, and catalog infant facial expressions and they found that both Japanese and American infants displayed exactly the same emotional expressions.

So far in this book we have concentrated on body language that is generally common to most parts of the world. The biggest cultural differences exist mainly in relation to territorial space, eye contact, touch frequency, and insult gestures. The regions that have the greatest number of different local signals are Arab countries, parts of Asia, and Japan. Understanding cultural differences is too big a subject to be covered in one chapter so we'll stick to the basic things that you are likely to see abroad.





If a Saudi man holds another man's hand in

public it's a sign of mutual respect. But don't

do it in Australia, Texas, or Liverpool, England





Greeting Differences




Handshaking differences can make for some embarrassing and humorous cultural encounters. British, Australian, New Zealander, German, and American colleagues will usually shake hands on meeting, and again on departure. Most European cultures will shake hands with each other several times a day, and some French have been noted to shake hands for up to thirty minutes a day. Indian, Asian, and Arabic cultures may continue to hold your hand when the handshake has ended. Germans and French give one or two firm pumps followed by a short hold, whereas Brits give three to five pumps compared with an American's five to seven pumps. This is hilarious to observe at international conferences where a range of different handshake pumping takes place between surprised delegates. To the Americans, the Germans, with their single pump, seem distant. To the Germans, however, the Americans pump hands as if they are blowing up an airbed.

When it comes to greeting with a cheek kiss, the Scandinavians are happy with a single kiss, the French mostly prefer a double, while the Dutch, Belgians, and Arabs go for a triple kiss. The Australians, New Zealanders, and Americans are continually confused about greeting kisses and bump noses as they fumble their way through a single peck. The Brits either avoid kissing by standing back or will surprise you with a European double kiss. In his book A View from the Summit, Sir Edmund Hillary recounts that on reaching the peak of Everest, he faced Sherpa Tenzing Norgay and offered a proper, British, congratulatory handshake. But Norgay leaped forward and hugged and kissed him—the proper congratulations of Tibetans.





When One Culture Encounters Another




When Italians talk they keep their hands held high as a way of holding the floor in a conversation. What seems like affectionate arm-touching during an Italian conversation is nothing more than a way of stopping the listener from raising his hands and taking the floor. To interrupt an Italian, you must grab his hands in midair and hold them down. As a comparison, the Germans and British look as if they are physically paralyzed when they talk. They are daunted when trying to converse with Italians and French and rarely get an opportunity to speak. French use their forearms and hands when they talk, Italians use their entire arms and body, while the Brits and Germans stand at attention.

When it comes to doing international business, smart attire, excellent references, and a good proposal can all become instantly unstuck by the smallest, most innocent gesture sinking the whole deal. Our research in forty-two countries shows North Americans to be the least culturally sensitive people, with the British coming in a close second. Considering that 86 percent of North Americans don't have a passport, it follows that they would be the most ignorant of international body-language customs. Even George W. Bush had to apply for a passport after becoming President of the United States, so he could travel overseas. The Brits, however, do travel extensively but prefer everyone else to use British body signals, speak English, and serve fish and chips. Most foreign cultures do not expect you to learn their language, but are extremely impressed by the traveler who has taken the time to learn and use local body-language customs. This tells them that you respect their culture.





The English Stiff-Upper-Lip




This gesture relates to pursing the lips to control the face so that facial expressions are reduced and as little emotion as possible is shown. This way the English can give the impression of being in complete emotional control. When Princes Philip, Charles, Harry, and William walked behind the coffin of Diana in 1997, they each held the Stiff-Upper-Lip expression, which, to many in the non-British world, came across as unemotional about Diana's death.

Henry VIII was famous for pulling the Lips-Pursed expression. He had a small mouth and when he stiffened his upper lip for a portrait it looked even smaller. This habit led to a small mouth being a superiority signal among the English of the sixteenth century. The Lips-Pursed is an expression still used today by English people when they feel they are being intimidated by inferior people and this gesture is often accompanied by extended eye blinks.





Henry VIII popularized this gesture as a high-status signal because of his small

mouth, and modern Brits and Americans still use it





The Japanese




One area where handshakes, kissing, and bear hugs have not become established is Japan, where such bodily contact is considered impolite. Japanese people bow on first meeting, the person with the highest status bowing the least and the one with the least status bowing the most. On first meeting, business cards are exchanged, each person assesses the other's status, and appropriate bowing follows.

In Japan, make sure your shoes are spotlessly clean and in

good condition. Every time a Japanese bows, he inspects them.





The Japanese way of listening to someone involves a repertoire of smiles, nods, and polite noises, which have no direct equivalent in other languages. The idea is to encourage you to keep on talking, but this is often misinterpreted by Westerners and Europeans as agreement. The Head-Nod is an almost universal sign for yes, except for the Bulgarians, who use the gesture to signify no, and the Japanese who use it for politeness. If you say something a Japanese doesn't agree with, he'll still say yes—or Hai in Japanese—to keep you talking. A Japanese yes usually means, “Yes, I heard you” and not “Yes, I agree.” For example, if you say to a Japanese person, “You don't agree, do you?” he will nod his head and say yes even though he may not agree. In the Japanese context, it means “Yes, you are correct—I don't agree.”

The Japanese are concerned with saving face and have developed a set of rules to prevent things going wrong, so try to avoid saying no or asking questions when the answer might be no. The closest a Japanese will get to saying the word no is, “It is very difficult” or “We will give this positive study” when they really mean, “Let's forget the whole thing and go home.”





“You Dirty, Disgusting Pig!”—Nose-Blowing




Europeans and Westerners blow their noses into a handkerchief or tissue while Asians and Japanese spit or snort. Each is appalled by what they see as the other's “disgusting” behavior. This dramatic cultural difference is the direct result of the spread of tuberculosis in past centuries. In Europe, tuberculosis was the AIDS of the era—a disease from which there was little hope of survival—so governments instructed people to blow their nose to avoid further spreading the disease. This is why Westerners react so strongly to spitting—a spitting person could spread tuberculosis around, so people were as alarmed by that prospect as they would be if you could spread AIDS by spitting.

Modern nose-blowing is the result of a

past epidemic of tuberculosis.





If tuberculosis had been a problem in Eastern countries, the cultural reaction would be the same as with Westerners. As a result, the Japanese are appalled when someone produces a handkerchief, blows their nose into it, and puts it back in their pocket, purse, or up their sleeve! Japanese are unimpressed at the English custom of men wearing a handkerchief in their jacket top pocket. This is the equivalent of proudly dangling a roll of toilet paper from the pocket, ready for action. Asians believe, correctly, that it is a healthier option to spit, but it is a habit that is repulsive to Westerners and Europeans. This is why business meetings between Westerners and Europeans can fail when they've all got a cold. So don't feel upset by an Asian who spits or snorts, and never blow your nose in front of a Japanese person.





The Three Most Common Cross-Cultural Gestures




Let's examine the cultural interpretations and implications of three common hand gestures: the Ring, the Thumb-Up, and the V-sign.





1. The Ring


This gesture was popularized in the U.S.A. during the early nineteenth century by the newspapers that were starting a craze of using initials to shorten common phrases. There are many different views about what the initials OK originally stood for, some believing it stood for “all correct,” which was regularly misspelled as “oll korrect,” while others say that it means the opposite of “knockout,” that is, KO.





“OK” to a Westerner, “money” to a Japanese, “zero” to the French, and insulting to the Turks and Brazilians



Another popular theory is that it is an abbreviation of “Old Kinderhook,” from the birthplace of a nineteenth-century American president who used the initials as a campaign slogan. It's obvious that the ring itself represents the letter O in the OK signal. The OK meaning is common to all English-speaking countries and its meaning is fast spreading everywhere due to American television and movies, but it has other origins and meanings in certain places. For example, in France and Belgium it also means “zero” or “nothing.” In a Paris restaurant one evening, the waiter showed us to our table and asked, “Is the table okay?” We flashed him the OK signal and he responded, “Well, if you don't like it here we'll find you another table … ” He had interpreted the OK signal as meaning “zero” or “worthless”—in other words, he thought we had communicated that we didn't like the table.

Use the OK gesture to tell a French person their cooking

is wonderful, and they'll probably throw you out.





In Japan it can mean “money;” if you're doing business in Japan and you make this sign for OK a Japanese may think you're asking them for a bribe. In some Mediterranean countries it's an orifice signal, often used to imply that a man is homosexual. Show a Greek man the OK signal and he may think you're implying you or he is gay, while a Turk might think you're calling him an “arsehole.” It's rare in Arab countries, where it is used as either a threat signal or as an obscenity.

In the 1950's, before he became president, Richard Nixon visited Latin America on a goodwill tour to try to patch up strained relations with the locals. As he stepped out of his plane he showed the waiting crowds the American OK signal and was stunned as they began booing and hissing at him. Being unaware of local body-language customs, Nixon's OK signal had been read as “You're all a bunch of arseholes.”

If you travel internationally, the safest rule is to always ask the locals to show you their insult signals to avoid any possible embarrassing circumstances.





2. The Thumb-Up


In places that have strong British influence, such as Australia, the U.S.A., South Africa, Singapore, and New Zealand, the Thumb-Up gesture has three meanings: it's commonly used by hitchhikers who are thumbing a lift; it is an OK signal; and when the thumb is jerked sharply upward it becomes an insult, meaning “up yours” or “sit on this.” In some countries, such as Greece, the thumb is thrust forward and its main meaning is “get stuffed!”

Never hitchhike in Greece.





As we have already demonstrated, when Europeans count from one to five, they use the Thumb-Up to mean “one,” the index finger becomes “two,” whereas most English-speaking people count “one” on the index finger and “two” on the middle finger. In this case, the Thumb-Up will represent the number “five.”





This can mean “good,” “one,” “up yours” or “sit on this” depending where you live



Being the most powerful digit on the hand, it is used as a sign of power and can be seen protruding from pockets, waistcoats, and on lapels. The thumb is also used in combination with other gestures as a power and superiority signal or in situations where people try to get us “under their thumb.” The thumb is referred to in this expression because of its physical power.





3. The V-Sign


This sign is common in Australia, New Zealand, and Great Britain and carries an “up yours” interpretation. Winston Churchill popularized the “V for victory” sign during the Second World War, but his two-fingered version was done with the palm facing out, whereas the palm faces toward the speaker for the obscene insult version.





This can mean “two” to an American, “victory” to a German, and “up yours” in Britain



Its origin can be traced back centuries to the English archers who used these two fingers to fire their arrows. It was considered the ultimate degradation for a skilled archer to be captured and, rather than be executed, have his two shooting fingers removed. The two-fingered V-sign quickly became used as a goading signal in battle by the British to show their enemies “I've still got my shooting fingers.”

In parts of Europe, however, the palm-facing-in version still means “victory,” so an Englishman who uses it to tell a German “up yours” could leave the German thinking he'd won a prize. This signal now also means the number two in some parts of Europe, and if the insulted European was a bartender, his response could be to give an Englishman, American, or Australian two mugs of beer.





To Touch or Not to Touch?




Whether or not someone will be offended by being touched during conversation depends on their culture. For example, the French and Italians love to continually touch as they talk, while the British prefer not to touch at any time unless it's on a sports field in front of a large audience. Intimate embracing by British, Australian, and New Zealand sportsmen is copied from South American and Continental sportsmen who embrace and kiss each other after a goal is scored and continue this intimate behavior in the dressing rooms. The moment the Aussies, Brits, and Kiwis leave the field, it reverts to the “hands off—or else” policy.

British men will only touch each other on a sports

field when someone scores a point or a goal and then

it's a full embrace, kiss, and the odd grope. But try it

in the pub and see what happens.





Dr. Ken Cooper also studied touch frequencies in a number of countries and recorded the following results for touches per hour: Puerto Rico, 180; Paris, 110; Florida, 2; London, 0.

From our research and personal experience, here's a ready reckoner of places where it's acceptable to touch or not:

Don't Touch Do Touch

Germany India

Japan Turkey

England France

U.S.A. & Canada Italy

Australia Greece

New Zealand Spain

Estonia Middle East

Portugal Parts of Asia

Northern Europe Russia

Scandinavia





How to Offend Other Cultures




When it comes to inadvertently offending other cultures, Americans usually take first prize. As mentioned, most Americans don't have a passport and believe the rest of the world thinks like them and wants to be like them. Here's a picture of George W. Bush using the signature gesture of the Texas Longhorn football team, of which he is a supporter. The index finger and little finger represent the horns of the bull and this football gesture is recognized by most Americans.





Showing this American football gesture

is a jailable offense in Italy



In Italy, this gesture is known as the “cuckold” and is used to tell a man that other men are screwing his wife. In 1985, five Americans were arrested in Rome for jubilantly dancing and using this gesture outside the Vatican following the news of a major Longhorns win in the U.S.A. Apparently the Pope was unimpressed.





Summary




People do business with people who make them feel comfortable and it comes down to sincerity and good manners. When entering a foreign country, concentrate on reducing the broadness of your body language until you have the opportunity to observe the locals. A simple way to learn and understand cultural body-language differences is to record several foreign films and replay them with the sound off, but don't read the subtitles. Try to work out what is happening, then watch again and read the subtitles to check your accuracy.

If you're not sure how to be polite in someone else's culture,

ask the locals to show you how things are done.





Cultural misinterpretations of gestures can produce embarrassing results and a person's background should always be considered before jumping to conclusions about the meaning of his or her body language and gestures.

If you regularly travel internationally, we recommend Roger Axtell's Gestures: Do's and Taboos of Body Language Around the World (John Wiley & Sons). Axtell identified over 70,000 different physical signs and customs globally and shows you how to do business in most cultures.





