Introduction
1 SOCIAL INTERCOURSE
THE theory of social intercourse, which has been outlined at some length in Transnational Analysis
may be summarized as follows.
Spitz has found that infants deprived of handling over a long period will tend at length to sink into
an irreversible decline and are prone to succumb eventually to intercurrent disease. In effect, this
means that what he calls emotional deprivation can have a fatal outcome. These observations give
rise to the idea of stimulus-hunger, and indicate that the most favored forms of stimuli are those
provided by physical intimacy, a conclusion not hard to accept on the basis of everyday experience.
An allied phenomenon is seen in grown-ups subjected to sensory deprivation. Experimentally, such
deprivation may call forth a transient psychosis, or at least give rise to temporary mental
disturbances. In the past, social and sensory deprivation is noted to have had similar effects in
individuals condemned to long periods of solitary imprisonment. Indeed, solitary confinement is
one of the punishments most dreaded even by prisoners hardened to physical brutality, and is now a
notorious procedure for inducing political compliance. (Conversely, the best of the known weapons
against compliance is social organization.)
On that biological side, it is probable that emotional and sensory deprivation tends to bring about or
encourage organic changes. If the reticular activating system8 of the brain stem is not sufficiently
stimulated, degenerative changes in the nerve cells may follow, at least indirectly. This may be a
secondary effect due to poor nutrition, but the poor nutrition itself may be a product of apathy, as in
infants suffering from marasmus. Hence a biological chain may he postulated leading from
emotional and sensory deprivation through apathy to degenerative changes and death. In this sense,
stimulus-hunger has the same relationship to survival of the human organism as food-hunger.
Indeed, not only biologically but also psychologically and socially, stimulus-hunger in many ways
parallels the hunger for food. Such terms as malnutrition, satiation, gourmet, gourmand, faddist,
ascetic, culinary arts, and good cook are easily transferred from the field of nutrition to the field of
sensation. Overstuffing has its parallel in overstimulation. In both spheres, under ordinary
conditions where ample supplies are available and a diversified menu is possible, choices will be
heavily influenced by an individual's idiosyncrasies. It is possible that some or many of these
idiosyncrasies are constitutionally determined, but this is irrelevant to the problems at issue here.
The social psychiatrist's concern in the matter is with what happens after the infant is separated
from his mother. in the normal course of growth. What has been said so far may be summarized by
the "colloquialism":7 "If you are not stroked, your spinal cord will shrivel up." Hence, after the
period of close intimacy with the mother is over, the individual for the rest of his life is confronted
with a dilemma upon whose horns his destiny and survival are continually being tossed. One born
is the social, psychological and biological forces which stand in the way of continued physical
intimacy in the infant style; the other is his perpetual striving for its attainment. Under most
conditions he will compromise. He learns to do with more subtle, even symbolic, forms of handling,
until the merest nod of recognition may serve the purpose to some extent, although his original
craving for physical contact may remain unabated.
This process of compromise may be called by various terms, such as sublimation; but whatever it is
called, the result is a partial transformation of the infantile stimulus-hunger into something which
may be termed recognition-hunger. As the complexities of compromise increase, each person
becomes more and more individual in his quest for recognition, and it is these differentia which
lend variety to social intercourse and which determine the individual's destiny. A movie actor may
require hundreds of strokes each week from anonymous and undifferentiated admirers to keep his
spinal cord from shriveling, while a scientist may keep physically and mentally healthy on one
stroke a year from a respected master.
"Stroking" may be used as a general term for intimate physical contact; in practice it may take
various forms. Some people literally stroke an infant; others hug or pat it, while some people pinch
4

it playfully or flip it with a fingertip. These all have their analogues in conversation, so that it seems
one might predict how an individual would handle a baby by listening to him talk. By an extension
of meaning, "stroking" may be employed colloquially to denote any act implying recognition of
another's presence. Hence a stroke may be used as the fundamental unit of social action. An
exchange of strokes constitutes a transaction, which is the unit of social intercourse.
As far as the theory of games is concerned, the principle which emerges here is that any social
intercourse whatever has a biological advantage over no intercourse at all. This has been
experimentally demonstrated in the case of rats through some remarkable experiments by S. Levine
8 in which not only physical, mental and emotional development but also the biochemistry of the
brain and even resistance to leukemia were favorably affected by handling. The significant feature
of these experiments was that gentle handling and painful electric shocks were equally effective in
promoting the health of the animals.
This validation of what has been said above encourages us to proceed with increased confidence to
the next section.

2 THE STRUCTURING OF TIME
Granted that handling of infants, and its symbolic equivalent in grown-ups, recognition, have a
survival value. The question is, What next? In everyday terms, what can people do after they have
exchanged greetings, whether the greeting consists of a collegiate "Hi!" or an Oriental ritual lasting
several hours? After stimulus-hunger and recognition-hunger comes structure-hunger. The
perennial problem of adolescents is: "What do you say to her (him) then?" And to many people
besides adolescents, nothing is more uncomfortable than a social hiatus, a period of silent,
unstructured time when no one present can think of anything more interesting to say than; "Don't
you think the walls are perpendicular tonight?" The eternal problem of the human being is how to
structure his waking hours. In this existential sense, the function of all social living is to lend
mutual assistance for this project.
The operational aspect of time-structuring may be called programming. In has three aspects:
material, social and individual. The most common, convenient, comfortable, and utilitarian method
of structuring time is by a project designed to deal with the material of external reality: what is
commonly known as work. Such a project is technically called an activity; the term "work" is
unsuitable because a general theory of social psychiatry must recognize that social intercourse is
also a form of work.
Material programming arises from the vicissitudes encountered in dealing with external reality; it is
of interest here only insofar as activities offer a matrix for "stroking," recognition, and other more
complex forms of social intercourse. Material programming is not primarily a social problem; in
essence it is based on data processing. The activity of building a boat relies on a long series of
measurements and probability estimates, and any social exchange which occurs must be
subordinated to these in order for the building to proceed.
Social programming results in traditional ritualistic or semi-ritualistic interchanges. The chief
criterion for it is local acceptability, popularity called "good manners." Parents in all parts of the
world teach their children manners, which means that they know the proper greeting, eating,
courting and mourning rituals, and also how to carry on topical conversations with appropriate
strictures and reinforcements. The strictures and reinforcements constitute tact or diplomacy, some
of which is universal and some local. Belching at meals or asking after another man's wife are each
encouraged or forbidden by local ancestral tradition, and indeed there is a high degree of inverse
correlation between these particular transactions. Usually in localities where people belch at meals,
it is unwise to ask after the womenfolk; and in localities where people are asking after the
womenfolk, it is unwise to belch at meals. Usually formal rituals precede semi-ritualistic topical
conversations, and the latter may be distinguished by calling them -pastimes.
As people become better acquainted, more and more individual programming creeps in, so that
"incidents" begin to occur. These incidents superficially appear to be adventitious, and may be so
described by the parties concerned, but careful scrutiny reveals that they tend to follow definite
5

patterns which are amenable to sorting and classification, and that the sequence is circumscribed by
unspoken rules and regulations. These regulations remain latent as long as the amities or hostilities
proceed according to Hoyle, but they become manifest if an illegal move is made, giving rise to a
symbolic, verbal or legal cry of "Foul!" Such sequences, which in contrast to pastimes are based
more on individual than on social programming, may be called games. Family life and married life,
as well as life in organizations of various kinds, may year after year be based on variations of the
same game.
To say that the bulk of social activity consists of playing games does not necessarily mean that it is
mostly "fun" or that the parties are not seriously engaged in the relationship. On the one hand,
"playing" football and other athletic "games" may not be fun at all, and the players may be
intensely grim; and such games share with gambling and other forms of "play" the potentiality for
being very serious indeed, sometimes fatal. On the other hand, some authors, for instance Huizinga,
9 include under "play" such serious things as cannibal feasts. Hence calling such tragic behavior as
suicide, alcohol and drug addiction, criminality or schizophrenia "playing games" is not
irresponsible, facetious or barbaric. The essential characteristic of human play is not that the
emotions are spurious, but that they are regulated. This is revealed when sanctions are imposed on
an illegitimate emotional display. Play may be grimly serious, or even fatally serious, but the social
sanctions are serious only if the rules are broken.
Pastimes and games are substitutes for the real living of real intimacy. Because of this they may be
regarded as preliminary engagements rather than as unions, which is why they are characterized as
poignant forms of play. Intimacy begins when individual (usually instinctual) programming
becomes more intense, and both social patterning and ulterior restrictions and motives begin to give
way. It is the only completely satisfying answer to stimulus-hunger, recognition-hunger and
structure-hunger. Its prototype is the act of loving impregnation.
Structure-hunger has the same survival value as stimulus-hunger. Stimulus-hunger and recognitionhunger express the need to avoid sensory and emotional starvation, both of which lead to biological
deterioration. Structure-hunger expresses the need to avoid boredom, and Kierkegaard10 has
pointed out the evils which result from unstructured time. If it persists for any length of time,
boredom becomes synonymous with emotional starvation and can have the same consequences.
The solitary individual can structure time in two ways: activity and fantasy. An individual can
remain solitary even in the presence of others, as every schoolteacher knows. When one is a
member of a social aggregation of two or more people, there are several options for structuring
time. In order of complexity, these are: (1) Rituals (2) Pastimes (3) Games (4) Intimacy and (5)
Activity, which may form a matrix for any of the others. The goal of each member of the
aggregation is to obtain as many satisfactions as possible from his transactions with other members.
The more accessible he is, the more satisfactions he can obtain. Most of the programming of his
social operations is automatic. Since some of the "satisfactions" obtained under this programming,
such as self-destructive ones, are difficult to recognize in the usual sense of the word
"satisfactions," it would be better to substitute some more non-committal terra, such as "gains" or
"advantages."
The advantages of social contact revolve around somatic and psychic equilibrium. They are related
to the following factors: (1) the relief of tension (2) the avoidance of noxious situations (3) the
procurement of stroking and (4) the maintenance of an established equilibrium. All these items
have been investigated and discussed in great detail by physiologists, psychologists, and
psychoanalysts. Translated into terms of social psychiatry, they may be stated as (1) the primary
internal advantages (2) the primary external advantages (3) the secondary advantages and (4) the
existential advantages. The first three parallel the "gains from illness" described by Freud: the
internal paranosic gain, the external paranosic gain, and the eplnosic gain, respectively.11
Experience has shown that it is more useful and enlightening to investigate social transactions from
the point of view of the advantages gained than to treat them as defensive operations. In the first
place, the best defense is to engage in no transactions at all; in the second place, the concept of

6

"defenses" covers only part of the first two classes of advantages, and the rest of them, together
with the third and fourth classes, are lost to this point of view.
The most gratifying forms of social contact, whether or not they are embedded in a matrix of
activity, are games and intimacy. Prolonged intimacy is rare, and even then it is primarily a private
matter; significant social intercourse most commonly takes the form of games, and that is the
subject which principally concerns us here. For further information about rime-structuring, the
author's book on group dynamics should be consulted.
REFERENCES
1. Berne, E. Transnational Analysis in Psychotherapy, Grove Press, Inc., New York, 1961.
2. Spitz, R. "Hospitalism: Genesis of Psychiatric Conditions in Early Childhood." Psychoanalytic
Study of the Child. 1: 53-74, 1945.
3. Belbenoit, Rene. Dry Guillotine. E. P. Dutton & Company, New York, 1938.
4. Seaton, G. J. Isle of the Damned. Popular Library, New York, 1952.
5. Kinkead, E. In Every War But One. W. W. Norton & Company, New York, 1959.
6. French, J. D. "The Reticular Formation." Scientific American. 196: 54-60, May, 1957.
7. The "colloquialisms" used are those evolved in the course of time at the San Francisco Social
Psychiatry Seminars.
8. Levine, S. 'Stimulation in Infancy." Scientific American. 202: 80-86, May, 1960.
————. "Infantile Experience and Resistance to Physiological Stress." Science. 126: 405,
August 30, 1957.
9. Huizinga, J. Homo Ludens, Beacon Press, Boston, 1955.
10. Kierkegaard, S. A Kierkegaard Anthology, ed. R. Bretall. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1947, pp. 22 ff.
11. Freud, S. "General Remarks on Hysterical Attacks." Collected Papers, Hogarth Press, London,
1933, II, p. 102.
————. "Analysis of a Case of Hysteria." Ibid. Ill, p. 54.
12. Berne, E. The Structure and Dynamics of Organizations and Groups. J. B. Lippincott Company,
Philadelphia and Montreal, 1963. (See especially Chapters 11 and 120

7

PART I
Analysis of Games
