CHAPTER TEN
Underworld Games
WITH the infiltration of the "helping" professions into the courts, probation departments and
correctional facilities, and with the increasing sophistication o£ criminologists and law enforcement
officers, those concerned should be aware of the more common games prevalent in the underworld,
both in prison and out of it. These include "Cops and Robbers," "How Do You Get Out of Here"
and "Let's Pull a Fast One on Joey."

1 COPS AND ROBBERS
Thesis. Because many criminals are cop-haters, they seem to get as much satisfaction from
outwitting the police as from their criminal gains, often more. Their crimes, at the Adult level, are
games played for the material rewards, the take; but at the Child level it is the thrill of the chase:
the getaway and the cool-off.
Curiously enough, the childhood prototype of "Cops and Robbers" is not cops and robbers but hideand-seek, in which the essential element is the chagrin of being found. Younger children readily
betray this. If father finds them too easily, the chagrin is there without much fun. But father, if he is
a good player, knows what to do; he holds off, whereupon the little boy gives him a clue by calling
out, dropping something or banging. Thus he forces father to find him, but still shows chagrin; this
time he has had more fun because of the increased suspense. If father gives up, the boy usually
feels disappointed rather than victorious. Since the fun of being hidden was there, evidently that is
not where the trouble lies, What he is disappointed about is not being caught. When his turn comes
to hide, father knows he is not supposed to outwit the little boy for very one just enough to make it
fun; and he is wise enough to look chagrined when he is caught. It soon becomes clear that being
found is the necessary payoff.
Hence hide-and-seek is not a mere pastime but a true game At the social level it is a battle of wits,
and is most satisfying when the Adult of each player does his best; at the psychological level,
however, it is set up like compulsive gambling, in which White's Adult has to lose in order for his
Child to win. Not being caught is actually the antithesis. Among older children, one who finds an
insoluble hiding place is regarded as not being a good sport, since he has spoiled the game, He has
eliminated the Child element and turned the whole thing into an Adult procedure. He is no longer
playing for fun. He is in the same class as the owner of a casino, or some professional criminals,
who are really out for money rather than sport.
There seem to be two distinctive types of habitual criminals: those who are in crime primarily for
profit, and those who are in it primarily for the game—with a large group in between who can
handle it either way. The "compulsive winner," the big money-maker whose Child really does not
want to be caught, rarely is, according to reports; he is an untouchable, for whom the fix is always
in. The "compulsive loser," on the other hand, who is playing "Cops and Robbers" (C&R), seldom
does very well financially. The exceptions to this often seem to be due to luck rather than skill; in
the long run even the lucky ones usually end up as their Child requires, squawking rather than
riding high.
The C&R player, with whom we are concerned here, in some ways resembles, the Alcoholic. He
can shift roles from Robber to Cop and from' Cop to Robber. In some cases he may play the
Parental Cop during the day and the Child Robber after dark. There is a Cop in many Robbers, and
a Robber in many Cops. If the criminal "reforms," he may play the role of Rescuer, becoming a
social worker or a mission worker; but the Rescuer is Far less important in this game than in
"Alcoholic." Ordinarily, however, the player's role as Robber is his destiny, and each has his own
modus operandi for getting caught. He may make it tough or easy for the Cops.
The situation is similar with gamblers. At the social or sociological level a "professional" gambler
is one whose chief interest in life is gambling. But at the psychological level there are two different
kinds of people who are professional gamblers. There are those who spend their time gaming, i.e.,
59

playing with Fate, in whom the strength of the Adult's desire to win is exceeded only by the
strength of the Child's need to lose. Then there are those who run gambling houses and actually do
earn a living, usually a very good one, by providing opportunities for gamesters to play; they
themselves are not playing, and try to avoid playing, although occasionally under certain conditions
they will indulge themselves and enjoy it, just as a straight criminal may occasionally play a game
of C&R,
This throws light on why sociological and psychological studies of criminals have been generally
ambiguous and unproductive: they are dealing with two different kinds of people who cannot be
adequately differentiated in the ordinary theoretical or empirical frameworks. The same is true in
studying gamblers. Transactional and game analyses offer an immediate solution for this. They
remove the ambiguity by distinguishing transactionally, below the social level, between "players"
and "straight professionals."
Let us now turn from this general thesis to consider specific examples. Some burglars do their jobs
without any waste motion. The "Cops and Robbers" burglar leaves his calling card in gratuitous
acts of vandalism, such as spoiling valuable clothing with secretions and excretions. The straight
bank robber, according to reports, takes every possible precaution to avoid violence; the C&R bank
robber is only looking for an excuse to vent his anger. Like any professional, a straight criminal
likes his jobs to be as clean as circumstances permit. The C&R criminal is compelled to blow off
steam in the course of his work. The true professional is said never to operate until the fix is in; the
player is willing to take on the law barehanded. Straight professionals are well aware, in their own
way, of the game of C&R. If a gang member shows too much interest in the game, to the point of
jeopardizing the job, and particularly if his need to be caught begins to show, they will take drastic
measures to prevent a recurrence. Perhaps it is just because straight professionals are not playing
C&R that they are so seldom caught, and hence so rarely studied sociologically, psychologically
and psychiatrically; and this also applies to gamblers. Hence most of our clinical knowledge about
criminals and gamblers refers to players rather than to straight professionals.
Kleptomaniacs (as opposed to professional shoplifters) are examples of how widely trivial C&R is
played. It is probable that a very large percentage of Occidentals, at least, have played C&R in
fantasy, and that is what sells newspapers in our half of the world. This fantasy frequently occurs in
the form of dreaming up the "perfect murder," which is playing the hardest possible game and
completely outwitting the cops.
Variations of C&R are "Auditors and Robbers," played by embezzlers with the same rules and the
same payoff; Customs and Robbers," played by smugglers; etc. Of special interest is the criminal
variation of "Courtroom." Despite all his precautions, the professional may occasionally be arrested
and brought to trial. For him "Courtroom" is a procedure, which he carries out according to the
instructions of his legal advisers. For the lawyers, if they are compulsive winners, "Courtroom" is
essentially a game played with the jury in which the object is to win, not lose, and this is regarded
as a constructive game by a large segment of society.
Antithesis. This is the concern of qualified criminologists rather than psychiatrists. The police and
judiciary apparatus are not antithetical, but are playing their roles in the game under the rules set up
by society.
One thing should be emphasized, however. Research workers in criminology may joke that some
criminals behave as though they enjoyed the chase and 'wanted to be caught, or they may read the
idea and agree in a deferential way. But they show little tendency to consider such an "academic"
factor as decisive in their "serious" work. For one thing, there is no way to unmask this element
through the standard methods of psychological research. The investigator must therefore either
overlook a crucial point because he cannot work it with his research tools, or else change his tools.
The fact is that those tools have so far not yielded one single solution to any problem in
criminology. Researchers might therefore be better off discarding the old methods and tackling the
problem freshly. Until C&R is accepted not merely as an interesting anomaly, but as the very heart
of the matter in a significant percentage of cases, much research in criminology will continue to
deal with trivialities, doctrines, peripheral issues or irrelevancies.
60

ANALYSIS
Thesis: See if you can catch me. Aim: Reassurance. Roles: Robber, Cop (Judge).
Dynamics: Phallic intrusion, e.g. (1) Hide-and-seek, tag. (2) Crime.
Social Paradigm: Parent-Child.
Child: "See if you can catch me." Parent: "That's my job." Psychological Paradigm: Parent-Child.
Child: "You must catch me." Parent: "Aha, there you are."
Moves: (1) W: Defiance. B: Indignation. (2) W: Concealment. B: Frustration. (3) W: Provocation.
B: Victory.
Advantages: (1) Internal Psychological—material indemnification for old wrong. (2) External
Psychological—counterphobic. (3) Internal Social—See if you can catch me. (4) External Social-I
almost got away with it. (Pastime: They almost got away with it.) (5) Biological-notoriety. (6)
Existential: I've always been a loser,

2 HOW DO YOU GET OUT OF HERE
Thesis. The historical evidence is that those prisoners survive best who have their time structured
by an activity, a pastime or a game. This is apparently well known to political police, who are said
to break some prisoners down simply by keeping them inactive and in a state of social deprivation.
The favored activity of solitary prisoners is reading or writing books, and the favored pastime is
escape, some of whose practitioners, such as Casanova and Baron Trench, have become famous.
The favored game is "How Do You Get Out of Here1?" ("Want Out"), which may also be played in
state hospitals. It must be distinguished from the operation (see p. 48) of the same name, known as
"Good Behavior." An inmate who really wants to be free will find out how to comply with the
authorities so as to be released at the earliest possible moment. Nowadays this may often be
accomplished by playing a good game of "Psychiatry," Group Therapy Type. The game of "Want
Out," however, is played by inmates or by patients whose Child does not want to get out. They
simulate "Good Behavior," but at the critical point they sabotage themselves so as not to be
released. Thus in "Good Behavior" Parent, Adult and Child work together to be discharged; in
"Want Out" Parent and Adult go through the prescribed motions until the critical moment, when the
Child, who is actually frightened at the prospect of venturing into the uncertain world, takes over
and spoils the effect. "Want Out" was common in the late 1930's among recently arrived
immigrants from Germany who became psychotic. They would improve and beg for release from
the hospital; but as the day of liberation approached, their psychotic manifestations would recur.
Antithesis. Both "Good Behavior" and "Want Out" are recognized by alert administrators and can
be dealt with at die executive level. Beginners in group therapy, however, are often taken in. A
competent group therapist, knowing these are die most frequent manipulations in psychiatrically
oriented prisons, will be watching for them and will ferret them out at an early phase. Since "Good
Behavior" is an honest operation, it may be treated as such, and there is no harm in discussing it
openly. "Want Out," on the other hand, requires active therapy if the frightened inmate is to be
rehabilitated.
Relatives. A close relative of "Want Out" is an operation called "You've Got to Listen." Here the
inmate of an institution or the client of a social agency demands the right to make complaints. The
complaints are often irrelevant. His main purpose is to assure himself that he will be listened to by
the authorities. If they make the mistake of thinking that he expects the complaints to be acted on
and cut him off as too demanding, there may be trouble. If they accede to his demands, he will
increase them. If diey merely listen patiently and with signs of interest, the "Got to Listen" player
will be satisfied and cooperative, and will not ask for anything more. The administrator must learn
to distinguish "You've Got to Listen" from serious demands for remedial action.2
"Bum Rap" is another game that belongs in this family. A straight criminal may holler "Bum Rap"
in a real effort to get out, in which case it is part of the procedure. The inmate who plays "Bum

61

Rap" as a game, however, does not use it effectively to try to get out, since if he gets out be will no
longer have much excuse to holler.

3 LET'S PULL A FAST ONE ON JOEY
Thesis. The prototype of this game is "The Big Store," die big-time confidence game, but many
small gifts and even the badger game are FOOJY. No man can be beaten at FOOJY unless he has
larceny in his veins, because the first move is for Black to tell White that dumb-honest-old-Joey is
just waiting to be taken. If White were completely honest, he would either back off or warn Joey,
but he doesn't. Just as Joey is about to pay off, something goes wrong, and White finds that his
investment is gone. Or in the badger game, just as Joey is about to be cuckolded, he happens to
walk in. Then White, who was playing his own rules in his own honest way, finds that he has to
play Joey's rules, and they hurt.
Curiously enough, the mark is supposed to know the rules of FOOJY and stick to them. Honest
squawking is a calculated risk of the con mob; they will not hold that against White, and he is even
allowed a certain latitude in lying to the police to save his face. But if he goes too far and accuses
them falsely of burglary, for example, that is cheating, and they resent it. On the other hand, there is
little sympathy for a con man who gets into trouble by working a mark who is drunk, since this is
improper procedure, and be should know better. The same applies if he is stupid enough to pick a
mark with a sense of humor, since it is well known that such people cannot be trusted to play the
straight man in FOOJY all the way down the line through the terminal game of "Cops and
Robbers." Experienced con men are scared of marks who laugh after they have been taken.
It should be noted that a practical joke is not a game of FOOJY, because in a practical joke Joey is
the one who suffers, while in FOOJY Joey comes out on top, and White is the one who suffers. A
practical joke is a pastime, while FOOJY is a game in which the joke is arranged to backfire.
It is evident that FOOJY is a three- or four-handed game, with the police playing the fourth hand,
and that it is related to "Let's You and Him Fight."
NOTE
Thanks are due to Dr. Franklin Emst of the California Medical Facility at Vacaville, Mr. William
Collins of the California Rehabilitation Center at Norco, and Mr. Laurence Means of the California
Institution for Men at Tehachapi, for their continued interest in studying the game of "Cops and
Robbers" and for their helpful discussions and criticisms.
REFERENCES
1. Frederick Wiseman, in "Psychiatry and the Law: Use and Abuse of Psychiatry in a Murder Case"
{American Journal of Psychiatry. 118: 289-299, 1961) gives a clear and tragic example of a hard
form of "Cops and Robbers." It concerns a 23-year-old man who shot his fiancee and then turned
himself in. This was not easy to arrange, since the police did not believe his story until he had
repeated it four times. Later, he said: "It just seemed to me that all my life I was bound to end up in
the chair. If that was the way it was, that was the way it would be." The author says it was farcical
to expect a lay jury to understand the complex psychiatric testimony that was offered at the trial in
technical jargon. In game terms, the central issue can be stated in words of no more than two
syllables: A nine-year-old boy decides (for reasons clearly brought out at the trial) that he is bound
to end up in the chair. He spends the rest of his life headed toward this goal, and using his girl
friend as a target, in the end he sets himself up.
2. For further information about "Cops and Robbers" and games played by prison inmates, see:
Ernst, F. H. and Keating, W. C., "Psychiatric Treatment of the California Felon." American Journal
of Psychiatry. 120: 974-979, 1964.

62

