CHAPTER ELEVEN
Consulting Room Games
GAMES that are tenaciously played in the therapeutic situation are the most important ones for the
professional game analyst to be aware of. They can be most readily studied first-hand in the
consulting room. There are three types, according to the role of the agent:
1. Games played by therapists and case workers: "I'm Only Trying to Help You" and "Psychiatry."
2. Games played by professionally trained people who ate patients in therapy groups, such as
"Greenhouse."
3. Games played by lay patients and clients: "Indigence," "Peasant," "Stupid" and "Wooden Leg."

1 GREENHOUSE
Thesis. This is a variation of "Psychiatry," which is played hardest by young social scientists, such
as clinical psychologists. In the company of their colleagues these young people tend to play
"Psychoanalysis," often in a jocular way, using such expressions as "Your hostility is showing" or
"How mechanical can a defense mechanism get?" This is usually a harmless and enjoyable pastime;
it is a normal phase of their learning experience, and with a few originals in the group it can
become quite amusing. (This writer's preference is, "I see National Parapraxis Week is here again.")
As patients in psychotherapy groups some of these people are apt to indulge in this mutual critique
more seriously; but since it is not highly productive in that situation, it may have to be headed off
by the therapist. The proceedings may then turn into a game of "Greenhouse."
I here is a strong tendency for recent graduates to have an exaggerated respect for what they call
"Genuine Feelings." The expression of such a feeling may be preceded by an announcement that it
is on its way. After the announcement, the feeling is described, or rather presented before die group,
as though it were a rare flower which should be regarded with awe. The reactions of die other
members are received very solemnly, and they take on the air of connoisseurs at a botanical garden.
The problem seems to be, in the jargon of game analysis, whether this one is good enough to be
exhibited in the National Feeling Show. A questioning intervention by the therapist may be
strongly resented, as though be were some clumsy-fingered clod mauling the fragile petals of an
exotic century plant. The therapist, naturally, feels that in order to understand the anatomy and
physiology of a flower, it may be necessary to dissect it.
Antithesis. The antithesis, which is crucial for therapeutic progress, is the irony of the above
description. If this game is allowed to proceed, it may go on unchanged for years, after which the
patient may feel that he has had a "therapeutic experience" during which he has "expressed
hostility" and learned to "face feelings" in a way which gives him an advantage over less fortunate
colleagues. Meanwhile very little of dynamic significance may have happened, and certainly the
investment of time has not been used to maximum therapeutic advantage.
The irony in the initial description is directed not against the patients but against their teachers and
the cultural milieu which encourages such over-fastidiousness. If properly timed, a skeptical remark
may successfully divorce them from foppish Parental influences and lead to a less self-conscious
robustness in their transactions with each other. Instead of cultivating feelings in a kind of hothouse
atmosphere, they may just let them grow naturally, to be plucked when they are ripe.
The most obvious advantage of this game is the external psychological, since it avoids intimacy by
setting up special conditions under which feelings may be expressed, and special restrictions on the
responses of those present.

2 I'M ONLY TRYING TO HELP YOU
Thesis. This game may be played in any professional situation and is not confined to
psychotherapists and welfare workers. However, it is found most commonly and in its most florid
form among social workers with a certain type of training. The analysis of this game was clarified
63

for the writer under curious circumstances. All the players at a poker game had folded except two, a
research psychologist and a businessman. The businessman, who had a high hand, bet; the
psychologist, who had an unbeatable one, raised. The businessman looked puzzled, whereupon the
psychologist remarked facetiously: "Don't be upset, I'm only trying to help you!" The businessman
hesitated, and finally put in his chips. The psychologist showed the winning band, whereupon the
other threw down his cards in disgust. The others present then felt free to laugh at the psychologist's
joke, and the loser remarked ruefully: "You sure were helpful!" The psychologist cast a knowing
glance at the writer, implying that the joke had really been made at the expense of the psychiatric
profession. It was at that moment that the structure of this game became clear.
The worker or therapist, of whatever profession, gives some advice to a client or patient. The
patient returns and reports that the suggestion did not have the desired effect. The worker shrugs off
this failure with a feeling of resignation, and tries again. If be is more watchful, he may detect at
this point a twinge of frustration, but he will try again anyway. Usually he feels little need to
question his own motives, because he knows that many of his similarly trained colleagues do the
same thing, and that he is following the "correct" procedure and will receive full support from his
supervisors.
If he runs up against a hard player, such as a hostile obsessional, he will find it more and more
difficult to avoid feeling inadequate. Then he is in trouble, and the situation will slowly deteriorate.
In the worst case, he may come up against an angry paranoid who will rush in one day in a rage,
crying: "Look what you made me do!" Then his frustration will come strongly to the fore in the
spoken or unspoken thought: "But I was only trying to help you!" His bewilderment at the
ingratitude may cause him considerable suffering, indicating the complex motives underlying his
own behavior. This bewilderment is the payoff.
Legitimate helpers should not be confused with people who play "I'm Only Trying to Help You"
(ITHY). "I think we can do something about it." "I know what to do," "I was assigned to help you"
or "My fee for helping you will be. . . ." are different from "I'm only trying to help you." The first
four, in good faith, represent Adult offers to put professional qualifications at the disposal of the
distressed patient or client; ITHY has an ulterior motive which is more important than professional
skill in determining the outcome. This motive is based on the position that people are ungrateful
and disappointing. The prospect of success is alarming to the Parent of the professional and is an
invitation to sabotage, because success would threaten the position. The ITHY player needs to be
reassured that help will not be accepted no matter how strenuously it is offered. The client responds
with "Look How Hard I'm Trying" or "There's Nothing You Can Do to Help Me." More flexible
players can compromise: it is all right for people to accept help providing it takes diem a long time
to do so. Hence therapists tend to feel apologetic for a quick result, since they know that some of
their colleagues at staff meetings will be critical. At the opposite pole from hard ITHY players,
such as are found among social workers, are good lawyers who help their clients without personal
involvement or sentimentality. Here craftsmanship takes the place of covert strenuousness.
Some schools of social work seem to be primarily academies for the training of professional ITHY
players, and it is not easy for their graduates to desist from playing it. An example which may help
to illustrate some of the foregoing points will be found in the description of the complementary
game "Indigence."
ITHY and its variants are easy to find in everyday life. It is played by family friends and relatives
(e.g., "I Can Get It For You Wholesale"), and by adults who do community work with children. It is
a favorite among parents, and the complementary game played by the offspring is usually "Look
What You Made Me Do." Socially it may be a variant of "Schlemiel" in which the damage is done
while being helpful rather than impulsively; here the client is represented by a victim who may be
playing "Why Does This Always Happen To Me?" or one of its variants.
Antithesis. There are several devices available for the professional to handle an invitation to play
this game, and his selection will depend on the state of the relationship between himself and the
patient, particularly on the attitude of the patient's Child.

64

1. The classical psychoanalytic antithesis is the most thoroughgoing and the most difficult for the
patient to tolerate. The invitation is completely ignored. The patient then tries harder and harder.
Eventually he falls into a state of despair, manifested by anger or depression, which is the
characteristic sign that a game has been frustrated. This situation may lead to a useful confrontation.
2. A more gentle (but not prim) confrontation may be attempted on the first invitation. The therapist
states that he is the patient's therapist and not his manager.
3. An even more gentle procedure is to introduce the patient into a therapy group, and let the other
patients handle it.
4. With an acutely disturbed patient it may be necessary to play along during the initial phase.
These patients should be treated by a psychiatrist, who being a medical man, can prescribe both
medications and some of the hygienic measures which are still valuable, even in this day of
tranquilizers, in the treatment of such people. If the physician prescribes a hygienic regimen, which
may include baths, exercise, rest periods, and regular meals along with medication, the patient (1)
carries out the regimen and feels better C2) carries out the regimen scrupulously and complains that
it does not help (3) mentions casually that he forgot to carry out the instructions or that he has
abandoned the regimen because it was not doing any good. In the second and third case it is then up
to the psychiatrist to decide whether the patient is amenable to game analysis at that point, or
whether some other form of treatment is indicated to prepare him for later psychotherapy. The
relationship between the adequacy of die regimen and the patient's tendency to play games with it
should be carefully evaluated by the psychiatrist before he decides how to proceed next.
For the patient, on the other hand, the antithesis is, "Don't tell me what to do to help myself, I'll tell
you what to do to help me." If the therapist is known to be a Schlemiel, the correct antithesis for the
patient to use is, "Don't help me, help him." But serious players of "I'm Only Trying to Help You"
are generally lacking in a sense of humor. Antithetical moves on the part of a patient are usually
unfavorably received, and may result in the therapist's lifelong enmity. In everyday life such moves
should not be initiated unless one is prepared to carry them through ruthlessly and take the
consequences. For example, spuming a relative who "Can Get It For You Wholesale" may cause
serious domestic complications.
ANALYSIS
Thesis: Nobody ever does what I tell them. Ann: Alleviation of guilt. Roles: Helper, Client.
Dynamics: Masochism.
Examples: (1) Children learning, parent intervenes. (2) Social worker and client.
Social Paradigm: Parent-Child. Child: "What do I do now?" Parent: "Here's what you do."
Psychological Paradigm: Parent-Child. Parent: "See how adequate I am." Child: "I'll make you feel
inadequate." Moves: (1) Instructions requested—Instructions given. (2) Procedure bungled—
reproof, (3) Demonstration that procedures are faulty—Implicit apology.
Advantages: (1) Internal Psychological—martyrdom. (2) External Psychological—avoids facing
inadequacies. (3) Internal Social—"PTA," Projective Type; ingratitude. (4) External Social—
"Psychiatry," Projective Type. (5) Biological—slapping from client, stroking from supervisors. (6)
Existential—All people are ungrateful.

3 INDIGENCE
Thesis. The thesis of this game is best stated by Henry Miller in The Colossus of Maroussi: "The
event must have taken place during the year when I was looking for a job without the slightest
intention of taking one. It reminded me that, desperate as I thought myself to be, I bad not even
bothered to look through the columns of the want ads." This game is one of the complements of
"I'm Only Trying to Help You" (ITHY) as it is played by social workers who earn their living by it,
"Indigence" is played just as professionally by the client who earns his living in this manner. The
writer's own experience with "Indigence" is limited, but the following account by one of his most
accomplished students illustrates the nature of this game and its place in our society.
65

Miss Black was a social worker in a welfare agency whose avowed purpose, for which it received a
government subsidy, was the economic rehabilitation of indigents—which in effect meant getting
them to find and retain gainful employment. The clients of this agency were continually making
progress," according to official reports, but very few of them were actually "rehabilitated." This
was understandable, it was claimed, because most of them had been welfare clients for several
years, going from agency to agency and sometimes being involved with five or s& agencies at a
time, so that it was evident that they were "difficult cases."
Miss Black, from her training in game analysis, soon realized that the staff of her agency was
playing a consistent game of ITHY, and wondered how the clients were responding to this. In order
to check, she asked her own clients from week to week how many job opportunities they had
actually investigated. She was interested to discover that although they were theoretically supposed
to be looking assiduously for work from day to day, actually they devoted very little effort to this,
and sometimes the token efforts they did make had an ironic quality. For example, one man said
that he answered at least one advertisement a day looking for work. "What kind of work?" she
inquired. He said he wanted to go into sales work. "Is that the only kind of ad you answer?" she
asked. He- said that it was, but it was too bad that- he was a stutterer, as that held him back from
his chosen career. About this time it came to the attention of her supervisor that she was asking
these questions, and she was reprimanded for putting "undue pressure" on her clients.
Miss Black decided nevertheless to go ahead and rehabilitate some of them. She selected those who
were able-bodied and did not seem to have a valid reason to continue to receive welfare funds.
With this selected group, she talked over the games ITHY and "Indigence." When they were
willing to concede the point, she said that unless they found jobs she was going to cut them off
from welfare funds and refer them to a different kind of agency. Several of them almost
immediately found employment, some for the first time in years. But they were indignant at her
attitude, and some of them wrote letters to her supervisor complaining about it. The supervisor
called her in and reprimanded her even more severely, on the ground that although her former
clients were working, they were not "really rehabilitated." The supervisor indicated that there was
some question whether they would retain Miss Black in the agency. Miss Black, as much as she
dared without further jeopardizing her position, tactfully tried to elicit what would constitute "really
rehabilitated" in the agency's opinion. This was not clarified. She was only told that she was
"putting undue pressure" on people, and the fact that they were supporting their families for the first
time in years was in no way to her credit.
Because she needed her job and was now in danger of losing it, some of her friends tried to help.
The respected head of a psychiatric clinic wrote to the supervisor, stating that he had heard Miss
Black had done some particularly effective work with welfare clients, and asking whether she
might discuss her findings at a staff conference at his clinic. The supervisor refused permission.
In this case the rules of "Indigence" were set up by the agency to complement the local rules of
ITHY. There was a tacit agreement between the worker and the client which read as follows:
W. "I'll try to help you (providing you don't get better)." B. "I'll look for employment (providing I
don't have to find any)."
If a client broke the agreement by getting better, the agency lost a client, and the client lost his
welfare benefits, and both felt penalized. If a worker like Miss Black broke the agreement by
making the client actually find work, the agency was penalized by the client's complaints, which
might come to the attention of higher authorities, while again the client lost his welfare benefits.
As long as both obeyed the implicit rules, both got what they wanted. The client received his
benefits and soon learned what the agency wanted in return: an opportunity to "reach out" (as part
of ITHY) plus "clinical material" (to present at "client-centered" staff conferences).
The client was glad to comply with these demands, which gave him as much pleasure as it did the
agency. Thus they got along well together, and neither felt any desire to terminate such a satisfying
relationship. Miss Black, in effect, "reached in" instead of "reaching out," and proposed a
"community-centered" staff conference instead of a "client-centered" one; and this disturbed all the

66

others concerned in spite of the fact that she was thus only complying with the stated intent of the
regulations.
Two things should be noted here. First, "Indigence" as a game rather than a condition due to
physical, mental, or economic disability, is played by only a limited percentage of welfare clients.
Second, it will only be supported by social workers who are trained to play ITHY. It will not be
well-tolerated by other workers.
Allied games are "Veteran" and "Clinic." "Veteran" displays the same symbiotic relationship, this
time between the Veterans Administration, allied organizations, and a certain number of
"professional veterans" who share die legitimate privileges of disabled ex-servicemen. "Clinic" is
played by a certain percentage of those who attend the out-patient departments of large hospitals.
Unlike those who play "Indigent" or "Veteran," patients who -play "Clinic" do not receive financial
remuneration, but get other advantages. They serve a useful social purpose, since they are willing to
cooperate in the training of medical personnel and in studies of disease processes. From this they
may get a legitimate Adult satisfaction not available to players of "Indigence" and "Veteran."
Antithesis. Antithesis, if indicated, consists in withholding the benefits. Here the risk is not
primarily from the player himself, as in most other games, but from this game being culturally
syntonic and fostered by the complementary ITHY players. The threat comes from professional
colleagues and the aroused public, government agencies and protective unions. The complaints
which follow an exhibition of anti-"Indigence" may lead to a loud outcry of "Yes, Yes, How About
That?" which may be regarded as a healthy, constructive operation or pastime, even if it
occasionally discourages candidness. In fact, the whole American political system of democratic
freedoms is based on a license (not available under many other forms of government) to ask that
question. Without such a license, humanitarian social progress becomes seriously impeded.

4 PEASANT
Thesis. The prototype peasant is the arthritic Bulgarian villager who sells her only cow to raise
money to go to the university clinic in Sofia. There the professor examines her and finds her case
so interesting that he presents her in a clinical demonstration to the medical students. He outlines
not only the pathology, symptoms and diagnosis, but also the treatment. This procedure fills Her
with awe. Before she leaves, the professor gives her a prescription and explains the treatment in
more detail. She is overcome with admiration for his learning and says the Bulgarian equivalent of,
"Gee, you're wonderful, Professor!" However, she never has the prescription filled. First, there is
no apothecary in her village; second, even if there were, she would never let such a valuable piece
of paper out of her hands. Nor does she have the facilities for carrying out the rest of the treatment,
such as diet, hydrotherapy and so on. She lives on, crippled as before, but happy now because she
can tell everyone about the wonderful treatment prescribed for her by the great professor in Sofia,
to whom she expresses her gratitude every night in her prayers.
Years later, the Professor, in an unhappy frame of mind, happens to pass through the village on his
way to see a wealthy but demanding patient. He remembers the peasant when she rushes out to kiss
his hand and remind him of the marvelous regimen he put her on so long ago. He accepts her
homage graciously, and is particularly gratified when she tells him how much good the treatment
has done. In fact he is so carried away that he fails to notice that she limps as badly as ever.
Socially "Peasant" is played in an innocent and a dissembled form, both with the motto, "Gee
you're wonderful, Mr. Murgatroyd!" (GYWM). In the innocent form, Murgatroyd is wonderful. He
is a celebrated poet, painter, philanthropist or scientist, and naive young women frequently travel a
long way in the hope of meeting him so that they can sit adoringly at his feet and romanticize his
imperfections. A more sophisticated woman who sets out deliberately to have an affair or a
marriage with such a man, whom she sincerely admires and appreciates, may be fully aware of his
weaknesses. She may even exploit them in order to get what she wants. With these two types of
women, the game arises from the romanticizing or exploiting of the imperfections, while the

67

innocence lies in their genuine respect for his accomplishments, which they are able to evaluate
correctly.
In the dissembled form, Murgatroyd may or may not be wonderful, but he comes up against a
woman incapable of appreciating him in the best sense, in any case; perhaps she is a high-class
prostitute. She plays "Little Old Me" and uses GYWM as sheer flattery to attain her own ends.
Underneath she is either bewildered by him or laughing at him. But she does not care about him;
what she wants are the perquisites that go with him.
Clinically "Peasant" is played in two similar forms, with the motto, "Gee you're wonderful,
Professor!" (GYWP). In the innocent form the patient may stay well as long as she can believe in
GYWP, which places an obligation on the therapist to be well-behaved both in public and in private
life. In the dissembled form the patient hopes the therapist will go along with her GYWP and think:
"You're uncommonly perceptive" (YUP). Once she has him in this position, she can make him look
foolish and then move on to another therapist; if he cannot be so easily beguiled, he may actually
be able to help her.
The simplest way for the patient to win GYWP is not to get better. If she is more malicious, she
may take more positive steps to make the therapist look foolish. One woman played GYWP with
her psychiatrist without any alleviation of symptoms; she finally left him with many salaams and
apologies. She then went to her revered clergyman for help and played GYWP with him. After a
few weeks she seduced him into a game of second-degree "Rapo." She then told her neighbor
confidentially over the back fence how disappointed she was that so fine a man as Rev. Black could,
in a moment of weakness, make a pass at an innocent and unattractive women like herself.
Knowing his wife, she could forgive him, of course, but nevertheless, etc. This confidence just
slipped out inadvertently, and it was only afterward that she remembered "to her horror" that the
neighbor was an elder in the church. With her psychiatrist she won by not getting better; with her
clergyman she won by seducing him, although she was reluctant to admit it. But a second
psychiatrist introduced her to a therapy group where she could not maneuver as she had before.
Then, with no GYWP and YUP to fill in her therapeutic time, she began to examine her behavior
more closely and with the help of the group was able to give up both her games—GYWP and
"Rapo."
Antithesis. The therapist must first decide whether the game is played innocently and hence should
be allowed to continue for the benefit of the patient until her Adult is sufficiently well-established
to risk countermeasures. If it is not innocent, the countermeasures may be taken at the first
appropriate opportunity, after the patient has been sufficiently well prepared so that she will be able
to understand what happens. The therapist then steadfastly refuses to give advice, and when the
patient begins to protest, he makes it clear that this is not merely "Poker-Faced Psychiatry" but a
well-thought-out policy. In due time his refusals may either enrage the patient or precipitate acute
anxiety symptoms. The next step depends on the malignancy of the patient's condition. If she is too
upset, her acute reactions should be dealt with by appropriate psychiatric or analytic procedures to
re-establish the therapeutic situation. The first goal, in the dissembled form, is to split off the Adult
from the hypocritical Child so that the game can be analyzed.
In social situations, intimate entanglements with innocent GYWM players should be avoided, as
any intelligent actor's agent will impress upon his clients. On the other hand, women who play
dissembled GYWM are sometimes interesting and intelligent if they can be de-GYWMed, and may
turn out to be quite a delightful addition to the family social circle.

5 PSYCHIATRY
Thesis. Psychiatry as a procedure must be distinguished from "Psychiatry" as a game. According to
the available evidence, presented in proper clinical form in scientific publications, the following
approaches, among others, are of value in treating psychiatric conditions: shock therapy, hypnosis,
drugs, psychoanalysis, orthopsychiatry and group therapy. There are others which are less
commonly used and will not be discussed here. Any of these can be used in the game of
68

"Psychiatry," which is based on the position "I am a healer," supported by a diploma: "It says here I
am a healer." It will be noted that in any case this is a constructive, benevolent position, and that
people who play "Psychiatry" can do a great deal of good, providing they are professionally trained.
It is likely, however, that there will be some gain in therapeutic results if therapeutic ardor is
moderated. The antithesis was best expressed long ago by Ambroise Par£, who said in effect: "I
treat them, but God cures them." Every medical student learns about this dictum, along with others
such as primium non nocere, and phrases such as vis medicatrix naturae. Nonmedical therapists,
however, are not likely to be exposed -to these ancient cautions. The position "I am a healer
because it says here that I am a healer" is likely to be an impairment, and may be replaced to
advantage with something like: "I will apply what therapeutic procedures I have learned in the hope
that they will be of some benefit." This avoids the possibility of games based on: "Since I am a
healer, if you don't get better it's your fault" (e.g., "I'm Only Trying To Help You" or "Since you're
a healer, I'll get better for you" (e.g., "Peasant"). All of this, of course, is known in principle to
every conscientious therapist. Certainly every therapist who has ever presented a case at a reputable
clinic has been made aware of it. Conversely, a good clinic may be defined as one which makes its
therapists aware of these things.
On the other side, the game of "Psychiatry" is more apt to crop up with patients who have
previously been treated by less competent therapists. A few patients, for example, carefully pick
weak psychoanalysts, moving from one to another, demonstrating that they cannot be cured and
meanwhile learning to play a sharper and sharper game of "Psychiatry"; eventually it becomes
difficult for even a first-rate clinician to separate the wheat from the chaff. The duplex transaction
on the patient's side is:
Adult: "I am coming to be cured."
Child: "You will never cure me, but you will teach me to be a better neurotic (play a better game of
'Psychiatry')."
"Mental Health" is played similarly; here the Adult statement is, "Everything will get better if I
apply the principles of mental health which I have read and heard about." One patient learned to
play "Psychiatry" from one therapist, "Mental Health" from another, and then as a result of still
another effort began to play a pretty good game of "Transactional Analysis." When this was frankly
discussed with her, she agreed to stop playing "Mental Health," but requested that she be allowed to
continue to play "Psychiatry" because it made her feel comfortable. The transactional psychiatrist
agreed. She continued, therefore, for several months to recite her dreams and her interpretations of
them at weekly intervals. Finally, partly out of plain gratitude, perhaps, she decided that it might be
interesting to find out what was really the matter with her. She became seriously interested in
transactional analysis, with good results.
A variant of "Psychiatry" is "Archaeology" (title by courtesy of Dr. Norman Reider of San
Francisco), in which the patient takes the position that if she can only find out who had the button,
so to speak, everything will suddenly be all right. This results in a continual rumination over
childhood happenings. Sometimes the therapist may he beguiled into a game of "Critique," in
which the patient describes her feelings in various situations and the therapist tells her what is
wrong with them. "Self-Expression," which is a common game in some therapy groups, is based on
the dogma "Feelings are Good." A patient who uses vulgar expletives, for example, may be
applauded or at least implicitly lauded. A sophisticated group, however, will soon spot this as a
game.
Some members of therapy groups become quite adept at picking out games of "Psychiatry," and
will soon let a new patient know if they think he is playing "Psychiatry" or "Transactional
Analysis" instead of using group procedures to obtain legitimate insight. A woman who transferred
from a Self-Expression group in one city to a more sophisticated group in another city told a story
about an incestuous relationship in her childhood. Instead of the awe which she had come to expect
whenever she told this oft-repeated tale, she was greeted with indifference, whereupon she became
enraged. She was astonished to discover that the new group was more interested in her transactional
anger than in her historical incest, and in irate tones she hurled what apparently in her mind was the
69

ultimate insult: she accused them of not being Freudian. Freud, himself, of course, took
psychoanalysis more seriously, and avoided making a game of it by saying that he himself was not
a Freudian.
Recently unmasked is a new variant of "Psychiatry" called "Tell Me This," somewhat similar to the
party pastime "Twenty Questions." White relates a dream or an incident, and the other members,
often including die therapist, then attempt to interpret it by asking pertinent questions. As long as
White answers the questions, each member continues his inquiries until he finds a question White
cannot answer. Then Black sits back with a knowing look which says: "Aha! If you could answer
that one, you would certainly get better, so I have done my part." (This is a distant relative of "Why
Don't You—Yes But"). Some therapy groups are based almost entirely on this game, and may go
on for years with only minimal change or progress. "Tell Me This" allows much latitude to White
(the patient) who, for example, can play along with it by feeling ineffectual; or he can counter it by
answering all the questions offered, in which case the anger and dismay of the other players soon
becomes manifest, since he is throwing back at them, "I've answered all your questions and you
haven't cured me, so what does that make you?" "Tell Me This" is also played in schoolrooms,
where the pupils know that the "right" answer to an open-ended question asked by a certain type of
teacher is not to be found by processing the factual data, but by guessing or outguessing which of
several possible answers will make the teacher happy. A pedantic variant occurs in teaching ancient
Greek; the teacher always has the upper hand over the pupil, and can make him look stupid and
prove it in print by pointing to some obscure feature of the text. This is also often played in
teaching Hebrew.

6 STUPID
Thesis. In its milder form, the thesis of "Stupid" is, "I laugh with you at my own clumsiness and
stupidity." Seriously disturbed people, however, may play it in a sullen way which says, "I am
stupid, that's the way I am, so do me something." Both forms are played from a depressive position.
"Stupid" must be distinguished from "Schlemiel," where the position is more aggressive, and the
clumsiness is a bid for forgiveness. It must also be distinguished from "Clown," which is not a
game but a pastime which reinforces the position "I am cute and harmless." The critical transaction
in "Stupid" is for White to make Black call him stupid or respond as though he were stupid. Hence
White acts like a Schlemiel but does not ask for forgiveness; in fact forgiveness makes him uneasy,
because it threatens his position. Or he behaves clownishly, but with no implication that he is
kidding; he wants his behavior to be taken seriously, as evidence of real stupidity. There is
considerable external gain, since the less White learns, the more effectively he can play. Hence at
school he need not study, and at work he need not go out of his way to learn anything that might
lead to advancement. He has known from an early age that everyone will be satisfied with him as
long as he is stupid, despite any expressions to the contrary. People are surprised when in time of
stress, if he decides to come through, it turns out that he is not stupid at all—any more than is the
"stupid" younger son in the fairy tale.
Antithesis. The antithesis of the milder form is simple. By not playing, by not laughing at the
clumsiness or railing at the stupidity, the anti-"Stupid" player will make a friend for life. One of the
subtleties is that this game is often played by cyclothymic or manic-depressive personalities. When
such people are euphoric, it seems as though they really want their associates to join in their
laughter at themselves. It is often hard not to, for they give the impression that they will resent an
abstainer—which in a way they do, since he threatens their position and spoils the game. But when
they are depressed, and their resentment against those who laughed with or at them comes into the
open, the abstainer knows that he has acted correctly. He may be the only one the patient is willing
to have in the room or talk to when he is withdrawn, and all the former "friends" who enjoyed the
game are now treated as enemies.
It is no use telling White that he is not really stupid. He may actually be of quite limited
intelligence and well aware of it, which is how the game got started in the first place. There may be
70

special areas, however, in which he is superior: often psychological insight is one. It does no harm
to show whatever respect is deserved for such aptitudes, but this is different from clumsy attempts
at "reassurance." The latter may give him the bitter satisfaction of realizing that other people are
even more stupid than he, but this is small consolation. Such "reassurance" is certainly not the most
intelligent therapeutic procedure; usually it is a move in a game of "I'm Only Trying to Help You."
The antithesis of "Stupid" is not to substitute another game, but simply to refrain from playing
"Stupid."
The antithesis of the sullen form is a more complicated problem, because the sullen player is trying
to provoke not laughter or derision but helplessness or exasperation, which he is well equipped to
handle in accordance with his challenge "So do me something." Thus he wins either way. If Black
does nothing, it is because he feels helpless, and if he does something, it is because he is
exasperated. Hence these people are prone also to play "Why Don't You—Yes But," from which
they can get the same satisfactions in milder form. There is no easy solution in this case, nor is
there likely to be one forthcoming until the psychodynamics of this game are more clearly
understood.

7 WOODEN LEG
Thesis. The most dramatic form of "Wooden Leg" is "The Plea of Insanity." This may be translated
into transactional terms as follows: "What do you expect of someone as emotionally disturbed as I
am—that I would refrain from killing people?" To which the jury is asked to reply: "Certainly not,
we would hardly impose that restriction on you!" "The Plea of Insanity," played as a legal game, is
acceptable to American culture and is different from the almost universally respected principle that
an individual may be suffering from a psychosis so profound that no reasonable person would
expect him to be responsible for his actions. In Japan drunkenness, and in Russia war-time military
service, are accepted as excuses for evading responsibility for all kinds of outrageous behavior
(according to this writer's information).
The thesis of "Wooden Leg" is, "What do you expect of a man with a wooden leg?" Put that way,
of course, no one would expect anything of a man with a wooden leg except that he should steer his
own wheel chair. On the other hand, during World War II there was a man with a wooden leg who
used to give demonstrations of jitterbug dancing, and very competent jitterbug dancing, at Army
Hospital amputation centers. There are blind men who practice law and hold political offices (one
such is currently mayor of the writer's home town), deaf men who practice psychiatry and handless
men who can use a typewriter.
As long as someone with a real, exaggerated or even imaginary disability is content with his lot,
perhaps no one should interfere. But the moment he presents himself for psychiatric treatment, the
question arises if he is using his life to his own best advantage, and if he can rise above his
disability. In this country the therapist will be working in opposition to a large mass of educated
public opinion. Even the close relatives of the patient who complained most loudly about the
inconveniences caused by his infirmity, may eventually rum on the therapist if the patient makes
definitive progress. This is readily understandable to a game analyst, but it makes his task no less
difficult. All the people who were playing "I'm Only Trying to Help You" are threatened by the
impending disruption of the game if the patient shows signs of striking out on his own, and
sometimes they use almost incredible measures to terminate the treatment.
Both sides are illustrated by the case of the stuttering client of Miss Black's, mentioned in the
discussion of the game "Indigence." This man played a classical form of "Wooden Leg." He was
unable to find employment, which he correctly attributed to the fact that he was a stutterer, since
the only career that interested him, he said, was that of salesman. As a free citizen he had a right to
seek employment in whatever field he chose, but as a stutterer, his choice raised some question as
to the purity of his motives. The reaction of the helpful agency when Miss Black attempted to break
up this game was very unfavorable to her.

71

"Wooden Leg" is especially pernicious in clinical practice, because the patient may find a therapist
who plays the same game with the same plea, so that progress is impossible. This is relatively easy
to arrange in the case of the "Ideological Plea," "What do you expect of a man who lives in a
society like ours?" One patient combined this with the "Psychosomatic Plea," "What do you expect
of a man with psychosomatic symptoms?" He found a succession of therapists who would accept
one plea but not the other, so that none of them either made him feel comfortable in his current
position by accepting both pleas, or budged him from it by rejecting both. Thus he proved that
psychiatry couldn't help people.
Some of the pleas which patients use to excuse symptomatic behavior are colds, head injuries,
situational stress, the stress of modem living, American culture and the economic system. A literate
player has no difficulty in finding authorities to support him. "I drink because I'm Irish." "This
wouldn't happen if I lived in Russia or Tahiti." The fact is that patients in mental hospitals in Russia
and Tahiti are very similar to those in American state hospitals.1 Special pleas of "If It Weren't For
Them" or "They Let Me Down" should always be evaluated very carefully in clinical practice—and
also in social research projects.
Slightly more sophisticated are such pleas as: What do you expect of a man who (a) comes from a
broken home (b) is neurotic (c) is in analysis or (d) is suffering from a disease known as alcoholism?
These are topped by, "If I stop doing this I won't be able to analyze it, and then I'll never get better."
The obverse of "Wooden Leg" is "Rickshaw," with the thesis, "If they only had (rickshaws)
(duckbill platypuses) (girls who spoke ancient Egyptian) around this town, I never would have got
into this mess."
Antithesis. Anti-"Wooden Leg" is not difficult if the therapist can distinguish clearly between his
own Parent and Adult, and if the therapeutic aim is explicitly understood
by both parties.
On the Parental side, he can be either a "good" Parent or a "harsh" one. As a "good" Parent he can
accept the patient's plea, especially if it fits in with his own viewpoints, perhaps with the
rationalization that people are not responsible for their actions until they have completed their
therapy. As a "harsh" Parent he can reject the plea and engage in a contest of wills with the patient.
Both of these attitudes are already Familiar to the "Wooden Leg" player, and he knows how to
extract the maximum satisfactions from each of them.
As an Adult, the therapist declines both of these opportunities. When the patient asks, "What do
you expect of a neurotic?" (or whatever plea he is using at the moment) the reply is, "I don't expect
anything. The question is, what do you expect of yourself?" The only demand he makes is that the
patient give a serious answer to this question, and the only concession he makes is to allow the
patient a reasonable length of time to answer it: anywhere from six weeks to six months, depending
on the relationship between them and the patient's previous preparation.
REFERENCE
1. Berne, E. "The Cultural Problem: Psychopathology in Tahiti." American Journal of Psychiatry.
116: 1076-1081, 1960.

72

