CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Autonomy
THE attainment of autonomy is manifested by the release or recovery of three capacities:
awareness, spontaneity and
intimacy.
Awareness. Awareness means the capacity to see a coffeepot and hear the birds sing in one's own
way, and not the way one was taught. It may be assumed on good grounds that seeing and hearing
have a different quality for infants than for grownups,1 and that they are more esthetic and less
intellectual in the first' years of life. A little boy sees and hears birds with delight. Then the "good
father" comes along and feels he should "share" the experience and help his son "develop." He says:
"That's a jay, and this is a sparrow." The moment the little boy is concerned with which is a jay and
which is a sparrow, he can no longer see the birds or hear them sing. He has to see and hear them
the way his father wants him to. Father has good reasons on his side, since few people can afford to
go through life listening to the birds sing, and the sooner the little boy starts his "education" the
78

better. Maybe he will be an ornithologist when he grows up. A few people, however, can still see
and hear in the old way. But most of the members of the human race have lost the capacity to be
painters, poets or musicians, and are not left the option of seeing and hearing directly even if they
can afford to; they must get it secondhand. The recovery of this ability is called here "awareness."
Physiologically awareness is eidetic perception, allied to eidetic imagery.2 Perhaps there is also
eidetic perception, at least in certain individuals, in the spheres of taste, smell and kinesthesia,
giving us the artists in those fields: chefs, perfumers and dancers, whose eternal problem is to find
audiences capable of appreciating their products.
Awareness requires living in the here and now, and not in the elsewhere, the past or the future. A
good illustration of possibilities, in American life, is driving to work in the morning in a hurry. The
decisive question is: "Where is the mind when the body is here?" and there are three common cases.
1. The man whose chief preoccupation is being on time is die one who is furthest out. With his
body at the wheel of his car, his mind is at the door of his office, and he is oblivious to his
immediate surroundings except insofar as they are obstacles to the moment when his soma will
catch up with his psyche. This is the Jerk, whose chief concern is how it will look to the boss. If he
is late, he will take pains to arrive out of breath. The compliant Child is in command, and his game
is "Look How Hard I've Tried." While he is driving, he is almost completely lacking in autonomy,
and as a human being he is in essence more dead than alive. It is quite possible that this is the most
favorable condition for the development of hypertension or coronary disease.
2. The Sulk, on the other hand, is not so much concerned with arriving on time as in collecting
excuses for being late. Mishaps, badly timed lights and poor driving or stupidity on the part of
others fit well into his scheme and are secretly welcomed as contributions to his rebellious Child or
righteous Parent game of "Look What They Made Me Do." He, too, is oblivious to his surroundings
except as they subscribe to his game, so that he is only half alive. His body is in his car, but his
mind is out searching for blemishes and injustices.
3. Less common is the "natural driver," the man to whom driving a car is a congenial science and
art. As he makes his way swiftly and skillfully through the traffic, he is at one with his vehicle. He,
too, is oblivious of his surroundings except as they offer scope for the craftsmanship which is its
own reward, but he is very much aware of himself and the machine which he controls so well, and
to that extent he is alive. Such driving is formally an Adult pastime from which his Child and
Parent may also derive satisfaction.
4. The Fourth case is the person who is aware, and who will not hurry because he is living in the
present moment with the environment which is here: the sky and the trees as well as the feeling of
motion. To hurry is to neglect that environment and to be conscious only of something that is still
out of sight down the road, or of mere obstacles, or solely of oneself. A Chinese man started to get
into a local subway train, when his Caucasian companion pointed out that they could save twenty
minutes by taking an express, which they did. When they got off at Central Park, the Chinese man
sat down on a bench, much to his friend's surprise. "Well," explained the former, "since we saved
twenty minutes, we can afford to sit here that long and enjoy our surroundings."
The aware person is alive because he knows how he feels, where he is and when it is. He knows
that after he dies the trees will still be there, but he will not be there to look at them again, so he
wants to see them now with as much poignancy as possible.
Spontaneity. Spontaneity means option, the freedom to choose and express one's feelings from the
assortment available (Parent feelings, Adult Feelings and Child feelings). It means liberation,
liberation from the compulsion to play games and have only the feelings one was taught to have.
Intimacy. Intimacy means the spontaneous, game-free candidness of an aware person, the liberation
of the eidetically perceptive, uncorrupted Child in all its naivete" living in the here and now. It can
be shown experimentally3 that eidetic perception evokes affection, and that candidness mobilizes
positive feelings, so that there is even such a thing as "one-sided intimacy" - a phenomenon well
known, although not by that name, to professional seducers, who are able to capture their partners
without becoming involved themselves. This they do by encouraging the other person to look at

79

them directly and to talk Freely, while the male or Female seducer makes only a well-guarded
pretense of reciprocating.
Because intimacy is essentially a function of the natural Child (although expressed in a matrix of
psychological and social complications), it tends to turn out well if not disturbed by the intervention
of games. Usually the adaptation to Parental influences is what spoils it, and most unfortunately
this is almost a universal occurrence. But before, unless and until they are corrupted, most infants
seem to be loving,4 and that is the essential nature of intimacy, as shown experimentally,
REFERENCES
1. Berne, E. "Primal Images & Primal Judgment." Psychiatric Quarterly. 29: 634-658, 1955.
2. Jaensch, E. R. Eidetic Imagery. Harcourt, Brace & Company, New York, 1930.
3. These experiments are still in the pilot stage at the San Francisco Social Psychiatry Seminars.
The effective experimental use of transactional analysis requires special training and experience,
just as the effective experimental use of chromatography or infrared spectrophotoraetry does.
Distinguishing a game from a pastime is no easier than distinguishing a star from a planet. See
Berne, E. "The Intimacy Experiment." Transactional Analysis Bulletin. 3: 113, 1964. "More About
Intimacy." Ibid. 3: 125, 1964.
4. Some infants are corrupted or starved very early (marasmus, some colics) and never nave a
chance to exercise this capacity.

