CHAPTER THREE
Procedures and Rituals
TRANSACTIONS usually proceed in series. These series are not random, but are programmed.
Programming may come from one of three sources: Parent, Adult or Child, or more generally, from
society, material or idiosyncrasy- Since the needs of adaptation require that the Child may be
shielded by the Parent or Adult until each social situation has been tested, Child programming is
most apt to occur in situations of privacy and intimacy, where preliminary testing has already been
done.
The simplest forms of social activity are procedures and rituals. Some of these are universal and
some local, but all of them have to be learned. A -procedure is a series of simple complementary
Adult transactions directed toward the manipulation of reality. Reality is defined as having two
aspects: static and dynamic. Static reality comprises all the possible arrangements of matter in the
universe. Arithmetic, for example, consists of statements about static reality. Dynamic reality may
be defined as the potentialities for interaction of all the energy systems in the universe. Chemistry,
for example, consists of statements about dynamic reality. Procedures are based on data processing
and probability estimates concerning the material of reality, and reach their highest development in
professional techniques. Piloting an airplane and removing an appendix are procedures.
Psychotherapy is a procedure insofar as it is under the control of the therapist's Adult, and it is not a
procedure insofar as his Parent or Child takes over the executive. The programming of a procedure
is determined by the material, on the basis of estimates made by the agent's Adult.
Two variables are used in evaluating procedures. A procedure is said to be efficient when the agent
makes the best possible use of the data and experience available to him, regardless of any
deficiencies that may exist in his knowledge. If the Parent or the Child interferes with the Adult's
data processing, the procedure becomes contaminated and will be less efficient. The effectiveness
of a procedure is judged by the actual results. Thus efficiency is a psychological criterion and
effectiveness is a material one. A native assistant medical officer on a tropical island became very
adept at removing cataracts. He used what knowledge he had with a very high degree of efficiency,
but since he knew less than the European medical officer, he was not quite as effective. The
European began to drink heavily so that his efficiency dropped, but at first his effectiveness was not
diminished. But when his hands became tremulous as the years went by, his assistant began to
surpass him not only in efficiency, but also in effectiveness. It can be seen from this example that
both of these variables are best evaluated by an expert in the procedures involved—efficiency by
personal acquaintance with the agent, and effectiveness by surveying the actual results.
From the present viewpoint, a ritual is a stereotyped series of simple complementary transactions
programmed by external social forces. An informal ritual, such as social leave-taking, may be
subject to considerable local variations in details, although the basic form remains the same. A
formal ritual, such as a Roman Catholic Mass, offers much less option. The form of a ritual is
Parentally determined by tradition, but more recent "parental" influences may have similar but less
stable effects in trivial instances. Some formal rituals of special historical or anthropological
interest have two phases: (1) a phase in which transactions are carried on under rigid Parental
strictures (2) a phase of Parental license, in which the Child is allowed more or less complete
transactional freedom, resulting in an orgy.
Many formal rituals started off as heavily contaminated though fairly efficient procedures, but as
time passed and circumstances changed, they lost all procedural validity while still retaining their
usefulness as acts of faith. Trans-actionally they represent guilt-relieving or reward-seeking
compliances with traditional Parental demands. They offer a safe, reassuring (apotropaic), and
often enjoyable method of structuring time.
Of more significance as an introduction to game analysis are informal rituals, and among the most
instructive are the American greeting rituals.
1A;
1B:

"Hi!" (Hello, good morning.)
"Hi!" (Hello, good morning.)
14

2A:
2B:
3A:
3B:
4A:
4B:

"Warm enough for ya?" (How are you?)
"Sure is. Looks like rain, though." (Fine. How are you?)
"Well, take cara yourself." (Okay.)
"I'll be seeing you."
"So long."
"So long."

It is apparent that this exchange is not intended to convey information. Indeed, if there is any
information, it is wisely withheld. It might take Mr. A fifteen minutes to say how he is, and Mr. B,
who is only the most casual acquaintance, has no intention of devoting that much time to listening
to him. This series of transactions is quite adequately characterized by calling it an "eight-stroke
ritual." If A and B were in a hurry, they might both be contented with a two-stroke exchange, Hi-Hi.
If they were old-fashioned Oriental potentates, they might go through a two-hundred stroke ritual
before settling down to business. Meanwhile, in the jargon of transactional analysis, A and B have
improved each other's health slightly; for the moment, at least, "their spinal cords won't shrivel up,"
and each is accordingly grateful.
This ritual is based on careful intuitive computations by both parties. At this stage of their
acquaintance they figure that they owe each other exactly four strokes at each meeting, and not
oftener than once a day. If they run into each other again shortly, say within the next half hour, and
have no new business to transact, they will pass by without any sign, or with only the slightest nod
of recognition, or at most with a very perfunctory Hi-Hi. These computations hold not only for
short intervals but over periods of several months. Let us now consider Mr. C and Mr. D, who pass
each other about once a day, trade one stroke each—Hi-Hi —and go their ways. Mr. C goes on a
month's vacation. The day after he returns, he encounters Mr. D as usual. If on this occasion Mr. D
merely says "Hi!" and no more, Mr. C will be offended, "his spinal cord will shrivel slightly." By
his calculations, Mr. D and he owe each other about thirty strokes. These can be compressed into a
few transactions, if those transactions are emphatic enough. Mr. D's side properly runs something
like this (where each unit of "intensity" or "interest" is equivalent to a stroke):
ID: "Hi!" (1 unit.)
2D: "Haven't seen you around lately." (2 units.)
3D: "Oh, have you! Where did you go?" (5 units.)
4D: "Say, that's interesting. How was it?" (7 units.)
5D: "Well, you're sure looking fine." (4 units.) "Did your family go along?" (4 units.)
6D: "Well, glad to see you back." (4 units.)
7D: "So long." (I unit.)
This gives Mr. D a total of 28 units. Both he and Mr. C know that he will make up the missing units
the following day, so the account is now, for all practical purposes, squared. Two days later they
will be back at their two-stroke exchange, Hi-Hi. But now they "know each other better," i.e., each
knows the other is reliable, and this may be useful if they should meet "socially."
The inverse case is also worth considering. Mr. E and Mr. F have set up a two-stroke ritual, Hi-Hi.
One day instead of passing on, Mr. E stops and asks: "How are you?" The conversation proceeds as
follows:
IE: "Hi!"
IF: "Hi!'
2E: "How are you?"
2F (Puzzled'): "Fine. How are you?"
3E: "Everything's great. Warm enough for you?"
3F: "Yeah." (Cautiously.) "Looks like rain, though."
4E: "Nice to see you again."
15

4F: "Same here. Sorry, I've got to get to the library before it closes. So long."
5E: "So long."
As Mr. F hurries away, he thinks to himself: "What's come over him all of a sudden? Is he selling
insurance or something?" In transactional terms this reads: "All he owes me is one stroke, why is he
giving me five?"
An even simpler demonstration of the truly transactional business-like nature of these simple rituals
is the occasion when Mr. G says "Hi!" and Mr. H passes on without replying. Mr. G's reaction is
"What's the matter with him?" meaning: "I gave him a stroke and he didn't give me one in return."
If Mr. H keeps this up and extends it to other acquaintances, he is going to cause some talk in his
community.
In borderline cases it is sometimes difficult to distinguish between a procedure and a ritual. The
tendency is for the layman to call professional procedures rituals, while actually every transaction
may be based on sound, even vital experience, but the layman does not have the background to
appreciate that. Conversely, there is a tendency for professionals to rationalize ritualistic elements
that still cling to their procedures, and to dismiss skeptical laymen on the ground that they are not
equipped to understand. And one of the ways in which entrenched professionals may resist the
introduction of sound new procedures is by laughing them off as rituals. Hence the fate of
Semmelweis and other innovators.
The essential and similar feature of both procedures and rituals is that they are stereotyped. Once
the first transaction has been initiated, the whole series is predictable and follows a predetermined
course to a foreordained conclusion unless special conditions arise. The difference between them
lies in the origin of the predetermination: procedures are programmed by the Adult and rituals are
Parentally patterned.
Individuals who are not comfortable or adept with rituals sometimes evade them by substituting
procedures. They can be found, for example, among people who like to help the hostess with
preparing or serving food and drink at parties.

