CHAPTER FIVE
Games
1 DEFINITION
A GAME is an ongoing series of complementary ulterior transactions progressing to a well-defined,
predictable outcome. Descriptively it is a recurring set of transactions, often repetitious,
superficially plausible, with a concealed motivation; or, more colloquially, a series of moves with a
snare, or "gimmick." Games are clearly differentiated from procedures, rituals, and pastimes by two
chief characteristics: (I) their ulterior quality and (2) the payoff. Procedures may be successful,
rituals effective, and pastimes profitable, but all of them are by definition candid; they may involve
contest, but not conflict, and the ending may be sensational, but it is not dramatic. Every game, on
the other hand, is basically dishonest, and the outcome has a dramatic, as distinct from merely
exciting, quality.
It remains to distinguish games from the one remaining type of social action which so far has not
been discussed. An operation is a simple transaction or set of transactions undertaken for a specific,
stated purpose. If someone frankly asks for reassurance and gets it, that is an operation. If someone
asks for reassurance, and after it is given turns it in some way to the disadvantage of the giver, that
is a game. Superficially, then, a game looks like a set of operations, but after the payoff it becomes
apparent that these operations were really maneuvers; not honest requests but moves in the game.
In the "insurance game," for example, no matter what the agent appears to be doing in conversation,
if he is a hard player he is really looking for or working on a prospect. What he is after, if he is
worth his salt, is to "make a killing." The same applies to "the real estate game," "the panama
game" and similar occupations- Hence at a social gathering, while a salesman is engaged in
pastimes, particularly variants of "Balance Sheet," his congenial participation may conceal a series
19

of skillful maneuvers designed to elicit the kind of information he is professionally interested in.
There are dozens of trade journals devoted to improving commercial maneuvers, and which give
accounts of outstanding players and games (interesting operators who make unusually big deals).
Transactionally speaking, these are merely variants of Sports Illustrated, Chess World, and other
sports magazines.
As far as angular transactions are concerned—games which are consciously planned with
professional precision under Adult control to yield the maximum gains—the big "con games"
which flourished in the early 1900's are hard to surpass for detailed practical planning and
psychological virtuosity.
What we are concerned with here, however, are the unconscious games played by innocent people
engaged in duplex transactions of which they are not fully aware, and which form the most
important aspect of social life all over the world. Because of their dynamic qualities, games are
easy to distinguish from mere static attitudes, which arise from taking a position.
The use of the word "game" should not be misleading. As explained in the introduction, it does not
necessarily imply fun or even enjoyment. Many salesmen do not consider their work fun, as Arthur
Miller made clear in his play, The Death- of a Salesman. And there may be no lack of seriousness.
Football games nowadays are taken very seriously, but no more so than such transactional games as
"Alcoholic" or "Third-Degree Rapo".
The same applies to the word "play," as anyone who has "played" hard poker or "played" the stock
market over a long period can testify. The possible seriousness of games and play, and the possibly
serious results, are well known to anthropologists. The most complex game that ever existed, that
of "Courtier" as described so well by Stendhal in The Charterhouse of Parma, was deadly serious.
The grimmest of all, of course, is "War."

2 A TYPICAL GAME
The most common game played between spouses is colloquially called "If It Weren't For You," and
this will be used to illustrate the characteristics of games in general.
Mrs. White complained that her husband severely restricted her social activities, so that she had
never learned to dance. Due to changes in her attitude brought about by psychiatric treatment, her
husband became less sure of himself and more indulgent. Mrs. White was then free to enlarge the
scope of her activities. She signed up for dancing classes, and then discovered to her despair that
she had a morbid fear of dance floors and had to abandon this project.
This unfortunate adventure, along with similar ones, laid bare some important aspects of the
structure of her marriage. Out of her many suitors she had picked a domineering man for a husband.
She was then in a position to complain that she could do all sorts of things "if it weren't for you."
Many of her women friends also had domineering husbands, and when they met for their morning
coffee, they spent a good deal of time playing "If It Weren't For Him."
As it turned out, however, contrary to her complaints, her husband was performing a very real
service for her by forbidding her to do something she was deeply afraid of, and by preventing her,
in fact, from even becoming aware of her fears. This was one reason her Child had shrewdly
chosen such a husband.
But there was more to it than that. His prohibitions and her complaints frequently led to quarrels, so
that their sex life was seriously impaired. And because of his feelings of guilt, he frequently
brought her gifts which might not otherwise have been forthcoming; certainly when he gave her
more freedom, his gifts diminished in lavishness and frequency. She and her husband had little in
common besides their household worries and the children, so that their quarrels stood out as
important events; it was mainly on these occasions that they had anything but the most casual
conversations. At any rate, her married life had proved one thing to her that she had always
maintained: that ail men were mean and tyrannical. As it turned out, this attitude was related to
some daydreams of being sexually abused which had plagued her in earlier years.
There are various ways of describing this game in general terms. It is apparent that it belongs in the
large field of social dynamics. The basic fact is that by marrying, Mr. and Mrs. White have an
20

opportunity to communicate with each other, and such an opportunity may be called social contact.
The fact that they use this opportunity makes their household a social aggregation, as contrasted
with a New York subway train, for example, where people are in spatial contact but rarely avail
themselves of the opportunity and so form a this-social aggregation. The influence the Whites exert
on each other's behavior and responses constitutes social action. Various disciplines would
investigate such social action from different points of view. Since we are here concerned with the
personal histories and psycho-dynamics of the individuals involved, the present approach is one
aspect of social -psychiatry; some implicit or explicit judgment is passed on the "healthiness" of the
games studied. This is somewhat different from the more neutral and less committed attitudes of
sociology and social psychology. Psychiatry reserves the right to say, "Just a moment!" which the
other disciplines do not. Transactional analysis is a branch of social psychiatry, and game analysis
is a special aspect of transactional analysis.
Practical game analysis deals with special cases as they appear in specific situations. Theoretical
game analysis attempts to abstract and generalize the characteristics of various games, so that they
can be recognized independently of their momentary verbal content and their cultural matrix. The
theoretical analysis of "If It Weren't For You," Marital Type, for example, should state the
characteristics of that game in such a way that it can be recognized just as easily in a New Guinea
jungle village as in a Manhattan penthouse, whether it is concerned with a nuptial party or with the
financial problems of getting a fishing rod for the grandchildren; and regardless of how bluntly or
subtly the moves are made, according to the permissible degrees of frankness between husband and
wife. The prevalence of the game in a given society is a matter for sociology and anthropology.
Game analysis, as a part of social psychiatry, is only interested in describing the game when it does
occur, regardless of how often that may be. This distinction is not complex, but it is analogous to
the distinction between public health and internal medicine; the first is interested in the prevalence
of malaria, while the latter studies cases of malaria as they come up, in the jungle or in Manhattan.
At the present time the scheme given below has been round the most useful one for theoretical
game analysis. No doubt it will be improved as further knowledge accumulates. The first requisite
is to recognize that a certain sequence of maneuvers meets the criteria of a game. As many samples
as possible of the game are then collected. The significant features of the collection are isolated.
Certain aspects emerge as essential. These are then classified under headings which are designed to
be as meaningful and instructive as possible in the current state of knowledge. The analysis is
undertaken from the point of view of the one who is "it"—in this case, Mrs. White.
Thesis. This is a genera) description of the game, including the immediate sequence of events (the
social level) and information about their psychological background, evolution and significance (the
psychological level). In the case of "If It Weren't For You," Marital Type, the details already given
will serve (pp. 50-51). For the sake of brevity, this game will henceforth be referred to as IWFY.
Antithesis. The presumption that a certain sequence constitutes a game is tentative until it has been
existentially validated. This validation is carried out by a refusal to play or by undercutting the
payoff. The one who is "it" will then make more intense efforts to continue the game. In the face of
adamant refusal to play or a successful undercutting he will then lapse into a state called "despair,"
which in some respects resembles a depression, but is different in significant ways. It is more acute
and contains elements of frustration and bewilderment. It may be manifested, for example, by the
onset of perplexed weeping. In a successful therapeutic situation this may soon be replaced by
humorous laughter, implying an Adult realization: "There I go again!" Thus despair is a concern of
the Adult, while in depression it is the Child who has the executive power. Hopefulness,
enthusiasm or a lively interest in one's surroundings is the opposite of depression; laughter is the
opposite of despair. Hence the enjoyable quality of therapeutic game analysis. The antithesis to
IWFY is permissiveness. As long as the husband is prohibitive, the game can proceed. If instead of
saying "Don't you dare!" he says "Go ahead!" the underlying phobias are unmasked, and the wife
can no longer turn on him, as demonstrated in Mrs. White's case.
For clear understanding of a game, the antithesis should be known and its effectiveness
demonstrated in practice.
21

Aim, This states simply the general purpose of the game. Sometimes there are alternatives. The aim
of IWFY may be stated as either reassurance ("It's not that I'm afraid, it's that he won't let me") or
vindication ("It's not that I'm not trying, it's that he holds me back"). The reassuring function is
easier to clarify and is more in accord with the security needs of the wife; therefore IWFY is most
simply regarded as having the aim of reassurance.
Roles. As previously noted, ego states are not roles but phenomena. Therefore ego states and roles
have to be distinguished in a formal description. Games may be described as two-handed, threehanded, many-handed, etc., according to the number of roles offered. Sometimes the ego state of
each player corresponds to his role, sometimes it does not.
IWFY is a two-handed game and calls For a restricted wife and a domineering husband. The wife
may play her role either as a prudent Adult ("It's best that I do as he says") or as a petulant Child.
The domineering husband may preserve an Adult ego state ("It's best that you do as I say") or slip
into a Parental one ("You'd better do what I say").
Dynamics. There are alternatives in staring the psycho-dynamic driving forces behind each case of
a game. It is usually possible, however, to pick out a single psychodynamic concept which usefully,
aptly and meaningfully epitomizes the situation. Thus IWFY is best described as deriving from
phobic sources.
Examples. Since the childhood origins of a game, or its infantile prototypes, are instructive to
study, it is worthwhile to search for such cognates in making a formal description. It happens that
IFWY is just as frequently played by little children as by grown-ups, so the childhood version is the
same as the later one, with the actual parent substituted for the restricting husband.
Transactional Paradigm. The transactional analysis of a typical situation is presented, giving both
the social and psychological levels of a revealing ulterior transaction. In its most dramatic form,
IWFY at the social level is a Parent-Child game.
Mr. White: "You stay home and take care of the house."
Mrs. White: "If it weren't for you, I could be out having fun."
At the psychological level (the ulterior marriage contract) the relationship is Child-Child, and quite
different
Mr. White: "You must always be here when I get home. I'm terrified of desertion."
Mrs. White: "I will be if you help me avoid phobic situations."
The two levels are illustrated in Figure 7.
Parent

Parent

Social level

Adult

Child

Mister
"Stay home"
("I'm terrified")

Adult

Psychological level

Child

Missis
"If ft weren't for you"
("Protect me'*)

< FIGURE 7 > A Game

22

Moves. The moves of a game correspond roughly to the strokes in a ritual. As in any game, the
players become increasingly adept with practice. Wasteful moves are eliminated, and more and
more purpose is condensed into each move. "Beautiful friendships" are often based on the fact that
the players complement each other with great economy and satisfaction, so that there is a maximum
yield with a minimum effort from the games they play with each other. Certain intermediate,
precautionary or concessional moves can be eluded, giving a high degree of elegance to the
relationship. The effort saved on defensive maneuvers can be devoted to ornamental flourishes
instead, to the delight of both parries and sometimes of the onlookers as well. The student observes
that there is a minimum number of moves essential to the program of the game, and these can be
stated in the protocol. Individual players will embellish or multiply these basic moves according to
their needs, talents or desires. The framework for IWFY is as follows:
(1) Instruction-Compliance ("You stay home"—"All right").
(2) Instruction-Protest ("You stay home again"—"If it weren't for you").
Advantages. The general advantages of a game consist in its stabilizing (homeostatic) functions.
Biological homeo-stasis is promoted by the stroking, and psychological stability is reinforced by
the confirmation of position. As has already been noted, stroking may take various forms, so that
the biological advantage of a game may be stated in tactile terms. Thus the husband's role in IWFY
is reminiscent of a backhanded slap (quite different in effect from a palmar slap, which is a direct
humiliation), and the wife's response is something like a petulant kick in the shins. Hence the
biological gain from IWFY is derived from the belligerence-petulance exchanges: a distressing but
apparently effective way to maintain the health of nervous tissues.
Confirmation of the wife's position—"All men are tyrants" —is the existential advantage. This
position is a reaction to the need to surrender that is inherent in the phobias, a demonstration of the
coherent structure which underlies all games. The expanded statement would be: "If I went out
alone in a crowd, I would be overcome by the temptation to surrender; at home I don't surrender: he
forces me, which proves that all men are tyrants." Hence this game is commonly played by women
who suffer from feelings of unreality, which signifies their difficulty in keeping the Adult in charge
in situations of strong temptation. The detailed elucidation of these mechanisms belongs to
psychoanalysis rather than game analysis. In game analysis the end product is the chief concern.
Internal psychological advantage of a game is its direct effect on the psychic economy (libido). In
IWFY the socially acceptable surrender to the husband's authority keeps the woman from
experiencing neurotic fears. At the same time it satisfies masochistic needs, if they exist, using
masochism not in the sense of self-abnegation but with its classical meaning of sexual excitement
in situations of deprivation, humiliation or pain. That is, it excites her to be deprived and dominated.
External psychological advantage is the avoidance of the feared situation by playing the game. This
is especially obvious in IWFY, where it is the outstanding motivation: by complying with the
husband's strictures, the wife avoids the public situations which she fears.
Internal social advantage is designed by the name of the game as it is played in the individual's
intimate circle. By her compliance, the wife gains the privilege of saying "If it weren't for you."
This helps to structure the time she must spend with her husband; in the case of Mrs. White, this
need for structure was especially strong because of the lack of other common interests, especially
before the arrival of their offspring and after the children were grown. In between, the game was
played less intensively and less frequently, because the children performed their usual function of
structuring time for their parents, and also provided an even more widely accepted version of
IWFY, the busy-housewife variation. The fact that young mothers in America often really are very
busy does not change the analysis of this variation. Game analysis only attempts to answer this
question without prejudice: given that a young woman is busy, how does she go about exploiting
her busyness in order to get some compensation for it?
External social advantage is designated by the use made of the situation in outside social contacts.
In the case of the game "If It Weren't For You," which is what the wife says to her husband, there is
a transformation into the pastime "If It Weren't For Him" when she meets with her friends over
morning coffee. Again, the influence of games in the selection of social companions is shown. The
23

new neighbor who is invited for morning coffee is being invited to play "If It Weren't For Him." If
she plays, well and good, she will soon be a bosom friend of the old-timers, other things being
equal. If she refuses to play and insists on taking a charitable view of her husband, she will not last
long. Her situation will be the same as if she kept refusing to drink at cocktail parties—in most
circles, she would gradually be dropped from the guest lists.
This completes the analysis of the formal features of IWFY. In order to clarify the procedure
further, the analysis of "Why Don't You—Yes But," which is the most common game played at
social gatherings, committee meetings and psychotherapy groups the world over, should be
consulted (page 115).

3 THE GENESIS OF GAMES
From the present point of view, child rearing may be regarded as an educational process in which
the child is taught what games to play and how to play diem. He is also taught procedures, rituals
and pastimes appropriate to his position in the local social situation, but these are less significant.
His knowledge of and skill in procedures, rituals and pastimes determine what opportunities will be
available to him, other things being equal; but his games determine the use he will make of those
opportunities, and the outcomes of situations for which he is eligible. As elements of his script, or
unconscious life-plan, his favored games also determine his ultimate destiny (again with other
things being equal): the payoffs on his marriage and career, and the circumstances surrounding his
death.
While conscientious parents devote a great deal of attention to teaching their children procedures,
rituals and pastimes appropriate to their stations in life, and with equal care select schools, colleges
and churches where their teachings will be reinforced, they tend to overlook the question of games,
which form the basic structure for the emotional dynamics of each family, and which the children
learn through significant experiences in everyday living from their earliest months. Related
questions have been discussed for thousands of years in a rather general, unsystematic fashion, and
there has been some attempt at a more methodical approach in the modern orthopsychiatric
literature; but without the concept of games there is little possibility of a consistent investigation.
Theories of internal individual psychodynamics have so far not been able to solve satisfactorily the
problems of human relationships. These are transactional situations which call for a theory of social
dynamics that cannot be derived solely from consideration of individual motivations.
Since there are as yet few well-trained specialists in child psychology and child psychiatry who are
also trained in game analysis, observations on the genesis of games are sparse. Fortunately, the
following episode took place in the presence of a well-educated transactional analyst.
Tanjy, age 7, got a stomach-ache at the dinner table and asked to be excused for that reason. His
parents suggested that he lie down for a while. His little brother Mike, age 3, then said, "I have a
stomach-ache too," evidently angling for the same consideration. The father looked at him for a few
seconds and then replied, "You don't want to play that game, do you?" Whereupon Mike burst out
laughing and said, "No!"
If this had been a household of food or bowel faddists, Mike would also have been packed off to
bed by his alarmed parents. If he and they had repeated this performance several times, it might be
anticipated that this game would have become part of Mike's character, as it so often does if the
parents cooperate. Whenever he was jealous of a privilege granted to a competitor, he would plead
illness in order to get some privileges himself. The ulterior transaction would then consist of:
(social level) "I don't feel well" + (psychological level) "You must grant me a privilege, too." Mike,
however, was saver from such a hypochondriacal career. Perhaps he will end up with a worse fate,
but that is not the issue. The issue is that a game in statu nascendi was broken right there by the
father's question and by the boy's frank acknowledgment that what he proposed was a game.
This demonstrates clearly enough that games are quite deliberately initiated by young children.
After they become fixed patterns of stimulus and response, their origins become lost in the mists of
time and their ulterior nature becomes obscured by social fogs. Both can be brought into awareness
only by appropriate procedures: the origin by some form of analytic therapy and the ulterior aspect
24

by antithesis. Repeated clinical experience along these lines makes it clear that games are imitative
in nature, and that they are initially set up by the Adult (neopsychic) aspect of the child's
personality. If the Child ego state can be revived in the grown-up player, the psychological aptitude
of this segment (the Adult aspect of the Child ego state) is so striking, and its skill in manipulating
people so enviable, that it is colloquially called "The Professor" (of Psychiatry). Hence in
psychotherapy groups which concentrate on game analysis, one of the more sophisticated
procedures is the search for the little "Professor" in each patient, whose early adventures in setting
up games between the ages of two and eight are listened to by everyone present with fascination
and often, unless the games are tragic, with enjoyment and even hilarity, in which the patient
himself may join with justifiable self-appreciation and smugness. Once he is able to do that, he is
well on his way to relinquishing what may be an unfortunate behavior pattern which he is much
better off without.
Those are the reasons why in the formal description of a game an attempt is always made to
describe the infantile or childhood prototype.

4 THE FUNCTION OF GAMES
Because there is so little opportunity for intimacy in daily life, and because some forms of intimacy
(especially if intense) are psychologically impossible for most people, the bulk of the time in
serious social life is taken up with playing games. Hence games are both necessary and desirable,
and the only problem at issue is whether the games played by an individual offer the best yield for
him. In this connection it should be remembered that the essential feature of a game is its
culmination, or payoff. The principal function of the preliminary moves is to set up the situation for
this payoff, but they are always designed to harvest the maximum permissible satisfaction at each
step as a secondary product. Thus in "Schlemiel" (making messes and then apologizing) the payoff,
and the purpose of the game, is to obtain the forgiveness which is forced by the apology; the
spillings and cigarette burns are only steps leading up to this, but each such trespass yields its own
pleasure. The enjoyment derived from the spilling does not make spilling a game. The apology is
the critical stimulus that leads to the denouement. Otherwise the spilling would simply be a
destructive procedure, a delinquency perhaps enjoyable.
The game of "Alcoholic" is similar: whatever the physiological origin, if any, of the need to drink,
in terms of game analysis the imbibing is merely a move in a game which is carried on with the
people in the environment. The drinking may bring its own kinds of pleasure, but it is not the
essence of the game. This is demonstrated in the variant of "Dry Alcoholic," which involves the
same moves and leads to the same payoff as the regular game, but is played without any bottles.
Beyond their social function in structuring time satisfactorily, some games are urgently necessary
for the maintenance of health in certain individuals. These people's psychic stability is so
precarious, and their positions are so tenuously maintained, that to deprive them of their games may
plunge them into irreversible despair and even psychosis. Such people will fight very hard against
any antithetical moves. This is often observed in marital situations when the psychiatric
improvement of one spouse (i-e., the abandonment of destructive games) leads to rapid
deterioration in the other spouse, to whom the games were of paramount importance in maintaining
equilibrium. Hence it is necessary to exercise prudence in game analysis.
Fortunately, the rewards of game-free intimacy, which is or should be the most perfect form of
human living, are so great that even precariously balanced personalities can safely and joyfully
relinquish their games if an appropriate partner can be found for the better relationship.
On a larger scale, games are integral and dynamic components of the unconscious life-plan, or
script, of each individual; they serve to fill in the time while he waits for the final fulfillment,
simultaneously advancing the action. Since the last act of a script characteristically calls for either a
miracle or a catastrophe, depending on whether the script is constructive or destructive, the
corresponding games ate accordingly either constructive or destructive. In colloquial terms, an
individual whose script is oriented toward "waiting for Santa Claus" is likely to be pleasant to deal
with in such games as "Gee You're Wonderful, Mr. Murgatroyd," while someone with a tragic
25

script oriented toward "waiting for rigor mortis to set in" may play such disagreeable games as
"Now I've Got You, You Son of a Bitch."
It should be noted that colloquialisms such as those in the previous sentence are an integral part of
game analysis, and are freely used in transactional psychotherapy groups and seminars. The
expression "waiting for rigor mortis to set in" originated in a dream of a patient, in which she
decided to get certain things done "before rigor mortis set in." A patient in a sophisticated group
pointed out what the therapist had overlooked: that in practice, waiting for Santa Claus and waiting
for death are synonymous. Since colloquialisms are of decisive importance in game analysis, they
will be discussed at length later on.

5 THE CLASSIFICATION OF GAMES
Most of the variables used in analyzing games and pastimes have already been mentioned, and any
of them can be used in classifying games and pastimes systematically. Some of the more obvious
classifications are based on the following factors:
1. Number of players: two-handed games (Frigid Woman), three-handed games (Let's You and
Him Fight), five-handed games (Alcoholic) and many-handed games (Why Don't You-Yes But).
2. Currency used: words (Psychiatry), money (Debtor), parts of the body (Polysurgery).
3. Clinical types: hysterical (Rapo), obsessive-compulsive (Schlemiel), paranoid (Why Does This
Have to Happen to Me), depressive (There I Go Again).
4. Zonal: oral (Alcoholic), anal (Schlemiel), phallic (Let's You and Him Fight).
5. Psychodynamic: counterphobic (If It Weren't for You), projective (PTA), introjective
(Psychiatry).
6. Instinctual: masochistic (If It Weren't for You), sadistic (Schlemiel), fetishistic (Frigid Man).
In addition to the number of players, three other quantitative variables are often useful to consider:
1. Flexibility. Some games, such as Debtor and Poly-surgery, can be played properly with only one
kind of currency, while others, such as exhibitionistic games, are more flexible.
2. Tenacity. Some people give up their games easily, others are persistent.
3. Intensity. Some people play their games in a relaxed way, others are more tense and aggressive.
Games so played are known as easy and hard games, respectively.
These three variables converge to make games gentle or violent. In mentally disturbed people, there
is often a noticeable progression in this respect, so that one can speak of stages. A paranoid
schizophrenic may initially play a flexible, loose, easy game of first-stage "Ain't It Awful" and
progress to an inflexible, tenacious, hard third stage. The stages in a game are distinguished as
follows:
a. A First-Degree Game is one which is socially acceptable in the agent's circle.
b. A Second-Degree Game is one from which no permanent, irremediable damage arises, but which
the players would rather conceal from the public.
c. A Third-Degree Game is one which is played for keeps, and which ends in the surgery, the
courtroom or the morgue.
Games can also be classified according to any of the other specific factors discussed in the analysis
of IWFY: the aims, the roles, the most obvious advantages. The most likely candidate For a
systematic, scientific classification is probably one based on the existential position; but since
knowledge of this factor is not yet sufficiently advanced, such a classification will have to be
postponed. Failing that, the most practical classification at present is probably a sociological one.
That is what will be used in the next section.
NOTES
Due credit should be given to Stephen Potter for his perceptive, humorous discussions of
maneuvers, or "ploys," in everyday social situations^ and to G. H. Mead for his pioneering study of
the role of games in social living.3 Those games that lead to psychiatric disabilities have been
systematically studied at the San Francisco Social Psychiatry Seminars since 1958, and this sector

26

of game analysis has recently been approached by T. Szasz.4 For the role of games in the group
process, die present writer's book on group dynamics should be consulted.*
REFERENCES
1. Maurer, D. W. The Big Con. The Bofabs-Merrill Co., New York, 1940.
2. Potter, S. Theory and Practice of Gamentanship. Henry Holt & Company, New York, n.d.
3. Mead, G. H, Mind, Self, and Society. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1934.
GAMES / 65
4. Szasz, T. The Myth of Mental Illness. Harper & Brothers, New York' 1961. . .
5. Berne, E. The Structure and Dynamics of Organizations and Group's. J. B. Lippincott Company,
Philadelphia and Montreal, 1963.

27

PART II
A Thesaurus of Games
Introduction
THIS collection is complete to date (1962), but new games are continually being discovered.
Sometimes what appears to be another example of a known game turns out, on more careful study,
to be an entirely new one, and a game which appears to be new often turns out to be a variation of a
known one. The individual items of the analyses are also subject to change as new knowledge
accumulates; for example, where there are several possible choices in describing dynamics, the
statement given may turn out later not to have been the most cogent one. Both the list of games and
the items given in the analyses, however, are adequate for clinical work.
Some of the games are discussed and analyzed in extenso. Others, which require more investigation,
or are uncommon, or whose significance is fairly obvious, are only briefly mentioned. The one who
is "it" is generally referred to as the "agent," or is given the name of "White," while the other party
is called "Black."
The games are classified into families according to the situations in which they most commonly
occur: Life Games, Marital Games, Party Games, Sexual Games and Underworld Games; then
comes a section for professionals on Consulting Room Games, and finally, some examples of Good
Games.

1 NOTATION
The following notation will be used in the analytic protocols.
Title: If the game has a long name, a convenient abbreviation is used in the text. Where a game or
its variations has more than one name, a cross reference will be found in the Index of Games. In
oral reports it is preferable to use the full name of the game rather than its abbreviation or acronym.
Thesis: this is restated as cogently as possible.
Aim: this gives the most meaningful choice, based on die writer's experience.
Roles: the role of the one who is "it," and from whose point of view the game is discussed, is given
first, in italics.
Dynamics: as with aim.
Examples: (1) this gives an illustration of the game as played in childhood, the most easily
recognizable pertinent prototype. (2) an illustration from adult life.
Paradigm: this illustrates as briefly as possible the critical transaction or transactions at the social
and psychological levels.
Moves: this gives the minimum number of transactional stimuli and transactional responses as
found in practice. These may be expanded, diluted or ornamented to an unlimited extent in different
situations.
Advantages: (1) Internal Psychological—this attempts to state how the game contributes to internal
psychic stability. (2) External Psychological—this attempts to state what anxiety-arousing
situations or intimacies are being avoided. (3) Internal Social—this gives the characteristic phrase
used in the game as played with intimates. (4) External Social—this gives the key phrase used in
the derivative game or pastime played in less intimate circles.
(5) Biological—this attempts to characterize the kind of stroking which the game offers to the
parties involved.
(6) Existential—this states the position from which the game is typically played.
Relatives: this gives the names of complementary, allied and antithetical games.
An adequate understanding of a game can only be obtained in the psychotherapeutic situation.
People who play destructive games will come to the therapist far more frequently than people who
play constructive ones. Therefore most of the games which are well understood are basically

28

destructive, but the reader should remember that there are constructive ones played by more
fortunate people.
And to prevent the idea of games from becoming vulgarized, as so many psychiatric terms are, it
should be emphasized once more that it is a very precise idea: games should be clearly
distinguished, by the criteria given previously, from procedures, rituals, pastimes, operations,
maneuvers and the attitudes which arise from various positions. A game is played from a position,
but a position or its corresponding attitude is not a game.

2 COLLOQUIALISMS
Many colloquialisms used here were supplied by patients. All of them, if used with due regard to
timing and sensibilities, are appreciated, understood and enjoyed by the players. If some of them
seem disrespectful, the irony is directed against the games and not against the people who play
them. The first requirement for colloquialisms is aptness, and if they often sound amusing, that is
precisely because they hit the nail on the head. As I have tried to show elsewhere in discussing
colloquial epithets, a whole page of learned polysyllables may not convey as much as the statement
that a certain woman is a bitch, or that a certain man is a jerk.1 Psychological truths may be stated
for academic purposes in scientific language, but the effective recognition of emotional strivings in
practice may require a different approach. So we prefer playing "Ain't It Awful" to "verbalizing
projected anal aggression." The former not only has a more dynamic meaning and impact, but it is
actually more precise. And sometimes people get better faster in bright rooms than diey do in drab
ones.
REFERENCE
1. Berne, E. "Intuition IV: Primal Images & Primal Judgments." Psychiatric Quarterly. 29: 634-658,
1955.

29

