CHAPTER SIX
Life Games
ALL games have an important and probably decisive influence on the destinies of the players under
ordinary social conditions; but some offer more opportunities than others for lifelong careers and
are more likely to involve relatively innocent bystanders. This group may be conveniently called
Life Games. It includes "Alcoholic," "Debtor," "Kick Me," "Now I've Got You, You Son of a
Bitch," "See What You Made Me Do" and their principal variants. They merge on the one side with
marital games, and on the other with those of the underworld.

1 ALCOHOLIC
Thesis. In game analysis there is no such thing as alcoholism or "an alcoholic," but there is a role
called the Alcoholic in a certain type of game. If a biochemical or physiological abnormality is the
prim^ mover in excessive drinking-and that is still open to some question - then its study belongs in
the field of internal medicine. Game analysis is interested in something quite different—the kinds
of social transactions that are related to such excesses. Hence the game "Alcoholic."
In its full flower this is a five-handed game, although the roles may be condensed so that it starts
off and terminates as a two-handed one. The central role is that of the Alcoholic—the one who is
"it"—played by White. The chief supporting role is that of Persecutor, typically played by a
member of the opposite sex, usually the spouse. The third role is that of Rescuer, usually played by
someone of the same sex, often the good family doctor who is interested in the patient and also in
drinking, problems. In the classical situation the doctor successfully rescues the alcoholic from his
habit. After White has not taken a drink for six months they congratulate each other. The following
day White is found in the gutter.
The fourth role is that of the Patsy, or Dummy. In literature this is played by the delicatessen man
who extends credit to White, gives him a sandwich on the curt and perhaps a cup of coffee, without
either persecuting him or trying to rescue him. In life this is more frequently played by White's
mother, who gives him money and often sympathizes with him about the wife who does not
understand him. In this aspect of the game, White is required to account in some plausible way for
his need for money—by some project in which both pretend to believe, although they know what
he is really going to spend most of the money for. Sometimes the Patsy slides over into another role,
which is a helpful but not essential one: the Agitator, the "good guy" who offers supplies without
even being asked for them: "Come have a drink with me (and you will go downhill faster)."
The ancillary professional in all drinking games is the bartender or liquor clerk. In the game
"Alcoholic" he plays the fifth role, the Connection, the direct source of supply who also
understands alcoholic talk, and who in a way is the most meaningful person in the life of any addict.
The difference between the Connection and the other players is the difference between
professionals and amateurs in any game: the professional knows when to stop. At a certain point a
good bartender refuses to serve the Alcoholic, who is then left without any supplies unless he can
locate a more indulgent Connection.
In the initial stages of "Alcoholic," the wife may play all three supporting roles: at midnight the
Patsy, undressing him, making him coffee and letting him beat up on her; in the morning the
Persecutor, berating him for the evil of his ways; and in the evening the Rescuer, pleading with him
to change them. In the later stages, due sometimes to organic deterioration, the Persecutor and the
Rescuer can be dispensed with, but are tolerated if they are also wilting to act as sources of supply.
White will go to the Mission House and be rescued if he can get a free meal there; or be will stand
for a scolding, amateur or professional, as long as he can get a handout afterward.
Present experience indicates that the payoff in "Alcoholic" (as is characteristic of games in general)
comes from the aspect to which most investigators pay least attention. In the analysis of this game,
drinking itself is merely an incidental pleasure having added advantages, the procedure leading up
to the culmination, which is the hangover. It is the same in the game of Schlemiel: the mess-making,
30

which attracts the most attention, is merely a pleasure-giving way for White to lead up to the crux,
which is obtaining forgiveness from Black.
For the Alcoholic the hangover is not as much the physical pain as the psychological torment. The
two favorite pastimes of drinking people are "Martini" (how many drinks and how they were mixed)
and "Morning After" (Let me tell you about my hangover). "Martini" is played, for the most part,
by social drinkers; many alcoholics prefer a hard round of psychological "Morning After," and
organizations such as A.A. offer him an unlimited opportunity for this.
Whenever one patient visited his psychiatrist after a binge, he would call himself all sorts of names;
the psychiatrist said nothing. Later, recounting these visits in a therapy group, White said with
smug satisfaction that it was the psychiatrist who had called him all those names. The main
conversational interest of many alcoholics in the therapeutic situation is not their drinking, which
they apparently mention mostly in deference to their persecutors, but their subsequent suffering.
The transactions! object of the drinking, aside from the personal pleasures it brings, is to set up a
situation where the Child can be severely scolded not only by the internal Parent but by any
parental figures in the environment who are interested enough to oblige. Hence the therapy of this
game should be concentrated not on the drinking but on the morning after, the self-indulgence in
self-castigation. There is a type of heavy drinker, however, who does not have hangovers, and such
people do not belong in the present category.
There is also a game "Dry Alcoholic," in which White goes through the process of financial or
social degradation without a bottle, making the same sequence of moves and requiring the same
supporting cast. Here again, the morning after is the crux of the matter. Indeed, it is the similarity
between "Dry Alcoholic" and regular "Alcoholic" which emphasizes that both are games; for
example, the procedure for getting discharged from a job is the same in both. "Addict" is similar to
"Alcoholic," but more sinister, more dramatic, more sensational and faster. In our society, at least,
it leans more heavily on the readily available Persecutor, with Patsies and Rescuers being few and
far between and the Connection playing a much more central role.
There are a variety of organizations involved in "Alcoholic," some of them national or even
international in scope, others local. Many of them publish rules for the game. Nearly all of them
explain how to play the role of Alcoholic: take a drink before breakfast, spend money allotted for
other purposes, etc. They also explain the function of the Rescuer. Alcoholics Anonymous, for
example, continues playing the actual game but concentrates on inducing the Alcoholic to take the
role of Rescuer. Former Alcoholics are preferred because they know how the game goes, and hence
are better qualified to play the supporting role than people who have never played before. Cases
have been reported of a chapter of A.A. running out of Alcoholics to work on; whereupon the
members resumed drinking since there was no other way to continue the game in the absence of
people to rescue.
There are also organizations devoted to improving the lot of the other players. Some put pressure
on the spouses to shift their roles from Persecutor to Rescuer. The one which seems to come closest
to the theoretical ideal of treatment deals with teen-age offspring of alcoholics; these young people
are encouraged to break away from the game itself, rather than merely shift their roles.
The psychological cure of an alcoholic also lies in getting him to stop playing the game altogether,
rather than simply change from one role to another. In some cases this has been feasible, although it
is a difficult task to find something else as interesting to the Alcoholic as continuing his game.
Since he is classically afraid of intimacy, the substitute may have to be another game rather than a
game-free relationship. Often so-called cured alcoholics are not very stimulating company socially,
and possibly they feel a lack of excitement in their lives and are continually tempted to go back to
their old ways. The criterion of a true "game cure" is that the former Alcoholic should be able to
drink socially without putting himself in jeopardy. The usual "total abstinence" cure will not satisfy
the game analyst.
It is apparent from the description of this game that there is a strong temptation for the Rescuer to
play "I'm Only Trying to Help You": for the Persecutor to play "Look What You've Done to Me";
and for the Patsy to play "Good Joe." With the rise of rescue organizations which publicize the idea
31

that alcoholism is a disease, alcoholics have been taught to play "Wooden Leg." The law, which
takes a special interest in such people, tends to encourage this nowadays- The emphasis has shifted
from the Persecutor to the Rescuer, from "I am a sinner" to "What do you expect from a sick
mane1" (part of the trend in modern thinking away from religion and toward science). From an
existential point of view the shift is questionable, and from a practical point of view it seems to
have done little to diminish the sale of liquor to heavy
*In the underworld slang "patsy" once meant all right, or satisfactory, and later came to denote a
"pigeon" drinkers. Nevertheless, Alcoholics Anonymous is still for most people the best initiation
into the therapy of over-indulgence.
Antithesis. As is well known, "Alcoholic" is usually played hard and is difficult to give up. In one
case a female alcoholic in a therapy group participated very little until she thought she knew
enough about the other members to go ahead with her game. She then asked them to tell her what
they thought of her. Since she had behaved pleasantly enough, various members said nice things
about her, but she protested: "That's not what I want. I want to know what you really think." She
made it clear that she was seeking derogatory comments. The other women refused to persecute her,
whereupon she went home and told her husband that if she took another drink, he must either
divorce her or send her to a hospital. He promised to do this, and that evening she became
intoxicated and he sent her to a sanitarium. Here the other members refused to play the persecutory
roles White assigned to them; she was unable to tolerate this antithetical behavior, in spite of
everyone's efforts to reinforce whatever insight she had already obtained. At home she found
someone who was willing to play the role she demanded.
In other cases, however, it appears possible to prepare the patient sufficiently so that the game can
be given up, and to attempt a true social cure in which the therapist declines to play either
Persecutor or Rescuer. It is equally untherapeutic for him to play the role of Patsy by allowing the
patient to forego his financial and punctuality obligations. The correct therapeutic procedure from a
transactional point of view is, after careful preliminary groundwork, to take an Adult contractual
position and refuse to play any of the roles, hoping that the patient will be able to tolerate not only
abstinence from drinking but also from playing his game. If he cannot, he is best referred to a
Rescuer.
Antithesis is particularly difficult, because the heavy drinker is highly regarded in most Western
countries as a desirable object for censure, concern or generosity, and someone who refuses to play
any of these roles tends to arouse public indignation. A rational approach may be even more
alarming to the Rescuers than to the Alcoholic, sometimes with unfortunate consequences to the
therapy. In one clinical situation a group of workers were seriously interested in the game
"Alcoholic" and were attempting to effect real cures by breaking up the game rather than merely
rescuing the patients. As soon as this became apparent, they were frozen out by the lay committee
which was backing the clinic, and none of them was ever again called on to assist in treating these
patients.
Relatives. An interesting byplay in "Alcoholic" is called "Have One." This was discovered by a
perceptive student of industrial psychiatry. White and his wife (a non-drinking Persecutor) go on a
picnic with Black and his wife (both Patsies). White says to the Blacks, "Have one!" If they have
one, this gives White license to have four or five. The game is unmasked if the Blacks refuse.
White, by the rules of drinking, is then entitled to be insulted, and he will find more compliant
companions for his next picnic. What appears at the social level to be Adult generosity, is at the
psychological level an act of insolence, whereby White's Child obtains Parental indulgence from
Black by open bribery under the very nose of Mrs. White, who is powerless to protest. Actually it is
just because she will be "powerless" to protest dial Mrs. White consents to the whole arrangement,
since she is just as anxious for the game to continue, with herself in the role of Persecutor, as Mr.
White is with himself in the role of Alcoholic, Her recriminations against him in the morning after
die picnic are easy to imagine. This variant can cause complications if White is Black's boss.
In general the Patsy is not as badly off as the name implies. Patsies are often lonely people who
have a great deal to gain by being nice to Alcoholics. The delicatessen man who plays "Good Joe"
32

makes many acquaintances in this way, and he can get a good reputation in his own social circle
not only as a generous person but also as a good storyteller.
One variant of "Good Joe," incidentally, is to go around asking for advice about how best to help
people. This is an example of a jolly and constructive game worth encouraging. Its inverse is Tough
Guy, taking lessons in violence or asking for advice about how best to hurt people. Although the
mayhem is never put into practice, the player has the privilege of associating with real tough guys
who are playing for keeps, and can bask in their reflected glory. This is one species of what the
French call un fanfaron de vice.
ANALYSIS
Thesis: How bad I've been; see if you can stop me. Aim: Self-castigation.
Roles: Alcoholic, Persecutor, Rescuer, Patsy, Connection. Dynamics: Oral deprivation.
Examples: (1) See if you can catch me. The prototypes of this game are difficult to correlate
because of its complexity. Children, however, particularly children of alcoholics, often go through
many of the maneuvers characteristic of the Alcoholic. "See if you can stop me," which involves
lying, hiding things, seeking derogatory comments, looking for helpful people, finding a benevolent
neighbor who will give free handouts, etc. Self-castigation is often postponed to later years.
(2) The alcoholic and his circle, Social Paradigm: Adult-Adult.
Adult: "Tell me what you really think of me or help me stop drinking."
Adult: "I'll be frank with you." Psychological Paradigm: Parent-Child. Child: "See if you can stop
me." Parent: "You must stop drinking because. . . ."
Moves: (1) Provocation—accusation or forgiveness. (2) Indulgence—anger or disappointment.
Advantages: (1) Internal Psychological—(a) Drinking as a procedure—rebellion, reassurance and
satisfaction of craving. (b) "Alcoholic" as a game—self-castigation (probable). (2) External
Psychological—avoidance of sexual and other forms of intimacy. (3) Internal Social—See if you
can stop me. (4) External Social—"Morning After," "Martini," and other pastimes. (5) Biological—
alternating loving and angry exchanges. (6) Existential—Everybody wants to deprive m,

2 DEBTOR
Thesis. "Debtor" is more than a game. In America it tends to become a script, a plan for a whole
lifetime, just as it does in some of the jungles of Africa and New Guinea.2 There the relatives of a
young man buy him a bride at an enormous price, putting him in their debt for years to come. Here
die same custom prevails, at least in the more civilized sections of the country, except that the bride
price becomes a house price, and if there is no stake from the relatives, this role is taken on by the
bank. Thus the young man in New Guinea with an old wrist watch dangling from his ear to ensure
success, and the young man in America with a new wrist watch wrapped around his arm to ensure
success, both feel that they have a "purpose" in life. The big celebration, the wedding or
housewarming, takes place not when the debt is discharged, but when it is undertaken. What is
emphasized on TV, for example, is not the middle-aged man who has finally paid off his mortgage,
but the young man who moves into his new home with his family, proudly waving the papers he
has just signed and which will bind him for most of his productive years. After he has paid his
debts—the mortgage, the college expenses for his children and his insurance—he is regarded as a
problem, a "senior citizen" for whom society must provide not only material comforts but a new
"purpose." As in New Guinea, if he is very shrewd, he may become a big creditor instead of a big
debtor, but this happens relatively rarely.
As this is written, a sow bug crawls across a desk. If he is turned over on his back, one can observe
the tremendous struggle he goes through to get on his feet again. During this interval he has a
"purpose" in his life. When he succeeds, one can almost see the look of victory on his face. Off he
goes, and one can imagine him telling his tale at the next meeting of sow bugs, looked up to by the
younger generation as an insect who has made it. And yet mixed with his smugness is a little
disappointment. Now that he has come out on top, life seems aimless. Maybe he will return in the
33

hope of repeating his triumph. It might be worth marking his back with ink, so as to recognize him
if he risks it. A courageous animal, the sow bug. No wonder he has survived for millions of years.
Most young Americans, however, take their mortgages very seriously only in times of stress. If
they are depressed, or the economic situation is bad, their obligations keep them going -and may
prevent some of them from committing suicide. Most of the time they play a mild game of "If It
Weren't for the Debts," but otherwise enjoy themselves. Only a few make a career out of playing a
hard game of "Debtor,"
"Try and Collect" (TAG) is commonly played by young married couples, and illustrates how a
game is set up so that the player "wins" whichever way it goes. The Whites obtain all sorts of goods
and services on credit, petty or luxurious, depending on their backgrounds and how they were
taught to play by their parents or grandparents. If the creditor gives up after a few soft efforts to
collect, then the Whites can enjoy their gains without penalty, and in this sense they win. If the
creditor makes more strenuous attempts, then they enjoy the pleasures of the chase as well as the
use of their purchases. The hard form of the game occurs if the creditor is determined to collect. In
order to get his money he will have to resort to extreme measures. These usually have a coercive
element—going to White's employers or driving up to his house in a noisy, garish truck labeled in
big letters COLLECTION AGENCY.
At this point there is a switch. White now knows that he will probably have to pay. But because of
the coercive element, made clear in most cases by the "third letter" from the collector ("If you do
not appear at our office within 48 hours. . . ."), White feels peremptorily justified in getting angry;
he now switches over to a variant of "Now I've Got You, You Son of a Bitch." In this case he wins
by demonstrating that the creditor is greedy, ruthless and untrustworthy. The two most obvious
advantages of this are (1) it strengthens White's existential position, which is a disguised form of
"All creditors are grasping," and (2) it offers a large external social gain, since he is now in a
position to abuse the creditor openly to his friends without losing his own status as a "Good Joe."
He may also exploit further internal social gain by confronting the creditor himself. In addition, it
vindicates his taking advantage of the credit system: if that is the way creditors are, as he has now
shown, why pay anybody?
"Creditor," in the form "Try and Get Away With It" (TAGAWI), is sometimes played by small
landlords. TAG and TAGAWI players readily recognize each other, and because of the prospective
transactional advantages and the promised sport, they are secretly pleased and readily become
involved with each other. Regardless of who wins the money, each has improved the other's
position for playing "Why Does This Always Happen To Me?" after it is all over.
Money games can have very serious consequences. If these descriptions sound facetious, as they do
to some people, it is not because they relate to trivia but because of the exposure of trivial
motivations behind matters people are taught to take seriously.
Antithesis. The obvious antithesis of TAG is to request immediate payment in cash. But a good
TAG player has methods for getting around that, which will work on any but the most hard-boiled
creditors. The antithesis of TAGAWI is promptness and honesty. Since hard TAG and TAGAWI
players are both professionals in every sense of die word, an amateur stands as much chance
playing against them as he does playing against professional gamblers. While the amateur seldom
wins, he can at least enjoy himself if he becomes involved in one of these games. Since both are by
tradition played grimly, nothing is more disconcerting to the professionals than to have an amateur
victim laugh at the outcome. In financial circles this is considered strictly Out. In the cases reported
to this writer, laughing at a debtor when one encounters him on the street is just as bewildering,
frustrating and disconcerting to him as playing anti-"Schlemiel" is to a Schlemiel.

3 KICK ME
Thesis. This is played by men whose social manner is equivalent to wearing a sign that reads
"Please Don't Kick Me." The temptation is almost irresistible, and when the natural result follows,
White cries piteously, "But the sign says 'don't kick me.'" Then he adds incredulously, "Why does
this always happen to me?" (WAHM.) Clinically, the WAHM may be introjected and disguised in
34

the "Psychiatry" cliche": "Whenever I'm under stress, I get all shook up." One game element in
WAHM comes from inverse pride: "My misfortunes are better than yours." This factor is often
found in paranoids.
If the people in his environment are restrained from striking at him by kindheartedness, "I'm Only
Trying to Help You," social convention or organizational rules, his behavior becomes more and
more provocative until he transgresses the limits and forces them to oblige. These are men who are
cast out, the jilted and the job losers.
The corresponding game among women is "Threadbare.1 Often genteel, they take pains to be
shabby. They see to it that their earnings, for "good" reasons, never rise much above the subsistence
level. If they have a windfall, there are always enterprising young men who will help them get rid
of it, giving them in return shares in a worthless business promotion or something equivalent.
Colloquially, such a woman is called "Mother's Friend," always ready to give judicious Parental
advice and living vicariously on the experience of others. Their WAHM is a silent one, and only
(heir demeanor of brave struggle suggests "Why does this always happen to me?"
An interesting form of WAHM occurs in well-adapted people who reap increasing rewards and
successes, often beyond their own expectations. Here the WAHM may lead to serious and
constructive thinking, and to personal growth in the best sense, if it takes the form "What did I
really do to deserve this?"

4 NOW I'VE GOT YOU, YOU SON OF A BITCH
Thesis. This can be seen in classic form in poker games. White gets an unbeatable hand, such as
four aces. At this point, if he is a NIGYSOB player, he is more interested in the fact that Black is
completely at his mercy than he is in good poker or making moneyWhite needed some plumbing fixtures installed, and he reviewed the costs very carefully with the
plumber before giving him a go-ahead. The price was set, and it was agreed that there would be no
extras. When the plumber submitted his bill, he included a few dollars extra for an unexpected
valve that had to be installed—about four dollars on a four-hundred-dollar job. White became
infuriated, called the plumber on the phone and demanded an explanation. The plumber would not
back down. White wrote him a long letter criticizing his integrity and ethics and refused to pay the
bill until the extra charge was withdrawn. The plumber finally gave in.
It soon became obvious that both White and the plumber were playing games. In the course of their
negotiations, they bad recognized each other's potentials. The plumber made his provocative move
when he submitted this bill. Since White had the plumber's word, the plumber was clearly in the
wrong. White now felt justified in venting almost unlimited rage against Him. Instead of merely
negotiating in a dignified way that befit the Adult standards he set for himself, perhaps with a little
innocent annoyance, White took the opportunity to make extensive criticisms of the plumber's
whole way of living. On the surface their argument was Adult to Adult, a legitimate business
dispute over a stated sum of money. At the psychological level it was Parent to Adult: White was
exploiting his trivial but socially defensible objection (position) to vent the pent-up furies of many
years on his cozening opponent, just as his mother might have done in a similar situation. He
quickly recognized his underlying attitude (NIGYSOB) and realized how secretly delighted he had
been at the plumber's provocation. He then recalled that ever since early childhood he had looked
for similar injustices, received diem with delight and exploited them with the same vigor. In many
of the cases he recounted, he had forgotten the actual provocation, but remembered in great detail
the course of the ensuing battle. The plumber, apparently, was playing some variation of "Why
Does This Always Happen to Me?" (WAHM).
NIGYSOB is a two-handed game which must be distinguished from "Ain't It Awful?" (AIA). In
AIA the agent seeks injustices in order to complain about them to a third party, making a threehanded game: Aggressor, Victim, Confidant. AIA is played under the slogan "Misery Loves
Company." The confidant is usually someone who also plays AIA. WAHM is three-handed, too,
but here the agent is trying to establish his pre-eminence in misfortune and resents competition
35

from other unfortunates. NIGYSOB is commercialized in a three-handed professional form as the
"badger game." It may also be played as a two-handed marital game in more or less subtle forms.
Antithesis. The best antithesis is correct behavior. The contractual structure of a relationship with a
NIGYSOB player should be explicitly stated in detail at the first opportunity, and the rules strictly
adhered to. In clinical practice, for example, the question of payment for missed appointments or
cancellations must be settled clearly at once, and extra precautions must be taken to avoid mistakes
in bookkeeping. If an unforeseen contretemps arises, the antithesis is to yield gracefully without
dispute, until such time as the therapist is prepared to deal with the game. In everyday life, business
dealings with NIGYSOB players are always calculated risks. The wife of such a person should be
treated with polite correctness, and even the mildest flirtations, gallantries or slights should be
avoided, especially if the husband himself seems to encourage them.
ANALYSIS
Thesis: Now I've got you, you son of a bitch. Aim: Justification. Roles: Victim, Aggressor.
Dynamics: Jealous rage.
Examples: (1) I caught you this time. (2) Jealous husband.
Social Paradigm: Adult-Adult.
Adult: "See, you have done wrong." Adult: "Now that you draw it to my attention, I guess I have."
Psychological Paradigm: Parent-Child.
Parent: "I've been watching you, hoping you'd make a slip."
Child: "You caught me this time." Parent: "Yes, and I'm going to let you feel the full force of my
fury."
Moves; (I) Provocation—Accusation. (2) Defense-Accusation. (3) Defense—Punishment.
Advantages: (1) Internal Psychological-justification for rage. (2) External Psychological—avoids
confrontation of own deficiencies. (3) Internal Social-NIGYSOB. (4) External Social—they're
always out to get you. (5) Biological-belligerent exchanges, usually ipsisexual. (6) Existential—
people can't be trusted.

5 SEE WHAT YOU MADE ME DO
Thesis. In its classical form this is a marital game, and in fact is a "three-star marriage buster," but
it may also be played between parents and children and in working life.
(1) First-Degree SWYMD: White, feeling unsociable, becomes engrossed in some activity which
tends to insulate him against people. Perhaps all he wants at the moment is to be left alone. An
intruder, such as his wife or one of his children, comes either for stroking or to ask him something
like, "Where can I find the long-nosed pliers?" This interruption "causes" his chisel, paintbrush,
typewriter or soldering iron to slip, whereupon he turns on the intruder in a rage and cries, "See
what you made me do." As this is repeated through the years, his family tends more and more to
leave him alone when he is engrossed. Of course it is not the intruder but his own irritation which
"causes' the slip, and he is only too happy when it occurs, since it gives him a lever for ejecting the
visitor. Unfortunately this is a game which is only too easily learned by young children, so that it is
easily passed on from generation to generation. The underlying satisfaction and advantages are
more clearly demonstrated when it is played more seductively.
(2) Second-Degree SWYMD: If SWYMD is the basis for a way of life, rather than merely being
used occasionally as a protective mechanism, White marries a woman who plays "I'm Only Trying
to Help You" or one of its relatives. It is then easy for him to defer decisions to her. Often this may
be done in the guise of considerateness or gallantry. He may deferentially and courteously let her
decide where to go for dinner or which movie to see. If things cum out well, he can enjoy them. If
not, he can blame her by saying or implying: "You Got Me Into This," a simple variation of
SWYMD. Or he may throw the burden of decisions regarding the children's upbringing on her,
while he acts as executive officer; if the children get upset he can play a straight game of SWYMD.
This lays the groundwork through the years. For blaming mother if the children turn out badly; then
36

SWYMD is not an end in itself, but merely offers passing satisfaction on the way to "I Told You
So" or "See What You've Done Now."
The professional player who pays his psychological way with SWYMD will use it also in his work.
In occupational SWYMD the long-suffering look of resentment replaces words. The player
"democratically" or as part of "good management" asks his assistants for suggestions. In this way
he may attain an unassailable position for terrorizing his juniors. Any mistake he makes can be
used against them by blaming them for it. Used against seniors (blaming them for one's mistakes),
it becomes self-destructive and may lead to termination of employment or, in the army, to transfer
to another unit. In that case it is a component of "Why Does This Always Happen To Me?" with
resentful people, or of "There I Go Again" with depressives— (both of the "Kick Me" family).
(3) Third-Degree SWYMD: in a hard form SWYMD may be played by paranoids against people
incautious enough to give them advice (.see "I'm Only Trying to Help You"). There it may be
dangerous, and in rare cases even fatal.
"See What You Made Me Do" (SWYMD) and "You Got Me Into This" (UGMIT) complement
each other nicely, so that the SWYMD-UGMIT combination is a classical basis for the covert game
contract in many marriages. This contract is illustrated by the following sequence.
By mutual agreement Mrs. White did the family bookkeeping and paid the bills out of the joint
checking account because Mr. White was "poor at figures." Every few months they would be
notified of an overdraft, and Mr. White would have to square it with the bank. When they looked
for the source of the difficulty, it would turn out that Mrs. White had made an expensive purchase
without telling her husband. When this came to light, Mr. White would furiously play his UGMIT,
and she would tearfully accept his rebuke and promise it would not happen again. Everything
would go smoothly for a while, and then a creditor's agent would suddenly appear to demand
payment for a long-overdue bill. Mr. White, not having heard of this bill, would question his wife
about it. She would then play her SWYMD, saying that it was his fault. Since he had forbidden her
to overdraw their account, the only way she could make ends meet was by leaving this large
obligation unpaid and hiding the duns from him.
These games had been allowed to go on for ten years, on the basis that each occurrence would be
the last, and that from then on it would be different—which it was, for a few months. In therapy Mr.
White very cleverly analyzed this game without any assistance from the therapist, and also devised
an effective remedy. By mutual agreement he and Mrs. White put all charge accounts and their
bank account in his name. Mrs. White continued to do the bookkeeping and make out the checks,
but Mr. White saw the hills first and controlled the outgoing payments. In this way neither duns nor
overdrafts could get by him, and they now shared the budgetary labor. Deprived of die satisfactions
and advantages of SWYMD-UGMIT, the Whites were at first at a loss, and were then driven to
find more open and constructive types of gratification from each other.
Antithesis. The antithesis to First-Degree SWYMD is to leave the player alone, and to SecondDegree SWYMD to throw the decision back on White. The First-Degree player may react by
feeling forlorn, but seldom angry; the Second-Degree player may become sulky if he is forced to
take the initiative, so that systematic anti-SWYMD leads to disagreeable consequences. The
antithesis to Third-Degree SWYMD should be put into competent professional hands.
PARTIAL ANALYSIS
The aim of this game is vindication. Dynamically the mild form may be related to premature
ejaculation, the hard form to rage based on "castration" anxiety. It is easily acquired by children.
The external psychological gain - avoidance of responsibility) is prominent, and the game is often
precipitated by the threat of impending intimacy, since the "justifiable" anger offers a good excuse
for avoiding sexual relations. The existential position is, "I am blameless,"
NOTE
Thanks are due to Dr. Rodney Nurse and Mrs. Frances Matson of the Center for Treatment and
Education on Alcoholism in Oakland, California, and to Dr. Kenneth Everts, Dr. R. J. Starrels, Dr.
37

Robert Goulding and others with a special interest in this problem, for their continued efforts in the
study of "Alcoholic" as a game, and for their contribution to and criticism of the present discussion.
REFERENCES
1. Berne, Eric. A Layman's Guide to Psychiatry & Psychoanalysis. Simon & Schuster, New York,
1957, p. 191.
2. Mead, Margaret. Growing Up in New Guinea. William Morrow & Company, New York, 1951.

38

