CHAPTER SEVEN
Marital Game
ALMOST any game can form the scaffolding For married life and family living, but some, such as
"IF It Weren't for You," flourish better or, like "Frigid Woman," are tolerated longer, under the
legal force of contractual intimacy. Marital games, of course, can only be arbitrarily separated from
sexual games, which are treated is a separate section. Those games which characteristically evolve
into their most full-blown forms in the marital relationship include "Comer," "Courtroom," "Frigid
Woman" and "Frigid Man," "Harried," "If It Weren't for You," "Look How Hard I've Tried" and
"Sweetheart."

1 CORNER
Thesis. Comer illustrates more clearly than most games their manipulative aspect and their function
as barriers to intimacy. Paradoxically, it consists of a disingenuous refusal to play the game of
another.
1. Mrs. White suggests to her husband that they go to a movie. Mr. White agrees.
2a. Mrs. White makes an "unconscious" slip. She mentions quite naturally in the course of
conversation that the house needs painting. This is an expensive project, and White has recently
told her that their finances are strained; he requested her not to embarrass or annoy him by
suggesting unusual expenditures, at least until the beginning of the new month. This is therefore an
ill-chosen moment to bring up the condition of the house, and White responds rudely.
2b. Alternatively: White steers the conversation around to the house, making it difficult for Mrs.
White to resist die temptation to say that it needs painting. As in the previous case, White responds
rudely.
3. Mrs. White takes offense and says that if he is in one of his bad moods, she will not go to die
movie with him, and he had best go by himself. He says if that is die way she feels about it, he will
go alone.
4. White goes to die movie (or out with the boys), leaving Mrs. White at home to nurse her injured
feelings. There are two possible gimmicks in this game: A. Mrs. White knows very well from past
experience that she is not supposed to take his annoyance seriously. What he really wants is for her
to show some appreciation of how hard he works to earn their living; then they could go off happily
together. But she refuses to play, and he feels badly lei down. He leaves filled with disappointment
and resentment, while she stays at home looking abused, but with a secret feeling of triumph.
B. White knows very well from past experience that he is not supposed to take her pique seriously.
What she really wants is to be honeyed out of it; then they would go off happily together. But he
refuses to play, knowing that his refusal is dishonest: he knows she wants to be coaxed, but
pretends he doesn't. He leaves the house, feeling cheerful and relieved, but looking wronged. She is
left feeling disappointed and resentful.
In each of these cases die winner's position is, from a naive standpoint, irreproachable; all he or she
has done is take the other literally. This is clearer in (B), where White takes Mrs. White's refusal to
go at face value. They both know that this is cheating, but since she said it, she is cornered.
The most obvious gain here is die external psychological. Both of diem find movies sexually
stimulating, and it is more or less anticipated that after they return from the theater, they will make
love. Hence whichever one of them wants to avoid intimacy sets up the game in move (2a) or (2b).
This is a particularly exasperating variety of "Uproar" (see Chapter 9). The "wronged" party can, of
course, make a good case for not wanting to make love in a state of justifiable indignation, and the
cornered spouse has no recourse.
Antithesis. This is simple for Mrs. White. All she has to do is change her mind, take her husband
by the arm, smile and go along with him (a shift from Child to Adult ego state). It is more difficult
for Mr. White, since she now has die initiative; but if he reviews die whole situation, he may be
39

able to coax her into going along with him, either as a sulky Child who has been placated or, better,
as an Adult.
"Comer" is found in a somewhat different form as a family game involving the children, where it
resembles the "double-bind" described by Bateson and his associates.1 Here the child is cornered,
so that whatever he does is wrong. According to the Bateson school, this may be an important
etiological factor in schizophrenia. In the present language, then, schizophrenia may be a child's
antithesis to "Corner." Experience in treating adult schizophrenics with game analysis bears this
out—that is, if the family game of "Comer" is analyzed to demonstrate that the schizophrenic
behavior was and is specifically undertaken to counter this game, partial or total remission occurs
in a properly prepared patient.
An everyday form of "Corner" which is played by the whole family and is most likely to affect the
character development of the younger children occurs with meddlesome "Parental" parents. The
little boy or girl is urged to be more helpful around the house, but when he is, the parents find fault
with what he does—a homely example of "damned if you do and damned if you don't." This
"double-bind" may be called the Dilemma Type of "Corner."
"Corner" is sometimes found as an etiological factor in asthmatic children.
Little girl: "Mommy, do you love me?" Mother: "What is love?"
This answer leaves the child with no direct recourse. She wants to talk about mother, and mother
switches the subject to philosophy, which the little girl is not equipped to handle. She begins to
breathe hard, mother is irritated, asthma sets in, mother apologizes and the "Asthma Game" now
runs its course. This "Asthma" type of "Corner" remains to be studied further.
An elegant variant, which may be called the "Russell-Whitehead Type" of "Corner," sometimes
occurs in therapy groups.
Black: "Well, anyway, when we're silent nobody is playing games."
White: "Silence itself may be a game."
Red: "Nobody was playing games today."
White: "But not playing games may itself be a game
The therapeutic antithesis is equally elegant. Logical paradoxes are forbidden. When White is
deprived of this maneuver, his underlying anxieties come quickly to the fore. Closely allied to
"Corner" on the one hand, and to "Threadbare" on the other, is the marital game of "Lunch Bag."
The husband, who can well afford to have lunch at a good restaurant, nevertheless makes himself a
few sandwiches every morning, which he takes to the office in a paper bag. In this way he uses up
crusts of bread, leftovers from dinner and paper bags which his wife saves for him. This gives him
complete control over the family finances, for what wife would dare buy herself a mink stole in die
face of such self-sacrifice? The husband reaps numerous other advantages, such as die privilege of
eating lunch by himself and of catching up on his work during lunch hour. In many ways this is a
constructive game which Benjamin Franklin would have approved of, since it encourages the
virtues of thrift, hard work and punctuality.

2 COURTROOM
Thesis. Descriptively this belongs to the class of games which find their most florid expressions in
law, and which includes "Wooden Leg" (the plea of insanity) and "Debtor" (the civil suit).
Clinically it is most often seen in marital counseling and marital psychotherapy groups. Indeed,
some marital counseling and marital groups consist of a perpetual game of "Courtroom" in which
nothing is resolved, since the game is never broken up. In such cases it becomes evident that the
counselor or therapist is heavily involved in the game without being aware of it.
"Courtroom" can be played by any number, but is essentially three-handed, with a plaintiff, a
defendant and a judge, represented by a husband, a wife and the therapist. If it is played in a
therapy group or over the radio or TV, die other members of the audience are cast as the jury. The
husband begins plaintively, "Let me tell you what (wife's name) did yesterday. She took the . . ."
etc., etc. The wife then responds defensively, "Here is the way it really was . . . and besides just
40

before that he was . . . and anyway at die time we were both . . ." etc. The husband adds gallantly,
"Well, I'm glad you people have a chance to hear both sides of the story, I only want to be fair." At
this point the counselor says judiciously, "It seems to me that if we consider . . ." etc., etc. If there is
an audience, the therapist may throw it to them with: "Well, let's hear what the others have to say."
Or, if the group is already trained, they will play the jury without any instruction from him.
Antithesis. The therapist says to the husband, "You're absolutely right!" If the husband relaxes
complacently or triumphantly, the therapist asks: "How do you feel about my saying that?" The
husband replies: "Fine." Then the therapist says, "Actually, I feel you're in the wrong." If the
husband is honest, he will say: "I knew that all along." If be is not honest, he will show 'some
reaction that makes it clear a game is in progress. Then it becomes possible to go into the matter
further. The game element lies in the fact that while the plaintiff' is overtly clamoring for victory,
fundamentally he believes that he is wrong.
After sufficient clinical material has been gathered to clarify the situation, the game can be
interdicted by a maneuver which is one of the most elegant in the whole art of antithetics. The
therapist makes a rule prohibiting the use of the (grammatical) third person in the group.
Thenceforward the members can only address each other directly as "you" or talk about themselves
as "I," but they cannot say, "Let me tell you about him" or "Let me tell you about her. "At this point
the couple stop playing games in the group altogether, or shift into "Sweetheart," which is some
improvement, or take up "Furthermore," which is no help at all. "Sweetheart" is described in
another section (page 107). In "Furthermore" the plaintiff makes one accusation after the other. The
defendant replies to each, "I can explain." The plaintiff pays no attention to the explanation, but as
soon as the defendant pauses, he launches into his next indictment with another "furthermore,"
which is followed by another explanation—a typical Parent-Child interchange.
"Furthermore" is played most intensively by paranoid defendants. Because of their literalness, it is
particularly easy for them to frustrate accusers who express themselves in humorous or
metaphorical terms. In general, metaphors are the most obvious traps to avoid in a game of
"Furthermore."
In its everyday form, "Courtroom" is easily observed in children as a three-handed game between
two siblings and a parent. "Mommy, she took my candy away" "Yes, but he took my doll, and
before that he was hitting me, and anyway we both promised to share our candy."
ANALYSIS
Thesis: They've got to say I'm right. Aim: Reassurance.
Roles: Plaintiff, Defendant, Judge (and/or Jury). Dynamics: Sibling rivalry.
Examples: (1) Children quarreling, parent intervenes. (2) Married couple, seek "help." Social
Paradigm: Adult-Adult.
Adult: "This is what she did to me." Adult: "The real facts are these."
Psychological Paradigm: Child-Parent. Child: "Tell me I'm right."
Parent: "This one is right." Or: "You're both right."
Moves: (1) Complaint filed—Defense filed. (2) Plaintiff files rebuttal, concession, or good-will
gesture. (3) Decision of judge or instructions to jury. (4) Final decision filed.
Advantages; (1) Internal Psychological—projection of guilt. (2) External Psychological—excused
from guilt. (3) Internal Social—"Sweetheart," "Furthermore," "Uproar" and others. (4) External
Social—"Courtroom." (5) Biological—stroking from judge and jury. (6) Existential-depressive
position, I'm always wrong.

3 FRIGID WOMAN
Thesis. This is almost always a marital game, since it is hardly conceivable that an informal liaison
would present the required opportunities and privileges over a sufficient length of time, or that such
a liaison would be maintained in the face of it.

41

The husband makes advances to his wife and is repulsed. After repeated attempts, he is told that all
men are beasts, he doesn't really love her, or doesn't love her for herself, that all he is interested in
is sex. He desists for a time, then tries again with the same result. Eventually he resigns himself and
makes no further advances. As the weeks or months pass, the wife becomes increasingly informal
and sometimes forgetful. She walks through the bedroom half dressed or forgets her clean towel
when she takes a bath so that he has to bring it to her. If she plays a hard game or drinks heavily,
she may become flirtatious with other men at parties. At length he responds to those provocations
and tries again. Once more he is repulsed, and a game of "Uproar" ensues involving their recent
behavior, other couples, their in-laws, their finances and their failures, terminated by a slamming
door.
This time the husband makes up his mind that he is really through, that they will find a sexless
modus vivendi, months pass. He declines the negligee parade and the forgotten towel maneuver.
The wife becomes more provocatively informal and more provocatively forgetful, but he still
resists. Then one evening she actually approaches him and kisses him. At first he doesn't respond,
remembering his resolution, but soon nature begins to take its course after the long famine, and
now he thinks he surely has it made. His first tentative advances are not repulsed. He becomes
bolder and bolder. Just at the critical point, the wife steps back and cries: "See, what did I tell you!
All men are beasts, all I wanted was affection, but all you are interested in is sex!" The ensuing
game of "Uproar" at this point may skip the preliminary phases of their recent behavior and their
in-laws, and go right to the financial problem.
It should be noted that in spite of his protestations, the husband is usually just as afraid of sexual
intimacy as his wife is, and has carefully chosen his mate to minimize • the danger of overtaxing
his disturbed potency, which he can now blame on her.
In its everyday form this game is played by unmarried ladies of various ages, which soon earns
them a common slang epidiet. With diem it often merges into the game of indignation, or "Rapo."
Antithesis. This is a dangerous game, and the possible antitheses are equally dangerous. Taking a
mistress is a gamble. In the face of such stimulating competition, the wife may give up the game
and try to initiate a normal married life, perhaps too late. On the other hand, she may use the affair,
often with the help of a lawyer, as ammunition against the husband in a game of "Now I've Got
You, You Son of a Bitch." The outcome is equally unpredictable if the husband undertakes
psychotherapy and she does not. The wife's game may collapse as the husband grows stronger,
leading to healthier adjustment; but if she is a hard player, improvement on his part may result in
divorce. The best solution, if available, is for both parties to go into a transactional marital group,
where the underlying advantages of the game and the basic sexual pathology can be laid bare. With
this preparation both spouses may become interested in intensive individual psychotherapy. That
may result in a psychological remarriage. If not, at least each of the parties may make a more
sensible readjustment to the situation than they might have otherwise.
The decent antithesis for the everyday form is to find another social companion. Some of the
shrewder or more brutal antitheses are corrupt and even criminal.
Relatives. The converse game, "Frigid Man," is less common, but it takes much the same general
course with some variations in detail. The final outcome depends upon the scripts of the parties
involved.
The crucial point of "Frigid Woman" is the terminal phase of "Uproar." Once this has run its course,
sexual intimacy is out of the question, since both parties derive a perverse satisfaction from
"Uproar" and have no need of further sexual excitement from each other. Hence the most important
item in anti-"Frigid Woman" is to decline "Uproar." This leaves the wife in a state of sexual
dissatisfaction which may be so acute that she will become more compliant. The use made of
"Uproar" distinguishes "Frigid Woman" from "Beat Me Daddy," where "Uproar" is part of the
foreplay; in "Frigid Woman," "Uproar" substitutes for the sex act itself. Thus in "Beat Me Daddy,"
"Uproar" is a condition of the sexual act, a kind of fetish which increases the excitement, while in
"Frigid Woman," once "Uproar" has taken place, die episode is finished.

42

An early analogue of "Frigid Woman" is played by that type of prissy little girl described by
Dickens in Great Expectations. She comes out in her starched dress and asks the little boy to make
her a mud pie. Then she sneers at his dirty hands and clothing and tells him how clean she is,
ANALYSIS
Thesis: Now I've got you, you son of a bitch. Aim: Vindication.
Roles: Proper Wife, Inconsiderate Husband. Dynamics: Penis envy.
Examples: (1) Thank you for the mud pie, you dirty little boy. (2) Provocative, frigid wife. Social
Paradigm: Parent-Child.
Parent: "I give you permission to make me a mud pie (kiss me)-"
Child: "I'd love to." Parent: "Now see how dirty you are." Psychological Paradigm: Child-Parent.
Child: "See if you can seduce me." Parent: 'I’ll try, if you stop me." Child: "See, it was you who
started it" Moves: (1) Seduction-Response. (2) Rejection-Resignation. (3) Provocation-Response.
(4) Rejection-Uproar.
Advantages: (1) Internal Psychological—freedom from guilt for sadistic fantasies. (2) External
Psychological— avoids feared exhibition and penetration. (3) Internal Social—"Uproar." (4)
External Social—What do you do with dirty little boys (husbands)? (5) Biological—inhibited sex
play and belligerent exchanges. (6) Existential—I am pure.

4 HARRIED
Thesis. This is a game played by the harried housewife. Her situation requires that she be proficient
in ten or twelve different occupations; or, stated otherwise, that she fill gracefully ten or twelve
different roles. From time to time semi-facetious lists of these occupations or roles appear in the
Sunday supplements: mistress, mother, nurse, housemaid, etc. Since these roles are usually
conflicting and fatiguing, their imposition gives rise in the course of years to the condition
symbolically known as "Housewife's Knee" (since the knee is used for rocking, scrubbing, lifting,
driving and so forth), whose symptoms are succinctly summarized in the complaint: "I'm tired."
Now, if the housewife is able to set her own pace and find enough satisfaction in loving her
husband and children, she will not merely serve but enjoy her twenty-five years, and see the
youngest child off to college with a pang of loneliness. But if on die one hand she is driven by her
inner Parent and called to account by the critical husband she has chosen for that purpose, and on
the other unable to get sufficient satisfaction from loving her family, she may grow more and more
unhappy. At first she may try to console herself with the advantages of "If It Weren't For You" and
"Blemish" (and indeed, any housewife may fall back on these when the going gets rough); but soon
these fail to keep her going. Then she has to find another way out, and that is the game of
"Harried,"
The thesis of this game is simple. She takes on everything that comes, and even asks for more. She
agrees with her husband's criticisms and accepts all her children's demands. If she has to entertain
at dinner, she not only feels she must function impeccably as a conversationalist, chatelaine over
the household and servants, interior decorator, caterer, glamour girl, virgin queen and diplomat; she
will also volunteer that morning to bake a cake and take the children to the dentist. If she already
feels harassed, she makes the day even more harried. Then in the middle of the afternoon she
justifiably collapses, and nothing gets done. She lets down her husband, the children and their
guests, and her self-reproaches add to her misery. After this happens two or three times her
marriage is in jeopardy, the children are confused, she loses weight, her hair is untidy, her face is
drawn and her shoes are scuffed. Then she appears at the psychiatrist's office, ready to be
hospitalized.
Antithesis. The logical antithesis is simple: Mrs. White can fill each of her roles in succession
during the week, but she must refuse to play two or more of them simultaneously. When she gives a
cocktail party. For example, she can play either caterer or nursemaid, but not both. If she is merely
suffering from Housewife's Knee, she may be able to limit herself in this way.
43

If she is actually playing a game of "Harried," however, it will be very difficult for her to adhere to
this principle. In that case the husband is carefully chosen; he is an otherwise reasonable man who
will criticize his wife if she is not as efficient as he thinks his mother was. In effect, she marries his
fantasy of his mother as perpetuated in his Parent, which is similar to her fantasy of her mother or
grandmother. Having found a suitable partner, her Child can now settle into the harassed role
necessary to maintain her psychic balance, and which she will not readily give up. The more
occupational responsibility the husband has, the easier it is for both of them to find Adult reasons to
preserve the unhealthy aspects of their relationship.
When the position becomes untenable, often because of official school intervention on behalf of the
unhappy offspring, the psychiatrist is called in to make it a three-handed game. Either the husband
wants him to do an overhaul job in the wife, or the wife wants him as an ally against the husband.
The ensuing proceedings depend on the skill and alertness of die psychiatrist. Usually the first
phase, the alleviation of the wife's depression, will proceed smoothly. The second phase, in which
she will give up playing "Harried" in favor of playing "Psychiatry," is the decisive one. It tends to
arouse increasing opposition from both spouses. Sometimes this is well concealed and then
explodes suddenly, though not unexpectedly. If this stage is weathered, then the real work of game
analysis can proceed.
It is necessary to recognize that the real culprit is the wife's Parent, her mother or grandmother; the
husband is to some extent only a lay figure chosen to play his role in die game. The therapist has to
fight not only this Parent and the husband, who has a heavy investment in playing his end, but also
the social environment, which encourages the wife's compliance. The week after the article appears
about the many roles a housewife has to play, there is a How'nt I Doing? in the Sunday paper: a
ten-item test to determine "How Good A Hostess (Wife) (Modier) (Housekeeper) (Budgeteer) Are
You?" For the housewife who plays "Harried," that is the equivalent of the little leaflet that comes
with children's games, stating the rules. It may help to speed up die evolution of "Harried," which,
if not checked, may end in a game of "State Hospital" ("The last thing I want is to be sent to a
hospital").
One practical difficulty with such couples is that die husband tends to avoid personal involvement
with the treatment beyond playing "Look How Hard I'm Trying," because he is usually more
disturbed than he cares to admit. Instead he may send indirect messages to the therapist, through
temper outbursts which he knows will be reported by the wife. Hence "Harried" easily progresses
to a third-degree life-death-divorce struggle. The psychiatrist is almost alone on the side of life,
assisted only by the harried Adult of the patient which is locked in combat that may prove mortal
against all three aspects of the husband, allied with her own inner Parent and Child. It is a dramatic
battle, with odds of two against five, which tries the skill of the most game-free and professional
therapist. If he quails, he can take the easy way out and offer his patient on the altar of the divorce
court, which is equivalent to saying "I surrender—Let's you and him fight."

5 IF IT WEREN'T FOR YOU
Thesis. The detailed analysis of this game has already been given in Chapter 5. It was historically
die second game uncovered, after "Why Don't You—Yes But," which up to that point had been
regarded merely as an interesting phenomenon. With the additional discovery of IWFY, it became
clear that there must be a whole department of social action based on ulterior transactions. This led
to a more active search for such goings-on, and the present collection is one outcome.
Briefly, a woman marries a domineering man so that he will restrict her activities and thus keep her
from getting into situations which frighten her. If this were a simple operation, she might express
her gratitude when he performed this service for her. In the game of IWFY, however, her reaction
is quite the opposite: she takes advantage of the situation to complain about the restrictions, which
makes her spouse feel uneasy and gives her all sorts of advantages. This game is the internal social
advantage. The external social advantage is the derivative pastime "If It Weren't For Him," which
she plays with her congenial lady friends.
44

6 LOOK HOW HARD I'VE TRIED
Thesis. In its common clinical form this is a three-handed game played by a married couple with a
psychiatrist. The husband (usually) is bucking for a divorce, despite loud protestations to the
contrary, while the spouse is more sincere in wanting to continue the marriage. He comes to the
therapist under protest and talks just enough to demonstrate to the wife that he is cooperating;
usually he plays a mild game of "Psychiatry" or "Courtroom." As time passes he exhibits either
increasingly resentful pseudo-compliance or belligerent argumentativeness toward the therapist. At
home he initially shows more "understanding" and restraint, and finally behaves worse than ever.
After one, five or ten visits, depending on the skill of the therapist, he refuses to come any longer
and goes hunting or fishing instead. The wife is then forced into filing for divorce. The husband is
now blameless, since his wife has taken the initiative and he has demonstrated his good faith by
going to the therapist. He is in a good position to say to any attorney, judge, friend or relative,
"Look how hard I've tried!"
Antithesis. The couple is seen together. If one—let us say the husband—is clearly playing this
game, the other is taken into individual treatment and the player is sent on his way, on the valid
ground that he is less ready for therapy. He can still get a divorce, but only at die expense of
abandoning his position that he is really trying. If necessary, the wife can start the divorce, and her
position is much improved since she really has tried. The favorable, hoped-for outcome is that the
husband, his game broken up, will go into a state of despair and then seek treatment elsewhere with
genuine motivation.
In its everyday form this is easily observed in children as a two-handed game with one parent. It is
played from either of two positions: "I am helpless" or "I am blameless." The child tries, but
bungles or is unsuccessful. If he is Helpless, the parent has to do it for him. If he is Blameless, the
parent has no reasonable grounds for punishing him. This reveals the elements of the game. The
parents should find out two things: which of them taught the child this game; and what they are
doing to perpetuate it.
An interesting, though sometimes sinister, variant is "Look How Hard I Was Trying," which is
usually a harder game of the second or third degree. This can be illustrated by the case of a hardworking man with a gastric ulcer. There are many people with progressive physical disabilities who
do the best they can to cope with the situation, and they may enlist the help of their families in a
legitimate way. Such conditions, however, can also be exploited for ulterior purposes.
First Degree: A man announces to his wife and friends that he has an ulcer. He also lets them know
that he is continuing to work. This elicits their admiration. Perhaps a person with a painful and
unpleasant condition is entitled to a certain amount of ostentation as a poor recompense for his
suffering. He should be given due credit for not playing "Wooden Leg" instead, and deserves some
reward for continuing to assume his responsibilities. In such a case, die courteous reply to 'Took
How Hard I'm Trying" is, "Yes, we all admire your fortitude and conscientiousness."
Second Degree: A man is told that he has an ulcer, but keeps it a secret from his wife and friends.
He continues working and worrying as hard as ever, and one day he collapses on the job. When his
wife is notified, she gets the message instantly: "Look How Hard I Was Trying." Now she is
supposed to appreciate him as she never has before, and to feel sorry for all the mean things she has
said and done in the past. In short, she is now supposed to love him, all previous methods of
wooing her having failed. Unfortunately for the husband, her manifestations of affection and
solicitude at this point are more apt to be motivated by guilt than by love. Deep down she is likely
to be resentful because he is using unfair leverage against her, and has also taken unfair advantage
of her by keeping his illness a secret. In short, a diamond bracelet is a much more honest instrument
of courtship than a perforated stomach. She has the option of throwing the jewelry back at him, but
she cannot decently walk out on the ulcer. A sudden confrontation with a serious illness is more
likely to make her feel trapped than won over.

45

This game can often be discovered immediately after the patient first hears that he has a potentially
progressive disability. If he is going to play it, the whole plan will very likely flash through his
mind at that point, and can be recovered by a careful psychiatric review of the situation. What is
recovered is the secret gloating of his Child at learning that he has such a weapon, masked by his
Adult concern at the practical problems raised by his illness.
Third Degree: Even more sinister and spiteful is the sudden unheralded suicide because of serious
illness. The ulcer progresses to cancer, and one day the wife, who has never been informed that
anything serious is amiss, walks into' the bathroom and finds her husband lying there dead. The
note says clearly enough, "Look How Hard I Was Trying." If something like this happens twice to
the same woman, it is time for her to find out what she has been playing.
ANALYSIS
Thesis: They can't push me around.
Aim: Vindication.
Roles: Standfast, Persecutor, Authority.
Dynamics: Anal passivity.
Examples: (1) Child dressing. (2) Spouse bucking for divorce.
Social Paradigm: Adult-Adult.
Adult: "It's time to (get dressed) (go to a psychiatrist)."
Adult: "All right, I'll try it." Psychological Paradigm: Parent-Child.
Parent: "I'm going to make you (get dressed) (go to a psychiatrist)."
Child: "See, it doesn't work."
Moves: (1) Suggestion-Resistance. (2) Pressure-Compliance. (3) Approval-Failure.
Advantages: (1) Internal Psychological—freedom from guilt for aggression. (2) External
Psychological—evades domestic responsibilities. (3) Internal Social—Look how hard I've tried. (4)
External Social—same. (5) Biological —belligerent exchanges. (6) Existential—I am helpless
(blameless).

7 SWEETHEART
Thesis. This is seen in its fullest flower in the early stages of marital group therapy, when the
parties feel defensive; it can also be observed on social occasions. White makes a subtly derogatory
remark about Mrs. White, disguised as an anecdote, and ends: "Isn't that right, sweetheart?" Mrs.
White tends to agree for two ostensibly Adult reasons: (a) because the anecdote itself is, in the main,
accurately reported, and to disagree about what is presented as a peripheral detail (but is really the
essential point of the transaction) would seem pedantic; (b) because it would seem surly to disagree
with a man who calls one "sweetheart" in public. The psychological reason for her agreement,
however, is her depressive position. She married him precisely because she knew he would perform
this service for her: exposing her deficiencies and thus saving her from the embarrassment of
having to expose them herself. Her parents accommodated her the same way when she was little.
Next to "Courtroom," this is the most common game played in marital groups. The more tense the
situation, and the closer the game is to exposure, the more bitterly is the word "sweetheart"
enunciated, until the underlying resentment becomes obvious. On careful consideration it can be
seen that this is a relative of "Schlemiel," since the significant move is Mrs. White's implicit
forgiveness for White's resentment, of which she is trying hard not to be aware. Hence anti"Sweetheart" is played analogously to anti-"Schlemiel": "You can tell derogatory anecdotes about
me, but please don't call me 'sweetheart'" This antithesis carries with it the same perils as does anti"Schlemiel." A more sophisticated and less dangerous antithesis is to reply: "Yes, honey!"
In another form the wife, instead of agreeing, responds with a similar "Sweetheart" type anecdote
about the husband, saying in effect, "You have a dirty face too, dear."
Sometimes the endearments are not actually pronounced, but a careful listener can hear them even
when they are unspoken. This is "Sweetheart," Silent Type.
46

REFERENCE
1. Bateson, G., et al. "Toward a Theory of Schizophrenia." Behavioral Science. 1: 251-264, 1956.

