CHAPTER NINE
Sexual Games
SOME games are played to exploit or fight off sexual impulses. These are all, in effect, perversions
of the sexual instincts in which the satisfaction is displaced from the sexual act to the crucial
transactions which constitute die payoff of the game. This cannot always be demonstrated
convincingly, because such games are usually played in privacy, so that clinical information about
them has to be obtained secondhand, and the informant's bias cannot always be satisfactorily
evaluated. The psychiatric conception of homosexuality, for example, is heavily skewed, because
the more aggressive and successful "players" do not often come for psychiatric treatment, and die
available material mostly concerns the passive partners.
The games included here are: "Let's You and Him Fight," "Perversion," "Rapo," "Stocking Game"
and "Uproar," In most cases, the agent is a woman. This is because the hard forms of sexual games
in which' the man is the agent verge on or constitute criminality, and properly belong in the
Underworld section. On the other side, sexual games and marital games overlap, but the ones
described here are readily available to unmarried people as well as to spouses.

1 LET'S YOU AND HIM FIGHT
Thesis. This may be a maneuver, a ritual or a game. In each case the psychology is essentially
feminine. Because of its dramatic qualities, LYAHF is the basis of much of the world's literature,
both good and bad.
1, As a maneuver it is romantic. The woman maneuvers or challenges two men into fighting, with
the implication or promise that she will surrender herself to the winner,
After the competition is decided, she fulfills her bargain. This is an honest transaction, and the
presumption is that she and her mate live happily ever after.
2. As a ritual, it tends to be tragic. Custom demands that the two men fight for her, even if she does
not want them to, and even if she has already made her choice. If the wrong man wins, she must
nevertheless take him. In this case it is society and not the woman who sets up LYAHF. If she is
willing, the transaction is an honest one. If she is unwilling or disappointed, the outcome may offer
her considerable scope for playing games, such as "Let's Pull A Fast One on Joey."
3. As a game it is comic. The woman sets up the competition, and while the two men are fighting,
she decamps with a third. The internal and external psychological advantages for her and her mate
are derived from the position that honest competition is for suckers, and the comic story they have
lived through forms the basis for the internal and external social advantages.

2 PERVERSION
Thesis. Heterosexual perversions such as fetishism, sadism and masochism are symptomatic of a
confused Child and are treated accordingly. Their transactional aspects, however, as manifested m
actual sexual situations, can be dealt with by means of game analysis. This may lead to social
control, so that even if the warped sexual impulses remain unchanged, they are neutralized as far as
actual indulgence is concerned.
People who are suffering from mild sadistic or masochistic distortions tend to take a primitive kind
of Mental Health position. They feel that they are strongly sexed, and that prolonged abstinence
will lead to serious consequences. Neither of these conclusions is necessarily true, but they form
the basis for a game of "Wooden Leg" with the plea: "What do you expect from someone as
strongly sexed as I am?"
Antithesis. To extend ordinary courtesy to oneself and one's partner; dial is, to refrain from verbal
or physical flagellation and confine oneself to more conventional forms of coitus. If White is a true
pervert, this will lay bare the second element of the game, which is often clearly expressed in his
dreams: that coitus itself has little interest For him, and that his real satisfaction is derived from the
54

humiliating foreplay. This is something that he may not have cared to admit to himself. But it will
now become clear to him that his complaint is: "After all this work, I have to have intercourse,
yet!" At this point the position is much more favorable for specific psychotherapy, and much of the
pleading and evasiveness has been nullified. This applies to ordinary "sexual psychopaths" as seen
in practice, and not to malignant schizophrenic or criminal perversions, nor to those who confine
their sexual activities to fantasy.
The game of "Homosexuality" has become elaborated into a subculture in many countries, just as it
is ritualized in others. Many of the disabilities which result from homosexuality arise from making
it into a game. The provocative behavior which gives rise to "Cops and Robbers," "Why Does This
Always Happen to Us," "It's the Society We Live In," "AH Great Men Were" and so forth, is often
amenable to social control, which reduces the handicaps to a minimum. The "professional
homosexual" wastes a large amount of time and energy which could be applied to other ends.
Analysis of his games may help him establish a quiet manage which will leave him free to enjoy
the benefits that bourgeois society offers, instead of devoting himself to playing his own variation
of "Ain't It Awful!"

3 RAPO
Thesis. This is a game played between a man and a woman which might more politely be called, in
the milder forms at least, "Kiss Off" or "Indignation." It may be played with varying degrees of
intensity.
1. First-Degree "Rapo," or "Kiss Off," is popular at social gatherings and consists essentially of
mild flirtation. White signals that she is available and gets her pleasure from the man's pursuit. As
soon as he has committed himself, the game is over. If she is polite, she may say quite frankly "I
appreciate your compliments and thank you very much," and move on to the next conquest. If she
is less generous, she may simply leave him. A skillful player can make this game last for a long
time at a large social gathering by moving around frequently, so that the man has to carry out
complicated maneuvers in order to follow her without being too obvious.
2. In Second-Degree "Rapo," or "Indignation," White gets only secondary satisfaction from Black's
advances. Her primary gratification comes from rejecting him, so that this game is also colloquially
known as "Buzz Off, Buster." She leads Black into a much more serious commitment than the mild
flirtation of First-Degree "Rapo" and enjoys watching his discomfiture when she repulses him.
Black, of course, is not as helpless as he seems, and may have gone to considerable trouble to get
himself involved. Usually he is playing some variation of "Kick Me."
3. Third-Degree "Rapo" is a vicious game which ends in murder, suicide or the courtroom. Here
White leads Black into compromising physical contact and then claims that he has made a criminal
assault or has done her irreparable damage. In its most cynical form White may actually allow him
to complete the sexual act so that she gets that enjoyment before confronting him. The
confrontation may be immediate, as in the illegitimate cry of rape, or it may be long delayed, as in
suicide or homicide following a prolonged love affair. If she chooses to play it as a criminal assault,
she may have no difficulty in finding mercenary or morbidly interested allies, such as the press, the
police, counselors and relatives. Sometimes, however, these outsiders may cynically turn on her, so
that she loses the initiative and becomes a tool in their games.
In some cases outsiders perform a different function.
They force the game on an unwilling White because they want to play "Let's You and Him Fight."
They put her in such a position that in order to save her face or her reputation she has to cry rape.
This is particularly apt to happen with girls under the legal age of consent; they may be quite
willing to continue a liaison, but because it is discovered or made an issue of, they feel constrained
to turn the romance into a game of Third-Degree "Rapo."
In one well-known situation, the wary Joseph refused to be inveigled into a game of "Rapo,"
whereupon Potiphar's wife made the classical switch into "Let's You and Him Fight," an excellent
example of the way a hard player reacts to antithesis, and of the dangers that beset people who
55

refuse to play games, These two games are combined in the well-known "Badger Game," in which
the woman seduces Black and then cries rape, at which point her husband takes charge and abuses
Black for purposes of blackmail.
One of the most unfortunate and acute forms of Third-Degree "Rapo" occurs relatively frequently
between homosexual strangers, who in a matter of an hour or so may bring the game to a point of
homicide. The cynical and criminal variations of this game contribute a large volume to sensational
newspaper copy.
The childhood prototype of "Rapo" is the same as that of "Frigid Woman," in which the little girl
induces the boy to humiliate himself or get dirty and then sneers at him, as classically described by
Maugham in Of Hitman Bondage and, as already noted, by Dickens in Great Expectations. This is
Second Degree. A harder form, approaching Third Degree, may be played in tough neighborhoods.
Antithesis. The man's ability to avoid becoming involved in this game or to keep it under control
depends on his capacity to distinguish genuine expressions of feeling from moves in the game. If he
is thus able to exert social control, he may obtain a great deal of pleasure from the mild flirtations
of "Kiss Off." On the other hand it is difficult to conceive of a safe antithesis for the Potiphar's
Wife maneuver, other than checking out before closing time with no forwarding address. In 1938
the writer met an aging Joseph in Aleppo who had checked out of Constantinople thirty-two years
previously, after one of the Sultan's ladies had cornered him during a business visit to the Yildiz
harem. He had to abandon his shop, but took time to pick up his hoard of gold francs, and had
never returned.
Relatives. The male versions of "Rapo" are notoriously found in commercial situations: "Casting
Couch" (and then she didn't get the part) and "Cuddle Up" (and then she got fired).
ANALYSIS
The following analysis refers to Third-Degree "Rapo" because there the elements of the game are
more dramatically illustrated.
Aim: Malicious revenge. Roles: Seductress, Wolf.
Dynamics (Third Degree): Penis envy, oral violence. "Kiss Off" is phallic, while "Indignation" has
strong anal elements.
Examples: (1) I'll tell on you, you dirty little boy. (2) Wronged woman.
Social Paradigm: Adult-Adult.
Adult (male): "I'm sorry if I went further than you intended me to."
Adult (female) "You have violated me and must pay the full penalty."
Psychological Paradigm: Child-Child.
Child (male): "See how irresistible I am." Child (female): "Now I've got you, you son of a bitch."
Moves: (1) Female: seduction; Male: counter-seduction. (2) Female: surrender; Male: victory. (3)
Female: confrontation; Male: collapse.
Advantages: (1) Internal Psychological—expression of
hatred and projection of guilt. (2) External Psychological-avoidance of emotional sexual intimacy.
(3) Internal Social -"Now I've Got You, You Son of a Bitch." (4) External Social-"Ain't It Awful,"
"Courtroom," "Let's You and Him Fight." (5) Biological—sexual and belligerent exchanges. (6)
Existential-I am blameless.

4 THE STOCKING GAME
Thesis. This is a game of the "Rapo" family; in it the most obvious characteristic is the
exhibitionism, which is hysterical in nature. A woman comes into a strange group and after a very
short time raises her leg, exposing herself in a provocative way, and remarks, "Oh my, I have a run
in my stocking." This is calculated to arouse the men sexually and to make the other women angry.
Any confrontation of White is met, of course, with protestations of innocence or counteraccusations, hence the resemblance to classical "Rapo." What is significant is White's lack of
adaptation. She seldom waits to find out what kind of people she is dealing with or how to time her
56

maneuver. Hence it stands out as inappropriate and affects her relationships with her associates. In
spite of some superficial "sophistication," she fails to understand what happens to her in life
because her judgment of human nature is too cynical. The aim is to prove that other people have
lascivious minds, and her Adult is conned by her Child and her Parent (usually a lascivious mother)
into ignoring both her own provocative-ness and the good sense of many of the people she meets.
Thus the game tends to be self-destructive.
This is probably a phallic variant of a game whose content depends on the underlying disturbance.
An "oral" variant may be exhibited by women with deeper pathology and well-developed breasts.
Such women often sit with their hands behind their heads so as to thrust their breasts forward; they
may draw additional attention to them by remarking about their size or some pathology such as an
operation or a lump. Some types of squirming probably constitute an anal variant. The implication
of this game is that the woman is sexually available. Thus it may be played in a more symbolic
form by bereaved women who "exhibit" their widowhood insincerely.
Antithesis. Along with the poor adaptation, these women show little tolerance for antithesis. If the
game is ignored or countered by a sophisticated therapy group, for example, they may not return.
Antithesis must be carefully distinguished in this game from reprisal, since the latter signifies that
White has won. Women are more skillful at counter-moves in "Stocking Game" than men, who
indeed have little incentive to break up this game. Antithesis, therefore, is best left to the discretion
of the other women present.

5 UPROAR
Thesis. The classical game is played between domineering fathers and teen-age daughters, where
there is a sexually inhibited mother. Father comes home from work and finds fault with daughter,
who answers impudently; or daughter may make the first move by being impudent, whereupon
father finds Fault. Their voices rise, and the clash becomes more acute. The outcome depends on
who has the initiative. There are three possibilities; (a) father retires to his bedroom and slams the
door (b) daughter retires to her bedroom and slams the door (c) both retire to their respective
bedrooms and slam the doors. In any case, the end of a game of "Uproar" is marked by a slamming
door. "Uproar" offers a distressing but effective solution to the sexual problems that arise between
fathers and teen-age daughters in certain households. Often they can only live in the same house
together if they are angry at each other, and the slamming doors emphasize for each of them the
fact that they have separate bedrooms.
In degenerate households this game may be played in a sinister and repellent form in which father
waits up for daughter whenever she goes out on a date, and examines her and her clodiing carefully
on her return to make sure that she has not had intercourse. The slightest suspicious circumstance
may give rise to the most violent altercation, which may end with the daughter being expelled from
the house in the middle of the night. In the long run nature will take its course—if not that night
then the next, or the one after. Then the father's suspicions are "justified," as he makes plain to the
mother, who has stood by "helplessly" while all this went on.
In general, however, "Uproar" may be played between any two people who are trying to avoid
sexual intimacy. For example, it is a common terminal phase of "Frigid Woman." It is relatively
rare between teen-age boys and their female relatives, because it is easier for teen-age boys to
escape from the house in the evening than for other members of the family. At an earlier age
brothers and sisters can set up effective barriers and partial satisfactions through physical combat, a
pattern which has various motivations at different ages, and which in America is a semi-ritualistic
form of "Uproar" sanctioned by television, pedagogic and pediatric authorities. In upper-class
England it is (or was) considered bad form, and the corresponding energies are channeled into the
well-regulated "Uproar" of the playing fields.
Antithesis. The game is not as distasteful to the father as he might like to think, and it is generally
the daughter who makes the antithetical move through an early, often premature or forced marriage.
If it is psychologically possible, the mother can make the antithetical move by relinquishing her
57

relative or absolute frigidity. The game may subside if the father finds an outside sexual interest,
but that may lead to other complications. In die case of married couples, the antitheses are the same
as for "Frigid Woman" or "Frigid Man."
Under appropriate circumstances "Uproar" leads quite naturally into "Courtroom."

58

