


Just as the first glimpse should please their eyes, your first words should delight their ears. Your tongue is a welcome mat embossed with either ‘Welcome’ or ‘Go Away!’ To make your Conversation Partner feel welcome, you must master small talk.

Small talk! Can you hear the shudder? Those two little words drive a stake into the hearts of some otherwise fearless and undaunted souls. Invite them to a party where they don’t know anyone, and it mainlines queasiness into their veins.

If this sounds familiar, take consolation from the fact that the brighter the individual, the more he or she detests small talk. When consulting for Fortune 500 companies, I was astounded. Top executives, completely comfortable making big talk with their boards of directors or addressing their stockholders, confessed they felt like little lost children at parties where the pratter was less than prodigious.

Small-talk haters, take further consolation from the fact that you are in star-studded company. Fear of small talk and stage fright are the same thing. The butterflies you feel in your stomach when you’re in a roomful of strangers flutter around the tummies of top performers. Pablo Casals complained of lifelong stage fright. Carly Simon curtailed live performances because of it. A friend of mine who worked with Neil Diamond said he insisted the words to ‘Song Sung Blue,’ a tune he’d been crooning for forty years, be displayed on his teleprompter, lest fear freeze him into forgetfulness.





Is small-talk-o-phobia curable?


Someday, scientists say, communications fears may be treatable with drugs. They’re already experimenting with Prozac to change people’s personalities. But some fear disastrous side effects. The good news is that when human beings think, and genuinely feel, certain emotions – like confidence they have specific techniques to fall back on – the brain manufactures its own antidotes. If fear and distaste of small talk is the disease, knowing solid techniques like the ones we explore in this section is the cure.

Incidentally, science is beginning to recognize it’s not chance or even upbringing that one person has a belly of butterflies and another doesn’t. In our brains, neurons communicate through chemicals called neurotransmitters. Some people have excessive levels of a neurotransmitter called norepinephrine, a chemical cousin of adrenaline. For some children, just walking into a kindergarten room makes them want to run and hide under a table.

As a tot, I spent a lot of time under the table. As a pre-teen in an all-girls boarding school, my legs turned to spaghetti every time I had to converse with a male. In high school, I once had to invite a boy to our school prom. The entire selection of dancing males lived in the dormitory of our brother school. And I only knew one resident, Eugene. I had met Eugene at summer camp the year before. Mustering all my courage, I decided to call him.

Two weeks before the dance, I felt the onset of sweaty palms. I put the call off. One week before, rapid heartbeat set in. I put the call off. Finally, three days before the big bash, breathing became difficult. Time was running out.

The critical moment, I rationalized, would be easier if I read from a script. I wrote out the following: ‘Hi, this is Leil. We met at camp last summer. Remember?’ (I programmed in a pause where I hoped he would say yes.) ‘Well, National Cathedral School’s prom is this Saturday night and I’d like you to be my date.’ (I programmed in another pause where I prayed he’d say yes.)

On Thursday before the dance, I could no longer delay the inevitable. I picked up the receiver and dialled. Clutching the phone waiting for Eugene to answer, my eyes followed perspiration droplets rolling down my arm and dripping off my elbow. A small salty puddle was forming around my feet. ‘Hello?’ a sexy, deep male voice answered the dorm phone.

In faster-than-a-speeding-bullet voice, like a nervous novice telemarketer, I shot out, ‘Hi, this is Leil. We-met-at-camp – last-summer-remember?’ Forgetting to pause for his assent, I raced on, ‘Well-National-Cathedral-School’s-prom-is-this-Saturday-night-and-I’d-like-you-to-be-my-date.’

To my relief and delight, I heard a big, cheerful ‘Oh that’s great, I’d love to!’ I exhaled my first normal breath all day. He continued, ‘I’ll pick you up at the girl’s dorm at seven thirty. I’ll have a pink carnation for you. Will that go with your dress? And my name is Donnie.’

Donnie? Donnie! Who said anything about Donnie?

Well, Donnie turned out to be the best date I had that decade. Donnie had buckteeth, a head full of tousled red hair, and communications skills that immediately put me at ease.

On Saturday night, Donnie greeted me at the door, carnation in hand and grin on face. He joked self-deprecatingly about how he was dying to go to the prom so, knowing it was a case of mistaken identity, he accepted anyway. He told me he was thrilled when ‘the girl with the lovely voice’ called, and he took full responsibility for ‘tricking’ me into an invitation. Donnie made me comfortable and confident as we chatted. First we made small talk and then he gradually led me into subjects I was interested in. I flipped over Donnie, and he became my very first boyfriend.

Donnie instinctively had the small-talk skills that we are now going to fashion into techniques to help you glide through small talk like a hot knife through butter. When you master them, you will be able, like Donnie, to melt the heart of everyone you touch.

The goal of How to Talk to Anyone is not, of course, to make you a small-talk whiz and stop there. The aim is to make you a dynamic conversationalist and forceful communicator. However, small talk is the first crucial step toward that goal.





How to start a conversation without strangling it


You’ve been there. You’re introduced to someone at a party or business meeting. You shake hands, your eyes meet … and suddenly your entire body of knowledge dries up and thought processes come to a screeching halt. You fish for a topic to fill the awkward silence. Failing, your new contact slips away in the direction of the cheese tray.

We want the first words falling from our lips to be sparkling, witty, insightful. We want our listeners to immediately recognize how riveting we are. I was once at a gathering where everybody was sparkling, witty, insightful, and riveting. It drove me berserk because most of these same everybodies felt they had to prove it in their first ten words or less!

Several years ago, the Mensa organization, a social group of extremely bright individuals who score in the country’s top 2 per cent in intelligence, invited me to be a keynote speaker at their annual convention. Their cocktail party was in full swing in the lobby of the hotel as I arrived. After checking in, I hauled my bags through the hoard of happy-hour Mensans to the lift. The doors separated and I stepped into a lift packed with party goers. As we began the journey up to our respective floors, the lift gave several sleepy jerks.

‘Hmm,’ I remarked, in response to the lift’s sluggishness, ‘the lift seems a little flaky.’ Suddenly, each elevator occupant, feeling compelled to exhibit his or her 132-plus IQ, pounced forth with a thunderous explanation. ‘It’s obviously got poor rail-guide alignment,’ announced one. ‘The relay contact is not made up,’ declared another. Suddenly I felt like a grasshopper trapped in a stereo speaker. I couldn’t wait to escape the attack of the mental giants.

Afterward, in the solitude of my room, I thought back and reflected that the Mensan’s answers were, indeed, interesting. Why then did I have an adverse reaction?

I realized it was too much, too soon. I was tired. Their high energy and intensity jarred my sluggish state.

You see, small talk is not about facts or words. It’s about music, about melody. Small talk is about putting people at ease. It’s about making comforting noises together like cats purring, children humming, or groups chanting. You must first match your listener’s mood.

Like repeating the note on the music teacher’s harmonica, Top Communicators pick up on their listener’s tone of voice and duplicate it. Instead of jumping in with such intensity, the Mensans could have momentarily matched my lethargic mood by saying, ‘Yes, it is slow, isn’t it?’ Had they then prefaced their information with, ‘Have you ever been curious why an elevator is slow?’ I would have responded with a sincere ‘Yes, I have.’ After a moment of equalized energy levels, I would have welcomed their explanations about the rail-guard alignment or whatever the heck it was. And friendships might have started.

I’m sure you’ve suffered the aggression of a mood mismatch. Have you ever been relaxing when some overexcited hot-breathed colleague starts pounding you with questions? Or the reverse: you’re late, rushing to a meeting, when an associate stops you and starts lazily narrating a long, languorous story. No matter how interesting the tale, you don’t want to hear it now.

The first step in starting a conversation without strangling it is to match your listener’s mood, if only for a sentence or two. When it comes to small talk, think music, not words. Is your listener adagio or allegro? Match that pace. I call it making a Mood Match.





Matching the mood can make or break the sale


Matching customers’ moods is crucial for salespeople. Some years ago, I decided to throw a surprise party for my best friend Stella. It was going to be a triple-whammy party because she was celebrating three events. One, it was Stella’s birthday. Two, she was newly engaged. And three, Stella had just landed her dream job. She had been my buddy since our school days and I was floating on air over her birthday-engagement-congratulations bash.

I had heard one of the best French restaurants in town had an attractive back room for parties. About 5 P.M. one afternoon, I wafted happily into the restaurant and found the seated maitre d’ languidly looking over his reservation book. I began excitedly babbling about Stella’s triple-whammy celebration and asked to see that fabulous back room I’d heard so much about. Without a smile or moving a muscle, he said, ‘Zee room ees een zee back. You can go zee eet eef you like.’

CRASH. What a party pooper! His morose mood kicked all the party spirit out of me, and I no longer wanted to rent his stupid space. Before I even looked at the room, he lost the rental. I left his restaurant vowing to find a place where the management would at least appear to share the joy of the happy occasion.

Every mother knows this instinctively. To quiet a whimpering infant, mama doesn’t just shake her finger and shout, ‘Quiet down.’ No, mama picks baby up. Mama cries, ‘Ooh, ooh, oh,’ sympathetically matching baby’s misery for a few moments. Mama then gradually transitions the two of them into hush-hush happy sounds. Your listeners are all big babies! Match their mood if you want them to stop crying, start buying, or come around to your way of thinking.

Technique 10:

Make a mood match

Before opening your mouth, take a ‘voice sample’ of your listener to detect his or her state of mind. Take a ‘psychic photograph’ of the expression to see if your listener looks buoyant, bored, or blitzed. If you ever want to bring people around to your thoughts, you must match their mood and voice tone, if only for a moment.





‘What’s a good opening line when I meet people?’


I was once at a party where I spotted a fellow surrounded by a fan club of avid listeners. The chap was smiling, gesticulating, obviously enthralling his audience. I went over to hearken to this fascinating speaker. I joined his throng of admirers and eavesdropped for a minute or two. Suddenly, it dawned on me: the fellow was saying the most banal things! His script was dull, dull, dull. Ah, but he was delivering his prosaic observations with such passion. Therefore, he held the group spellbound. It convinced me that it’s not all what you say, it’s how you say it.

Often people ask me, ‘What’s a good opening line when I meet people?’ I give them the same answer a woman who once worked in my office always gave me. Dottie often stayed at her desk to work through lunch. Sometimes, as I was leaving for the sandwich shop, I’d ask her, ‘Hey Dottie, what can I bring you back for lunch?’

Dottie, trying to be obliging, would say, ‘Oh anything is fine with me.’

‘No, Dottie!’ I wanted to scream. ‘Tell me what you want. Ham and cheese? Chicken Salad with mayonnaise? Peanut butter with sliced bananas? Be specific. Anything is a hassle.’

Frustrating though it may be, my answer to the opening-line question is ‘Anything!’ because almost anything you say really is OK – as long as it puts people at ease and sounds passionate.

How do you put people at ease? By convincing them they are OK and that the two of you are similar. When you do that, you break down walls of fear, suspicion, and mistrust.





Why banal makes a bond


Samuel I. Hayakawa was a college president, U.S. senator, and brilliant linguistic analyst of Japanese origin. He tells us this story that shows the value of, as he says, ‘unoriginal remarks.’11

In early 1942, a few weeks after the beginning of World War II – at a time when there were rumours of Japanese spies – Hayakawa had to wait several hours in a railroad station in Oshkosh, Wisconsin. He noticed others waiting in the station were staring at him suspiciously. Because of the war, they were apprehensive about his presence. He later wrote, ‘One couple with a small child was staring with special uneasiness and whispering to each other.’

So what did Hayakawa do? He made unoriginal remarks to set them at ease. He said to the husband that it was too bad the train should be late on so cold a night.

The man agreed.

‘I went on,’ Hayakawa wrote, ‘to remark that it must be especially difficult to travel with a small child in winter when train schedules were so uncertain. Again the husband agreed. I then asked the child’s age and remarked that their child looked very big and strong for his age. Again agreement, this time with a slight smile. The tension was relaxing.

After two or three more exchanges, the man asked Hayakawa, ‘I hope you don’t mind my bringing it up, but you’re Japanese, aren’t you? Do you think the Japs have any chance of winning this war?’

‘Well,’ Hayakawa replied, ‘your guess is as good as mine. I don’t know any more than I read in the papers. But the way I figure it, I don’t see how the Japanese, with their lack of coal and steel and oil … can ever beat a powerfully industrialized nation like the United States.’

Hayakawa went on, ‘My remark was admittedly neither original nor well informed. Hundreds of radio commentators … were saying much the same thing during those weeks. But just because they were, the remark sounded familiar and was on the right side so that it was easy to agree with.’

The Wisconsin man agreed at once with what seemed like genuine relief. His next remark was, ‘Say, I hope your folks aren’t over there while the war is going on.’

‘Yes, they are,’ Hayakawa replied. ‘My father and mother and two young sisters are over there.’

‘Do you ever hear from them?’ the man asked.

‘How can I?’ Hayakawa answered.

Both the man and his wife looked troubled and sympathetic. ‘Do you mean you won’t be able to see them or hear from them until after the war is over?’

There was more to the conversation but the result was, within ten minutes they had invited Hayakawa – whom they initially may have suspected was a Japanese spy – to visit them sometime in their city and have dinner in their home. And all because of this brilliant scholar’s admittedly common and unoriginal small talk. Top Communicators know the most soothing and appropriate first words should be, like Senator Hayakawa’s, unoriginal, even banal. But not indifferent. Hayakawa delivered his sentiments with sincerity and passion.





Ascent from banality


There is no need, of course, to stay with mundane remarks. If you find your company displays cleverness or wit, you match that. The conversation then escalates naturally, compatibly. Don’t rush it or, like the Mensans, you seem like you’re showing off. The bottom line on your first words is to have the courage of your own triteness. Because, remember, people tune in to your tone more than your text.

Technique 11:

Prosaic with passion

Worried about your first words? Fear not, since 80 percent of your listener’s impression has nothing to do with your words anyway. Almost anything you say at first is fine. No matter how prosaic the text, an empathetic mood, a positive demeanour, and passionate delivery make you sound exciting.





‘Anything, except liverwurst!’


Back to Dottie waiting for her sandwich at her desk. Sometimes as I walked out the door scratching my head wondering what to bring her, she’d call after me, ‘Anything, except liverwurst, that is.’ Thanks, Dottie, that’s a little bit of help.

Here’s my ‘anything, except liverwurst’ on small talk. Anything you say is fine as long as it is not complaining, rude, or unpleasant. If the first words out of your mouth are a complaint, BLAM, people label you a complainer. Why? Because that complaint is your new acquaintance’s 100 per cent sampling of you so far. You could be the happiest Pollyanna ever, but how will they know? If your first comment is a complaint, you’re a griper. If your first words are rude, you’re a creep. If your first words are unpleasant, you’re a stinker. Open and shut.

Other than these downers, anything goes. Ask them where they’re from, how they know the host of the party, where they bought the lovely suit they’re wearing – or hundreds of etceteras. The trick is to ask your prosaic question with passion to get the other person talking.

Still feel a bit shaky on making the approach to strangers? Let’s take a quick detour on our road to meaningful communicating. I’ll give you three quickie techniques to meet people at parties – then nine more to make small talk not so small.





What’s a Whatzit?


Singles proficient at meeting potential sweethearts without the benefit of introduction (in the vernacular, making a ‘pickup’), have developed a deliciously devious technique that works equally well for social or corporate networking purposes. The technique requires no exceptional skill on your part, only the courage to sport a simple visual prop called a Whatzit.

What’s a Whatzit? A Whatzit is anything you wear or carry that is unusual – a unique pin, an interesting purse, a strange tie, an amusing hat. A Whatzit is any object that draws people’s attention and inspires them to approach you and ask, ‘Uh, what’s that?’ Your Whatzit can be as subtle or overt as your personality and the occasion permit.

I wear around my neck an outmoded pair of glasses that resembles a double monocle. Often the curious have approached me at a gathering and asked, ‘Whatzit?’ I explain it’s a lorgnette left to me by my grandmother, which, of course, paves the way to discuss hatred of glasses, ageing eyes, love or loss of grandmothers, adoration of antique jewellery – any way the inquisitor wants to take it.

Perhaps, unknowingly, you have fallen prey to this soon-to-be-legendary technique. At a gathering, have you ever noticed someone you would like to talk to? Then you’ve racked your brain to conjure an excuse to make the approach. What a bounty it was to discover that he or she was wearing some weird, wild, or wonderful something you could comment on.





The Whatzit way to love


Your Whatzit is a social aid whether you seek business rewards or new romance. I have a friend, Alexander, who carries Greek worry beads with him wherever he goes. He’s not worried. He knows any woman who wants to talk to him will come up and say, ‘What’s that?’

Think about it, gentlemen. Suppose you’re at a party. An attractive woman spots you across the room. She wants to talk to you but she’s thinking, ‘Well, Mister, you’re attractive. But, golly, what can I say to you? You just ain’t got no Whatzit.’





Be a Whatzit seeker, too


Likewise, become proficient in scrutinizing the apparel of those you wish to approach. Why not express interest in the handkerchief in the tycoon’s vest pocket, the brooch on the bosom of the rich divorcée, or the school ring on the finger of the Director whose company you want to work for?

The big spender who, you suspect, might buy a hundred of your widgets has a tiny golf-club lapel pin? Say, ‘Excuse me, I couldn’t help but notice your attractive lapel pin. Are you a golfer? Me, too. What courses have you played?’

Your business cards and your Whatzit are crucial socializing artifacts. Whether you are riding in the elevator, climbing the doorstep, or traversing the path to the party, make sure your Whatzit is hanging out for all to see.

Technique 12:

Always wear a Whatzit

Whenever you go to a gathering, wear or carry something unusual to give people who find you the delightful stranger across the crowded room an excuse to approach. ‘Excuse me, I couldn’t help but notice your … what IS that?’





The next quickie technique was originated by doggedly determined politicians who don’t let one partygoer escape if they think he or she could be helpful to their campaigns. I call it the Whoozat technique.





What to do when he’s got no Whatzit


Say you have scrutinized the body of the important business contact you want to meet. You’ve searched in vain from the tip of his cowlick to the toes of his boots. He’s not sporting a single Whatzit.

If you strike out on finding something to comment on, resort to the Whoozat technique. Like a persistent politician, go to the party giver and say, ‘That man/woman over there looks interesting. Who is he/she?’ Then ask for an introduction. Don’t be hesitant. The party giver will be pleased you find one of the guests interesting.

If, however, you are loathe to pull the party giver away from his or her other guests, you still can perform Whoozat. This time, don’t ask for a formal introduction. Simply pump the party giver for just enough information to launch you. Find out about the stranger’s jobs, interests, hobbies.

Suppose the party giver says, ‘Oh, that’s Joe Smith. I’m not sure what his job is, but I know he loves to ski.’ Aha, you’ve just been given the icebreaker you need. Now you make a beeline for Joe Smith. ‘Hi, you’re Joe Smith, aren’t you? Susan was just telling me what a great skier you are. Where do you ski?’ You get the idea.

Technique 13:

Whoozat?

Whoozat is the most effective, least used (by nonpoliticians) meeting-people device ever contrived. Simply ask the party giver to make the introduction, or pump for a few facts that you can immediately turn into icebreakers.





Now the third in our little trio of meeting-who-you-want tricks.





‘I just thought I’d eavesdrop in and say “hello”’


The woman you’ve decided you MUST meet is wearing no Whatzit? Can’t find the host for the Whoozat technique? To make matters worse, she’s deep in conversation with a group of her friends. Seems quite hopeless that you will manoeuvre a meeting, doesn’t it?

No obstacle blocks the resolute politician, who always has a trick or ten up his or her sleeve. A politico would resort to the Eavesdrop In technique. Eavesdropping, of course, conjures images of clandestine activities – wire tapping, Watergate break-ins, spies skulking around in the murky shadows. Eavesdropping has historical precedent with politicians so, in a pinch, it comes naturally to mind.

At parties, stand near the group of people you wish to infiltrate. Then wait for a word or two you can use as a wedge to break into the group. ‘Excuse me, I couldn’t help overhearing that you …’ and then whatever is relevant here. For example ‘I couldn’t help overhearing your discussion of Bermuda. I’m going there next month for the first time. Any suggestions?’

Now you are in the circle and can direct your comments to your intended.

Technique 14:

Eavesdrop in

No Whatzit? No host for Whoozat? No problem! Just sidle up behind the swarm of folks you want to infiltrate and open your ears. Wait for any flimsy excuse and jump in with ‘Excuse me, I couldn’t help but overhear …’

Will they be taken aback? Momentarily.

Will they get over it? Momentarily.

Will you be in the conversation? Absolutely!





Let us now hop back on the train that first explored Small Talk City and travel to the land of Meaningful Communicating.





Don’t drop a frozen steak on their platter


You wouldn’t dream of going to a party naked. And I hope you wouldn’t dream of letting your conversation be exposed naked and defenceless against the two inevitable assaults ‘Where are you from?’ and ‘What do you do?’

When asked these questions, most people, like clunking a frozen steak on a china platter, drop a brick of frozen geography or baffling job title on the asker’s conversational platter. Then they slap on the muzzle.

You’re at a convention. Everyone you meet will, of course, ask ‘And where are you from?’ When you give them the short-form naked-city answer ‘Oh, I’m from Muscatine, Iowa’ (or Millinocket, Maine; Winnemucca, Nevada; or anywhere they haven’t heard of), what can you expect except a blank stare? Even if you’re a relatively big-city slicker from Denver, Colorado; Detroit, Michigan; or San Diego, California, you’ll receive a panicked look from all but American history professors. They’re rapidly racking their brains thinking ‘What do I say next?’ Even the names of world-class burgs like New York, London, Paris, and Los Angeles inspire less-than-riveting responses. When I tell people I’m from New York City, what are they expected to say? ‘Duh, seen any good muggings lately?’

Do humanity and yourself a favour. Never, ever, give just a one-sentence response to the question, ‘Where are you from?’ Give the asker some fuel for his tank, some fodder for his trough. Give the hungry communicator something to conversationally nibble on. All it takes is an extra sentence or two about your city – some interesting fact, some witty observation – to hook the asker into the conversation.

Several months ago, a trade association invited me to be its keynote speaker on networking and teaching people to be better conversationalists. Just before my speech, I was introduced to Mrs Devlin, who was the head of the association.

‘How do you do?’ she asked.

‘How do you do?’ I replied.

Then Mrs. Devlin smiled, anxiously awaiting a sample of my stimulating conversational expertise. I asked her where she was from. She plunked a frozen ‘Columbus, Ohio’ and a big expectant grin on my platter. I had to quickly thaw her answer into digestible conversation. My mind thrashed into action. Leil’s thought pattern: ‘Gulp, Columbus, Ohio. I’ve never been there, hmm. Criminy, what do I know about Columbus? I know a fellow named Jeff, a successful speaker who lives there. But Columbus is too big to ask if she knows him … and besides only kids play the “Do-you-know-so-and-so” game.’ My panicked silent search continued. ‘I think it’s named after Christopher Columbus … but I’m not sure, so I better keep my mouth shut on that one.’ Four or five other possibilities raced through my mind but I rejected them all as too obvious, too adolescent, or too off-the-wall.

I realized by now that seconds had passed, and Mrs Devlin was still standing there with a slowly dissipating smile on her face. She was waiting for me (the ‘expert’ who, within the hour, was expected to teach her trade association lessons on scintillating conversation) to spew forth words of wit or wisdom.

‘Oh, Columbus, gee,’ I mumbled in desperation, watching her face fall into the worried expression of a patient being asked by the surgeon, knife poised in hand, ‘Where’s your appendix?’

I never came up with stimulating conversation on Columbus. But, just then, under the knife, I created the following technique for posterity. I call it Never the Naked City.

Technique 15:

Never the naked city

Whenever someone asks you the inevitable, ‘And where are you from?’ never, ever, unfairly challenge their powers of imagination with a one-word answer.

Learn some engaging facts about your hometown that Conversational Partners can comment on. Then, when they say something clever in response to your bait, they think you’re a great conversationalist.





Different bait for shrimp or sharks


A fisherman uses different bait to bag bass or bluefish. And you will obviously throw out different conversational bait to snag simple shrimp or sophisticated sharks. Your hook should relate to the type of person you’re speaking with. I’m originally from Washington, D.C. If someone at, say, an art gallery asked me where I was from, I might answer ‘Washington, D.C. – designed, you know, by the same city planner who designed Paris.’ This opens the conversational possibilities to the artistry of city planning, Paris, other cities’ plans, European travel, and so forth.

At a social party of singles I’d opt for another answer. ‘I’m from Washington, D.C. The reason I left is there were seven women to every man when I was growing up.’ Now the conversation can turn to the ecstasy or agony of being single, the perceived lack of desirable men everywhere, even flirtatious possibilities.

In a political group, I’d cast a current fact from the constantly evolving political face of Washington. No need to speculate on the multitude of conversational possibilities that unlocks.

Where do you get your conversational bait? Start by phoning the chamber of commerce or historical society of your town. Search the World Wide Web and click on your town, or open an old-fashioned encyclopedia – all rich sources for future stimulating conversations. Learn some history, geography, business statistics, or perhaps a few fun facts to tickle future friends’ funny bones.

The Devlin debacle inspired further research. The minute I got home, I called the Columbus Chamber of Commerce and the historical society. Say you, too, are from Columbus, Ohio, and your new acquaintance lays it on you: ‘Where are you from?’ When you are talking with a businessperson, your answer could be, ‘I’m from Columbus, Ohio. You know many major corporations do their product testing in Columbus because it’s so commercially typical. In fact, it’s been called ‘the most American city in America.’ They say if it booms or bombs in Columbus, it booms or bombs nationally.’

Talking with someone with a German last name? Tell her about Columbus’s historic German Village with the brick streets and the wonderful 1850s-style little houses. It’s bound to inspire stories of the old country. Your Conversation Partner’s surname is Italian? Tell him Genoa, Italy, is Columbus’s sister city.

Talking with an American history buff? Tell him that Columbus was, indeed, named after Christopher Columbus and that a replica of the Santa Maria is anchored in the Scioto River. Talking with a student? Tell her about the five universities in Columbus.

The possibilities continue. You suspect your Conversation Partner has an artistic bent? ‘Ah,’ you throw out casually, ‘Columbus is the home of artist George Bellows.’

Columbusites, prepare some tasty snacks for askers even if you know nothing about them. Here’s a goodie. Tell them you always have to say ‘Columbus, Ohio ’ because in the US there is also a Columbus, Arkansas ; Columbus, Georgia ; Columbus, Indiana ; Columbus, Kansas ; Columbus, Kentucky ; Columbus, Mississippi ; Columbus, Montana ; Columbus, Nebraska ; Columbus, New Jersey ; Columbus, New Mexico ; Columbus, North Carolina ; Columbus, North Dakota ; Columbus, Pennsylvania ; Columbus, Texas ; and Columbus, Wisconsin. That spreads the conversational possibilities to fifteen other states. Remember, as a quotable notable once said, ‘No man would listen to you talk if he didn’t know it was his turn next.’

A postscript to the hellish experience I had with Columbus. Months later, I mentioned the trauma to my speaker friend from Columbus, Jeff. Jeff explained his house was really in a smaller town just minutes outside Columbus.

‘What town, Jeff?’

‘Gahanna, Ohio. Gahanna means “hell” in Hebrew,’ he said, and then went on to explain why he thought ancient Hebrew historians were clairvoyant.

Thanks, Jeff, I knew you’d never lay a naked city on any of your listeners.





Answering the inevitable


Third only to death and taxes is the assurance a new acquaintance will soon chirp, ‘And what do you do?’ (Is it fitting and proper they should make that query? We’ll pick up that sticky wicket later.) For the moment, these few defensive moves help you keep your crackerjack communicator credentials when asked the inevitable.

First, like Never the Naked City, don’t toss a short-shrift answer in response to the asker’s breathless inquiry. You leave the poor fish flopping on the deck when you just say your title: I’m an actuary, an auditor, an author, an astrophysicist. Have mercy so he or she doesn’t feel like a nincompoop outsider asking, ‘What, er, kind of actuizing (auditing, authoring, or astrophysizing) do you do?’

You’re a lawyer. Don’t leave it to laymen to try to figure out what you really do. Flesh it out. Tell a little story your Conversation Partner can get a handle on. For example, if you’re talking with a young mother say, ‘I’m a lawyer. Our firm specializes in employment law. In fact, now I’m involved in a case where a company actually discharged a woman for taking extra maternity leave that was a medical necessity.’ A mother can relate to that.

Talking with a business owner? Say ‘I’m a lawyer. Our firm specializes in employment law. My current case concerns an employer who is being sued by one of her staff for asking personal questions during the initial job interview.’ A business owner can relate to that.

Technique 16:

Never the naked job

When asked the inevitable ‘And what do YOU do,’ you may think ‘I’m an economist,’ ‘an educator,’ ‘an engineer’ is giving enough information to engender good conversation. However, to one who is not an economist, educator, or an engineer, you might as well be saying ‘I’m a paleontologist,’ ‘psychoanalyst,’ or ‘pornographer.’

Flesh it out. Throw out some delicious facts about your job for new acquaintances to munch on. Otherwise, they’ll soon excuse themselves, preferring the snacks back at the cheese tray.





Painful memories of naked job flashers


I still harbour painful recollections of being tongue-tied when confronted by naked job flashers. Like the time a fellow at a dinner party told me, ‘I’m a nuclear scientist.’ My weak ‘Oh, that must be fascinating’ reduced me to a mental molecule in his eyes.

The chap on my other side announced, ‘I’m in industrial abrasives,’ and then paused, waiting for me to be impressed. My ‘Well, er, golly, you must have to be a shrewd judge of character to be in industrial abrasives’ didn’t fly either. We three sat in silence for the rest of the meal.

Just last month a new acquaintance bragged, ‘I’m planning to teach Tibetan Buddhism at Truckee Meadows Community College,’ and then clammed up. I knew less about Truckee Meadows than I did about Tibetan Buddhism. Whenever people ask you what you do, give them some mouth-to-ear resuscitation so they can catch their breath and say something.





Help newlymets through their first moments


‘Susan, I’d like you to meet John Smith. John, this is Susan Jones.’ Duh, what do you expect John and Susan to say?

‘Smith? Umm, that’s S-M-I-T-H, isn’t it?’

‘Uh, er, golly, Susan, well, now, there’s an interesting name.’

Nice-try-forget-it. Don’t blame John or Susan for being less than scintillating. The fault lies with the person who introduced the two the way most people introduce their friends to each other – with naked names. They cast out a line with no bait for people to sink their teeth into.

Big Winners may not talk a lot, but conversation never dies unwillingly in their midst. They make sure of it with techniques like Never the Naked Introduction. When they introduce people, they buy an insurance policy on the conversation with a few simple add-ons: ‘Susan, I’d like you to meet John. John has a wonderful boat we took a trip on last summer. John, this is Susan Smith. Susan is editor-in-chief of Shoestring Gourmet magazine.’

Padding the introduction gives Susan the opportunity to ask what kind of boat John has or where the group went. It gives John an opening to discuss his love of writing. Or of cooking. Or of food. The conversation can then naturally expand to travel in general, life on boats, past holidays, favourite recipes, restaurants, budgets, diets, magazines, editorial policy – to infinity.

Technique 17:

Never the naked introduction

When introducing people, don’t throw out an unbaited hook and stand there grinning like Big Clam, leaving the newlymets to flutter their fins and fish for a topic. Bait the conversational hook to get them in the swim of things. Then you’re free to stay or float on to the next networking opportunity.





If you’re not comfortable mentioning someone’s job during the introduction, mention their hobby or even a talent. The other day at a gathering, the hostess introduced a man named Gilbert. She said, ‘Leil, I’d like you to meet Gilbert. Gilbert’s gift is sculpting. He makes beautiful wax carvings.’ I remember thinking, gift, now that’s a lovely way to introduce someone and induce conversation.

Armed with these two personality enhancers, three conversation igniters and three small extenders, it is time to take a step up the communications ladder. Let us now rise from small talk and seek the path to more meaningful dialogue. The next technique is guaranteed to make the exchange engrossing for your Conversation Partner.





Be a sleuth on their slips of the tongue


Even a well-intentioned husband who might ask his wife while making love, ‘Is it good for you, too, honey?’ knows not to ask a colleague, ‘Is the conversation good for you, too?’ Yet he wonders … we all do. With the following technique, set your mind at rest. You can definitely make the conversation hot for anyone you speak with. Like my prom date, Donnie, you will miraculously find subjects to engross your listeners. No matter how elusive the clue, Sherlock Holmes is confident he’ll soon be staring right at it through his magnifying glass. Like the unerring detective, Big Winners know, no matter how elusive the clue, they’ll find the right topic. How? They become word detectives.

I have a young friend, Nancy, who works in a nursing home. Nancy cares deeply about the elderly but often grumbles about how crotchety and laconic some of her patients are. She laments she has difficulty relating to them.

Nancy told me about one especially cantankerous old woman named Mrs Otis, whom she could never get to open up to her. ‘One day,’ Nancy confided, ‘right after all those rainstorms we had last week, just to make conversation, I remarked to Mrs Otis, “Terrible storms we had last week, don’t you think?” Well,’ Nancy continued, ‘Mrs Otis practically jumped down my throat. She said in a snippy voice, “It’s been good for the plants.”’ I asked Nancy how she responded to that.

‘What could I say?’ Nancy answered. ‘The woman was obviously cutting me off.’

‘Did you ever think to ask Mrs Otis if she liked plants?’

‘Plants?’ Nancy asked.

‘Well, yes,’ I suggested. ‘Mrs Otis brought the subject up.’ I asked Nancy to do me a favour. ‘Ask her,’ I begged. Nancy resisted, but I persisted. Just to quiet me down, Nancy promised to ask ‘cantankerous old Mrs Otis’ if she liked plants.

The next day, a flabbergasted Nancy called me from work. ‘Leil, how did you know? Not only did Mrs Otis love plants, she told me she’d been married to a gardener. Today I had a different problem with Mrs Otis. I couldn’t shut her up! She went on and on about her garden, her husband …’

Top Communicators know ideas don’t come out of nowhere. If Mrs Otis thought to bring up plants, then she must have some relationship with them. Furthermore, by mentioning the word, it meant subconsciously she wanted to talk about plants.

Suppose, for example, instead of responding to Nancy’s comment about the rain with ‘It’s good for the plants,’ Mrs Otis had said, ‘Because of the rain, my dog couldn’t go out.’ Nancy could then ask about her dog. Or suppose she grumbled, ‘It’s bad for my arthritis.’ Can you guess what old Mrs Otis wants to talk about now?

When talking with anyone, keep your ears open and, like a good detective, listen for clues. Be on the lookout for any unusual references: any anomaly, deviation, digression, or invocation of another place, time, person. Ask about it because it’s the clue to what your Conversation Partner would really enjoy discussing.

If two people have something in common, when the shared interest comes up, they jump on it naturally. For example, if someone mentions playing squash (bird watching or stamp collecting) and the listener shares that passion, he or she pipes up, ‘Oh, you’re a squasher (or birder or philatelist), too!’

Here’s the trick: there’s no need to be a squasher, birder, or philatelist to pipe up with enthusiasm. You can simply Be a Word Detective. When you pick up on the reference as though it excites you, too, it parlays you into conversation the stranger thrills to. (The subject may put your feet to sleep, but that’s another story.)

Technique 18:

Be a word detective

Like a good gumshoe, listen to your Conversation Partner’s every word for clues to his or her preferred topic. The evidence is bound to slip out. Then spring on that subject like a sleuth on to a slip of the tongue. Like Sherlock Holmes, you have the clue to the subject that’s hot for the other person.





Now that you’ve ignited stimulating conversation, let’s explore a technique to keep it hot.





Sell yourself with a top sales technique


Several years ago, a girlfriend and I attended a party saturated with a hotch-potch of swellegant folks. Everyone we talked to seemed to lead a nifty life. Discussing the party afterward, I asked my friend, ‘Diane, of all the exciting people at the party, who did you enjoy talking to most?’

Without hesitation she said, ‘Oh by far, Dan Smith.’

‘What does Dan do?’ I asked her.

‘Uh, well, I’m not sure,’ she answered.

‘Where does he live?’

‘Uh, I don’t know,’ Diane responded.

‘Well, what is he interested in?’

‘Well, we really didn’t talk about his interests.’

‘Diane,’ I asked, ‘what did you talk about?’

‘Well, I guess we talked mostly about me.’

‘Aha,’ I said to myself. Diane has just rubbed noses with a Big Winner.

As it turns out, I had the pleasure of meeting Big Winner Dan several months later. Diane’s ignorance about his life piqued my curiosity so I grilled him for details. As it turns out, Dan lives in Paris, has a beach home in the south of France, and a mountain home in the Alps. He travels around the world producing sound and light shows for pyramids and ancient ruins – and he is an avid hang glider and scuba diver. Does this man have an interesting life or what? Yet Dan, when meeting Diane, said not one word about himself.

I told Dan about how pleased Diane was to meet him yet how little she learned about his life. Dan simply replied, ‘Well, when I meet someone, I learn so much more if I ask about their life. I always try to turn the spotlight on the other person.’ Truly confident people often do this. They know they grow more by listening than talking. Obviously, they also captivate the talker.

Several months ago at a speaker’s convention, I was talking with a colleague, Brian Tracy. Brian does a brilliant job of training top salespeople. He tells his students of a giant spotlight that, when shining on their product, is not as interesting to the prospect. When salespeople shine the giant spotlight on the prospect, that’s what makes the sale.

Salespeople, this technique is especially crucial for you. Keep your Swivelling Spotlight aimed away from you, only lightly on your product, and most brightly on your buyer. You’ll do a much better job of selling yourself and your product.

Technique 19:

The swivelling spotlight When you meet someone, imagine a giant revolving spotlight between you. When you’re talking, the spotlight is on you. When New Person is speaking, it’s shining on him or her. If you shine it brightly enough, the stranger will be blinded to the fact that you have hardly said a word about yourself. The longer you keep it shining away from you, the more interesting he or she finds you.





Never be stuck for something to say again


Moments arise, of course, when even conversationalists extraordinaire hit the wall. Some folks’ monosyllabic grunts leave slim pickings even for masters of the Be a Word Detective technique.

If you find yourself futilely fanning the embers of a dying conversation (and if you feel for political reasons or human compassion that the conversation should continue), here’s a foolproof trick to get the fire blazing again. I call it Parroting after that beautiful tropical bird that captures everyone’s heart simply by repeating other people’s words.

Have you ever, puttering around the house, had the TV in the background tuned to a tennis game? You hear the ball going back and forth over the net – klink-klunk, klink-klunk, klink … this time you don’t hear the klunk. The ball didn’t hit the court. What happened? You immediately look up at the set.

Likewise in conversation, the conversational ball goes back and forth. First you speak, then your partner speaks, you speak … and so it goes, back and forth. Each time, through a series of nods and comforting grunts like ‘um hum,’ or ‘umm,’ you let your Conversation Partner know the ball has landed in your court. It’s your ‘I got it’ signal. Such is the rhythm of conversation.





‘What do I say next?’


Back to that frightfully familiar moment when it is your turn to speak but your mind goes blank. Don’t panic. Instead of signaling verbally or nonverbally that you ‘got it,’ simply repeat, or parrot, the last two or three words your companion said, in a sympathetic, questioning tone. That throws the conversational ball right back in your partner’s court.

I have a friend, Phil, who sometimes picks me up at the airport. Usually I am so exhausted that I rudely fall asleep in the passenger seat, relegating Phil to nothing more than a chauffeur.

After one especially exhausting trip some years ago, I flung my bags in his trunk and flopped onto the front seat. As I was dozing off, he mentioned he’d gone to the theatre the night before. Usually I would have just grunted and wafted into unconsciousness. However, on this particular trip, I had learned the Parroting technique and was anxious to try it. ‘Theater?’ I parroted quizzically.

‘Yes, it was a great show,’ he replied, fully expecting it to be the last word on the subject before I fell into my usual sleepy stupor.

‘Great show?’ I parroted. Pleasantly surprised by my interest, he said, ‘Yes, it’s a new show by Stephen Sondheim called Sweeney Todd.’

‘Sweeney Todd?’ I again parroted. Now Phil was getting fired up. ‘Yeah, great music and an unbelievably bizarre story …’

‘Bizarre story?’ I parroted. Well, that’s all Phil needed. For the next half an hour, Phil told me the show’s story about a London butcher who went around murdering people. I half dozed, but soon decided his tale of Sweeney Todd’s cutting off people’s heads was disturbing my sleepy reverie. So I simply backed up and parroted one of his previous phrases to get him on another track.

‘You said it had great music?’

That did the trick. For the rest of the forty-five minute trip to my home, Phil sang me ‘Pretty Women,’ ‘The Best Pies in London,’ and other songs from Sweeney Todd – much better accompaniment for my demi-nap. I’m sure, to this day, Phil thinks of that trip as one of the best conversations we ever had. And all I did was parrot a few of his phrases.

Technique 20:

Parroting

Never be left speechless again. Like a parrot, simply repeat the last few words your Conversation Partner says. That puts the ball right back in his or her court, and then all you need to do is listen.

Salespeople, why go on a wild goose chase for a customer’s real objections when it’s so easy to shake them out of the trees with Parroting?





Parroting your way to profits


Parroting is also a can opener to pry open people’s real feelings. Star salespeople use it to get to their prospect’s emotional objections, which they often don’t even articulate to themselves. A friend of mine, Paul, a used-car salesman, told me he credits a recent sale of a Lamborghini to Parroting.

Paul was walking around the lot with a prospect and his wife, who had expressed interest in a ‘sensible car.’ He was showing them every sensible Chevy and Ford on the lot. As they were looking at one very sensible family car, Paul asked the husband what he thought of it. ‘Well,’ he mused, ‘I’m not sure this car is right for me.’ Instead of moving on to the next sensible car, Paul parroted ‘Right for you?’ Paul’s questioning inflection signaled the prospect that he needed to say more.

‘Well, er, yeah,’ the prospect mumbled. ‘I’m not sure it fits my personality.’

‘Fits your personality?’ Paul again parroted.

‘You know, maybe I need something a little more sporty.’

‘A little more sporty?’ Paul parroted.

‘Well, those cars over there look a little more sporty.’

Aha! Paul’s parrot had ferreted out which cars to show the customer. As they walked over toward a Lamborghini on the lot, Paul saw the prospect’s eyes light up. An hour later, Paul had pocketed a fat commission.

Want to take a rest from talking to save your throat? This next technique gets your Conversation Partner off and running so all you have to do is listen (or even sneak off unnoticed as he or she chats congenially away).





‘Tell ’em about the time you …’


Every father smiles when his little tyke beseeches him at bedtime, ‘Daddy, Daddy, tell me the story again of the three little pigs’ (or the dancing princesses, or how you and Mummy met). Daddy knows Junior enjoyed the story so much the first time, he wants to hear it again and again.

Junior inspires the following technique called Encore! which serves two purposes. Encore! makes a colleague feel like a happy dad, and it’s a great way to give dying conversation a heart transplant.

I once worked on a ship that had Italian officers and mostly American passengers. Each week, the deck officers were required to attend the captain’s cocktail party. After the captain’s address in charmingly broken English, the officers invariably clumped together yakking it up in Italian. Needless to say, most of the passengers’ grasp of Italian ended at macaroni, spaghetti, salami, and pizza.

As cruise director, it fell on my shoulders to get the officers to mingle with the passengers. My not-so-subtle tactic was to grab one of the officers’ arms and literally drag him over to a smiling throng of expectant passengers. I would then introduce the officer and pray that either the cat would release his tongue, or a passenger would come up with a more original question than ‘Gee, if all you officers are here, who is driving the boat?’ Never happened. I dreaded the weekly captain’s cocktail party.

One night, sleeping in my cabin, I was awakened by the ship rocking violently from side to side. I listened and the engines were off. A bad sign. I grabbed my robe and raced up to the deck. Through the dense fog, I could barely discern another ship not half a mile from us. Five or six officers were grasping the starboard guardrail and leaning overboard. I rushed over just in time to see a man in the moonlight with a bandage over one eye struggling up our violently rocking ladder. The officers immediately whisked him off to our ship’s hospital. The engines started again and we were on our way.

The next morning I got the full story. A labourer on the other ship, a freighter, had been drilling a hole in an engine cylinder. While he was working, a sharp needle-thin piece of metal shot like a missile into his right eye. The freighter had no doctor on board so the ship broadcast an emergency signal.

International sea laws dictate that any ship hearing a distress signal must respond. Our ship came to the rescue and the seaman, clutching his bleeding eye, was lowered into a lifeboat that brought him to our ship. Dr Rossi, our ship’s doctor, was successfully able to remove the needle from the workman’s eye thus saving his eyesight.

Cut to the next captain’s cocktail party. Once again I was faced with the familiar challenge of getting officers to mingle and make small talk with the passengers. I made my weekly trek to the laconic officers’ throng to drag one or two away and, this time, my hand fell on the arm of the ship’s doctor. I hauled him over to the nearest group of grinning passengers and introduced him. I then said, ‘Just last week Dr Rossi saved the eyesight of a seaman on another ship after a dramatic midnight rescue. Dr Rossi, I’m sure these folks would love to hear about it.’

It was like a magic wand. To my amazement, it was as though Dr Rossi was blessed instantly with the tongues of angels. His previously monosyllabic broken English became thickly accented eloquence. He recounted the entire story for the growing group of passengers gathering around him. I left the throng that Dr Rossi enraptured to pull another officer over to an awaiting audience.

I grabbed the captain’s stripe-covered arm, dragged him over to another pack of smiling passengers and said, ‘Captain Cafiero, why don’t you tell these folks about the dramatic midnight rescue you made last week?’ The cat released Cafiero’s tongue and he was off and running.

Back to the throng to get the first officer for the next group. By now I knew I had a winner. ‘Signor Salvago, why don’t you tell these folks how you awakened the captain at midnight last week for the dramatic midnight rescue?’

By then it was time to go back to extract the ship’s doctor from the first bevy and take him to his next pack of passengers. It worked even better the second time. He happily commenced his Encore! for the second audience. As he chatted away, I raced back to the captain to pull him away for a second telling with another throng. I felt like the circus juggler who keeps all the plates spinning on sticks. Just as I got one conversation spinning, I had to race back to the first speaker to give him a whirl at another audience.

The captain’s cocktail parties were a breeze for me for the rest of the season. The three officers loved telling the same story of their heroism to new people every cruise. The only problem was I noticed the stories getting longer and more elaborate each time. I had to adjust my timing in getting them to do a repeat performance for the next audience.





Play it again, Sam


Encore! is the word appreciative audiences chant when they want another song from the singer, another dance from the dancer, another poem from the poet, and in my case, another storytelling from the officers. Encore! is the name of the technique you can use to request a repeat story from a prospect, potential employer, or valued acquaintance. While the two of you are chatting with a group of people, simply turn to him and say, ‘John, I bet everyone would love to hear about the time you caught that thirty-pound striped bass.’ Or, ‘Susan, tell everyone that story you just told me of how you rescued the kitten from the tree.’ He or she will, of course, demur. Insist! Your Conversation Partner is secretly loving it. The subtext of your request is ‘That story of yours was so terrific, I want my other friends to hear it.’ After all, only crowd pleasers are asked to do an Encore!

Technique 21:

Encore!

The sweetest sound a performer can hear welling up out of the applause is ‘Encore! Encore! Let’s hear it again!’ The sweetest sound your Conversation Partner can hear from your lips when you’re talking with a group of people is ‘Tell them about the time you …’

Whenever you’re at a meeting or party with someone important to you, think of some stories he or she told you. Choose an appropriate one from their repertoire that the crowd will enjoy. Then shine the spotlight by requesting a repeat performance.





One word of warning: make sure the story you request is one in which the teller shines. No one wants to retell the time they lost the sale, cracked up the car, or broke up the bar and spent the night in jail. Make sure your requested Encore! is a positive story where they come out the Big Winner, not the buffoon.

The next technique deals with sharing some positive stories of your life.





Endearing little flubs?


Often people think when they meet someone they like, they should share a secret, reveal an intimacy, or make a confession of sorts to show they are human too. Airing your youthful battle with bed wetting, teeth grinding, or thumb sucking – or your present struggle with gout or a goitre – supposedly endears you to the masses.

Well, sometimes it does. One study showed that if someone is above you in stature, their revealing a foible brings them closer to you.12 The holes in the bottom of presidential candidate Adlai Stevenson’s shoes charmed a nation, as did George Bush’s shocking admission that he couldn’t stomach broccoli.

If you’re on sure footing, say a superstar who wants to become friends with a fan, go ahead and tell your devotees about the time you were out of work and penniless. But if you’re not a superstar, better play it safe and keep the skeletons in the closet until later. People don’t know you well enough to put your foible in context.

Later in a relationship, telling your new friend you’ve been thrice married, you got caught shoplifting as a teenager, and you got turned down for a big job may be no big deal. And that may be the extent of what could be construed as black marks on an otherwise flawless life of solid relationships, no misdemeanors, and an impressive professional record. But very early in a relationship, the instinctive reaction is ‘What else is coming? If he shares that with me so quickly, what else is he hiding? A closetful of ex-spouses, a criminal record, walls papered with rejection letters?’ Your new acquaintance has no way of knowing your confession was a generous act, a well-intentioned revelation, on your part.

Technique 22:

Ac-cen-tu-ate the pos-i-tive

When first meeting someone, lock your closet door and save your skeletons for later. You and your new good friend can invite the skeletons out, have a good laugh, and dance over their bones later in the relationship. But now’s the time, as the old song says, to ‘ac-cen-tu-ate the pos-i-tive and elim-i-nate the neg-a-tive.’



So far, in this section, you have found assertive methods for meeting people and mastering small talk. The next is both an assertive and defensive move to help spare you that pasty smile we tend to sport when we have no idea what people are talking about.





Your most important prop


You’ve heard folks whine, ‘I can’t go to the party, I haven’t got a thing to wear.’ When was the last time you heard, ‘I can’t go to the party, I haven’t got a thing to say?’

When going to a gathering with great networking possibilities, you naturally plan your outfit and make sure your shoes will match. And, of course, you must have just the right tie or correct colour lipstick. You puff your hair, pack your business cards, and you’re off.

Whoa! Wait a minute. Didn’t you forget the most important thing? What about the right conversation to enhance your image? Are you actually going to say anything that comes to mind, or doesn’t, at the moment? You wouldn’t don the first outfit your groping hand hits in the darkened closet, so you shouldn’t leave your conversing to the first thought that comes to mind when facing a group of expectant, smiling faces. You will, of course, follow your instincts in conversation. But at least be prepared in case inspiration doesn’t hit.

The best way to assure you’re conversationally in the swing of things is to listen to a newscast just before you leave. What’s happening right now in the world – all the fires, floods, air disasters, toppled governments, and stock market crashes – pulverizes into great conversational fodder, no matter what crowd you’re circulating in.

It is with some embarrassment that I must attribute the following technique to a businesswoman in the world’s oldest profession. For a magazine article I was writing, I interviewed one of the savviest operators in her field, Sidney Biddle Barrows, the famed Mayflower Madam.

Sydney told me she had a house rule when she was in business. All of her female ‘independent contractors’ were directed to keep up with the daily news so they could be good conversationalists with their clients. This was not just Sidney’s whim. Feedback from her employees had revealed that 60 percent of her girls’ work hour was spend in chatting, and only 40 percent in satisfying the customers’ needs. Thus she instructed them to read the daily newspaper or listen to a radio broadcast before leaving for an appointment. Sidney told me when she initiated this rule, her business increased significantly. Reports came back from her clients complimenting her on the fascinating women she had working for her. The consummate businesswoman, Ms Barrows always strove to exceed her customers’ expectations.

Technique 23:

The latest news … don’t leave home without it

The last move to make before leaving for the party – even after you’ve given yourself final approval in the mirror – is to turn on the radio news or scan your newspaper. Anything that happened today is good material. Knowing the big-deal news of the moment is also a defensive move that rescues you from putting your foot in your mouth by asking what everybody’s talking about. Foot-in-mouth is not very tasty in public, especially when it’s surrounded by egg-on-face.





Ready for the big leagues of conversation? Let’s go …



