



Has it ever happened to you? Everyone at the party is speaking gobbledygook. They’re all discussing faulty audits, code constraints, or the library market – and you have no idea what they’re talking about. It’s because everybody at the party is an accountant, an architect, or a publisher – and you’re not.

So you stand there with a pasty smile on your face not opening your mouth. If you do, you fear the wrong thing will come out. Paranoia sets in. Everybody will snicker at you. You’re an outsider. So you suffer in silence.

In high school I suffered a massive Silent Outsider Syndrome, especially around males. All they wanted to talk about was cars. I knew nothing about cars. The only time I’d ever set foot in a ‘body shop’ was to get a suntan.

Well, one fateful day, Mum came home with a gift for me that transformed my teenage existence from shy to sociable. It was a book on all the current model cars and their differences over and under the hood. One reading, and I became fluent in Fords, Chevys, and Buicks. I no longer hyperventilated when boys said words like carburretor, alternator, camshaft, or exhaust manifold. I didn’t need to learn a lot, just enough to ask the right questions to get the guys talking. When I’d learned to speak ‘car’ with the boys, it worked wonders for my social life.

Cut to today. We grown-up boys and girls also have our favourite topics which usually involve our work or our hobbies. When we’re with people in our own field or who share interests, we open up like small-town gossips. (Even engineers who have a constant case of cat-got-their-tongue start gabbing about greasy turbines and various projects when they’re together.) To outsiders, our conversation sounds like gobbledygook. But we know precisely what it’s about. It’s our own jobbeldygook or hobbydygook.

You fear you’ll find yourself in a party of squash players when you’re the type of person who’d rather be in court than on court? Don’t panic hearing words like lobbing and hitting rails roll off the squash players’ tongues. So what if the only experience you’ve ever had with squash was the mashed acorn variety on your plate next to the turkey last Thanksgiving. All you need is the few techniques that follow.

Just as anglers throw out a dragonfly to get the fish to bite, all you have to do is throw out the right questions to get people to open up. Dale Carnegie’s adage, ‘show sincere interest and people will talk,’ only goes so far. As they say in poker, ‘it takes jacks or better to open.’ And in conversation, it takes cursory knowledge or better about their field to get them to really open up. You must have knowledgeable curiosity, the kind that makes you sound like you’re worth talking to.

In this section, we explore techniques that are ‘Open Sesames’ to get people gabbing with you like an insider.





To be a modern-day renaissance man or woman


Whenever friends visit my hometown, New York City, I warn them ‘Never ask anyone riding in the subway for directions.’

‘Because I’ll get mugged?’ they fearfully ask.

‘No, just because you’ll never get where you’re going!’ Most Big Apple subway riders know only two things about the subway: where they get on and where they get off. They know nothing about the rest of the system. Most people are like NYC strap-hangers when it comes to their hobbies and interests. They know their own pastimes, but all the others are like unvisited stations.

My unmarried (and wishing she weren’t) friend Rita has a bad case of bowler’s thumb. Every Wednesday night she’s bowling up a storm with her friends. She is forever discussing her scores, her averages, and her high game. Another single and searching friend, Walter, is into white-water rafting. He talks endlessly with his paddling friends about which rivers he’s run, which outfitters he’s gone with, and which class rapids he prefers. Thinking my two single friends might hit it off, I introduced Walter the paddler to Rita the bowler and mentioned their respective passions.

‘Oh you’re a bowler!’ said Walter.

‘Yes,’ Rita smiled demurely, awaiting more questions about her big bowling turn-on. Walter was silent.

Masking her disappointment, Rita said, ‘Uh, Leil tells me you’re into water rafting.’ Walter smiled proudly, awaiting further friendly interrogation on paddling. ‘Uh, that must be exciting. Isn’t it dangerous?’ was the best Rita could do.

‘No, it’s not dangerous,’ Walter patronizingly responded to her typical outsider’s question. Then the conversation died.

During the deafening silence, I remember thinking, if Rita had run just one river, if Walter had bowled just one game, their lives might be different now. Conversation could have flowed, and who knows what else might have flowered.





Go fly a kite!


The Scramble Therapy technique is salvation from such disappointing encounters. It will transform you into a modern-day Renaissance man or woman who comfortably can discuss a variety of interests.

Scramble Therapy is, quite simply, scrambling up your life and participating in an activity you’d never think of indulging in. Just one out of every four weekends, do something totally out of your pattern. Do you usually play tennis on weekends? This weekend, go hiking. Do you usually go hiking? This weekend, take a tennis lesson. Do you bowl? Leave that to your buddies this time. Instead, go white-water rafting. Oh, you were planning on running some rapids like you do every warm weekend? Forget it, go bowling.

Go to a stamp exhibition. Go to a chess lecture. Go ballooning. Go bird watching. Go to a pool hall. Go kayaking. Go fly a kite! Why? Because it will give you conversational fodder for the rest of your life. From that weekend on, you’ll sound like an insider with all the hikers, stamp collectors, ballooners, birders, billiards players, kayakers, and kitists you ever meet. Just by doing their activity once.

If you take a piece of blue litmus paper and dip it in a huge vat of acid, the tip turns pink. If you take another blue litmus paper and dip it into just one minuscule drop of acid on a glass slide, the tip turns just as pink. Compare this to participating in an activity just one time. A sampling gives you 80 per cent of the conversational value. You learn the insider’s questions to ask. You start using the right terms. You’ll never be at a loss again when the subject of extracurricular interests comes up – which it always does.





Do you speak scuba?


I’m not a certified scuba diver. However, six years ago in Bermuda I saw a sign: ‘Resort Dives, $25, no Scuba experience necessary.’ In just three hours, I received the best crash course in talking with scuba divers the world offers.

First I was given a quick lesson in the pool. Then, struggling to stay erect under the weight of my oxygen tank, regulator, buoyancy compensator, and weight belt, I went clumping out to the dive boat. Sitting there on the rocking dinghy, fondling my mask and fins like worry beads, I overheard the certified divers asking each other insider questions:

‘Where were you certified?’

‘Where have you dived?’

‘Do you prefer wrecks or reefs?’

‘Ever done any night diving?’

‘Are you into underwater photography?’

‘Do you dive on a computer?’

‘What’s your longest bottom time?’

‘Did you ever get the bends?’

Why the italicized words? Those are scuba lingo. I now speak scuba. To this day, whenever I meet divers, I have the right questions to ask, and subjects to discuss. And the right ones to avoid. (Like how much I like seafood. That’s like telling a cat lover how much you love tender barbecued kitten.) I can now ask my new friends which of the scuba hot spots they’ve been to – Cozumel, Cayman, Cancun. Then, if I want to really show off, I ask if they’ve been to Truk Lagoon in the Far Pacific, the Great Barrier Reef in Australia, or the Red Sea.

All the insider terms now roll comfortably off my tongue. Before my Scramble Therapy experience I’d be calling their beloved wrecks and reefs ‘sunken ships’ and ‘coral.’ Understandable words, but not scuba words. Not insider words. Upon meeting a scuba diver, I probably would have asked, ‘Oh scuba diving. That must be interesting. Uh, aren’t you afraid of sharks?’ Not a good way to get off on the right fin with a diver.

Technique 38:

Scramble therapy

Once a month, scramble your life. Do something you’d never dream of doing. Participate in a sport, go to an exhibition, hear a lecture on something totally out of your experience. You get 80 per cent of the right lingo and insider questions from just one exposure.





Think about it! Suppose at a dinner party, the table conversation turns to scuba diving. If you, too, had done your one-time-only dive, you’d ask your diving dinner companion if he likes night diving, or whether he prefers diving on wrecks or reefs. (He’ll never believe it when you tell him the deepest water you’ve ever submerged yourself in is your own bathtub.)

Then you turn to the bungee jumper seated on your left and ask him, ‘Do you prefer chest-waist jumps or ankle jumps?’ If the conversation then changes to tennis, or martial arts, or chess, or coin collecting, or even bird watching, you can keep up and keep the conversation going. What a guy! What a gal!





Surviving bafflegab


Even more insidious than hobby-talk is job-speak, or Gobbledygook. I still harbour social nightmares of the evening I attended a party thrown by a couple who worked in computer database management. As I walked in the door, I overheard one chap saying to another, ‘When the domain relational calculus is restricted to safe expressions, it’s equivalent to the turple relational …’

That’s all I stayed around for. I knew I wasn’t going to understand one bit or byte of conversation the rest of the evening. It made me long for the days when a mouse meant the furry little fellow who loves cheese, windows were the kind you bought drapes for, and the web was something spiders trapped flies in. I knew I was going to need some technical support if I was going to be compatible with this crowd.

I decided then and there to learn some of the opening questions database management types ask each other. Which I did. Now I can’t wait for a second chance at that crowd because I’m armed with questions like ‘What raid level are you using?’ and ‘What data warehousing product do you use?’

All you need are a few insider opening questions to get you started with any group. You ask questions, listen to the responses, and indulge in elementary on-target conversation with them for a moment or two about their field. (Then change the subject ASAP! You don’t want to fake you are more knowledgeable about their field than you really are.)





It’s all in the opening question


A tennis player can tell immediately from just appraising your opening serve how good a player you are. Is it going to be great playing with you, or a real bore? It’s the same in communicating. Just from your verbal opening serve, someone knows if it’s going to be interesting talking with you about their life or interests – or dull, dull, dull.

For example, suppose I’m introduced to someone and the first words out of her mouth are, ‘Oh, you’re a writer. When are you going to write the great American novel?’ Yikes, I know I’m talking with someone who is unfamiliar with my world. We’ll chat, but I prefer to change the subject. And soon, my Conversation Partner.

If, however, my new acquaintance says, ‘Oh you’re a writer. Do you write fiction or nonfiction?’ Bingo! Now I know I’m with a person who knows about my world. Why? Because that is the first question all writers ask each other. I enjoy talking to this inquisitor because I presume she has more insights into the writing world. Even if we quickly get off the subject of writing, she has come across as a well-informed individual.

Every job, every sport, every interest has insider opening questions that everybody in the same field asks – and it’s dumb outsider questions that they never ask each other. When an astronaut meets another astronaut, he asks, ‘What missions have you been on?’ (Never ‘How do you go to the bathroom up there?’) A dentist asks another dentist, ‘Are you in general practice or do you have a specialty?’ (Never ‘Heard any good pain jokes lately?’)

The good news is, beginning Gobbledygook is an easy language. There’s no need to master buzzwords, only a few opening questions to make you sound like an insider. Then, here’s the fun part, when you tell them you’re not connected to their field, they’re all the more impressed. ‘What a knowledgeable person!’ they say to themselves.





‘Help! Everybody there will be an artist.’


It’s not hard to harvest good Jobbledygook. Let’s say you’ve been invited to a gallery opening where you’ll be meeting many artists. If you don’t speak artist, go through your Rolodex to see if you have an artist friend or two.

Aha, you found one. Well, sort of. Your friend Sally attended art school. You call her up and ask, ‘Sally, I know this sounds silly but I’ve been invited to an event where I’m bound to be talking with a lot of artists. Could you give me a few good questions to ask?’ Sally might find your query a tad unusual, but your diligence should impress her.

Maybe she’ll say, ‘Well, ask artists what medium they work in.’

‘Medium?’ you ask.

‘Sure,’ she’ll tell you. ‘That’s the insider’s way to ask if they work with acrylics, oil, charcoal, pen, etc.’

‘Oh.’

‘Don’t ask artists to describe their work,’ she warns. ‘They feel theirs is a visual medium that can’t be described.’

‘Oh.’

‘And don’t ask them if their work is in a gallery.’

‘Oh?’

‘That could be a sore point. Instead ask “Is there anyplace I might see your work?” They’ll love that because, even if they’re not represented by a gallery, they can invite you to their studio to possibly buy their work.’

Technique 39:

Learn a little Gobbledygook

Big Winners speak Gobbledygook as a second language. What is Gobbledygook? It’s the language of other professions.

Why speak it? It makes you sound like an insider.

How do you learn it? You’ll find no Gobbledygook cassettes in the language section of your bookstore, but the lingo is easy to pick up. Simply ask a friend who speaks the lingo of the crowd you’ll be with to teach you a few opening questions. The words are few and the rewards are manifold.





That’s all you need to get started – two good opening art questions and a warning against the most-asked dumb outsider question.

Let’s say you’ve given a great opening serve with the right question on their job. You’ve slammed a swift ball dead centre into their conversational court. Happily, thinking they’re with an ace player, they answer your question. Then they put a little spin on the ball and send it lobbing right back into your court and it’s time for a follow-up question. Whoops, what to do now?

If you don’t want to come out of the bluffer’s closet just yet, you must master the next technique, Baring Their Hot Button.





Elementary doc-talk


I have a friend, John, a physician, who recently married a charming Japanese woman, Yamika. John told me the first time they were invited to a party to meet many of John’s colleagues, Yamika was panic-stricken. She wanted to make a good impression, yet she was tense about talking to American doctors. John was the only one she’d ever met, and during their romance they didn’t spend a whole lot of time discussing medicine.

John told her, ‘Don’t worry about it, Yami. They all ask each other the same old questions. When you meet them, just ask, “What’s your specialty” and “Are you affiliated with a hospital?”’

‘Then, to get into deeper conversation,’ he continued, ‘throw out questions like “How’s your relationship with your hospital?” or “How’s the current medical environment affecting you?” These are hot issues with doctors because everything’s changing in health care.’

John said Yamika delivered the lines verbatim. She circulated the party asking the various doctors’ specialties and inquiring about their affiliations and relationships with their hospitals. As a result, she was the hit of the party. Many of John’s colleagues later congratulated him on having found such a charming and insightful woman.





Getting the real grabber


It’s not just doctors. Every profession has concerns that are all the buzz within the industry. The rest of the world, however, knows little about these fixations. For example, independent booksellers constantly complain that big superstore chains are taking over the industry. Accountants lie awake nights worrying about liability insurance for faulty audits. Oh, us writers, too. We’re always bellyaching about magazines not paying us for electronic rights to our precious words.

Suppose some hapless soul were unlucky enough to find himself in a party of writers. Making conversation with these folks (who seldom know what they think until they see what they say) is no easy task for one who is accustomed to communicating in the spoken word. However, if before the party the nonwriter had called just one writer acquaintance and asked about the burning issues, he’d have had hot conversation with the wordsmiths all evening. I call the technique Baring Their Hot Button.

Technique 40:

Baring their hot button

Before jumping blindly into a bevy of bookbinders or a drove of dentists, find out what the hot issues are in their fields. Every industry has burning concerns the outside world knows little about. Ask your informant to bare the industry buzz. Then, to heat the conversation up, push those buttons.





Back to the art show you’re about to attend. You can’t let Sally hang up yet. She’s given you the two best opening questions for artists. But don’t let her go until you get the real conversational grabber. Ask her the hottest issues going on in the art world. She might think a minute and then say, ‘Well, there’s always art prices.’

‘Art prices?’ you ask.

‘Yes,’ she explains. ‘For example, in the 1980s the art world was very market-driven. Prices went sky high because some investors and status seekers paid exorbitant amounts. We feel that kind of took art away from the masses.’

Wow, now you’re really armed with some good insider art talk!





See you at the big one!


While you’re at it, don’t forget to grill your informant for special insider greetings to use when you’re with their gang. For example, actresses cringe if they hear ‘good luck’ before a show, but they smile at well-wishers who say ‘Break a leg!’

‘Break a leg,’ however, is not appropriate for runners before a marathon. That’s the last thought they want to have! The only thing they want to break is their personal record. Try ‘Have a personal best!’

Firefighters who work on shift seldom see each other except, of course, at the biggest blazes. Thus the firefighters’ greeting ‘See ya at the big one!’

Once, driving in a sleepy town you have to work at getting lost in, I succeeded. I was hopelessly turned around. Happily, I spotted the firehouse and a couple of bored firefighters lounging out front.

‘Excuse me, can you tell me the way back to Route 50?’ I called out the window. I could tell from their attitude they thought I was an idiot. Nevertheless, they lethargically pointed me in the right direction. As I drove off, I called out, ‘Thanks guys, see ya at the big one!’ In the rearview mirror I saw huge smiles break out on their faces as they stood up in unison and waved good-bye. The disoriented dizzy blond driving off had won their respect with their insider salute.





Extra! Extra! Learn even more about their lives


Let’s say your paper carrier has just hurled the newspaper from his bike to your front door. You pour a cup of coffee and get comfortable to catch up on what’s happening in the world. Your world, that is. Do you flip first to the international news? The fashion section? The sports page? The entertainment section? Maybe the comics?

Whichever section you usually flip to first, tomorrow DON’T. Turn to any other section, preferably one you hardly ever read. Why? Because it will familiarize you with other worlds so that you can soon discuss anything with anybody, no matter how little you have in common.

How about the real estate section? Yawn. Maybe you don’t find real estate especially engrossing. However, sooner or later you’re going to find yourself with a group of people who are discussing properties, deals, and today’s market. Scanning the real estate section just once every few weeks will keep you au courant with their conversation.

The advertising column? Maybe you think the world would be a far far better place without Madison Avenue. But your bottom line won’t be better off if you can’t hold your own discussing matters with the marketing executive you’ve just contracted to advertise your company’s widgets. Just a few peeks at the advertising news section and you’ll soon be chatting about campaigns and creative people, and doing print or TV. Instead of saying words, you’ll be saying copy. Instead of the agency, you’ll be bandying about real insider terms like the shop.

Using outsider words is one of the biggest giveaways that you are not in the know. On the ship, if a passenger asked any of my staff, ‘How long have you been working on the boat?’ they’d squelch a groan. Cruise staffers proudly worked on a ship, and the word boat revealed the passenger as a real landlubber.

The right word can perform conversational miracles. In the receiving line, whenever passengers asked our laconic captain, ‘When did you first become a master?’ or ‘What was your first command?’ he would hold up the entire line of people snaking around the ballroom waiting to shake his hand. Captain Cafiero would enthusiastically recount his naval history to the savvy inquirer who might have just learned the words master or command last week in the newspaper shipping notices. (If the passenger had simply said, ‘How long have you been a captain?’ or ‘What was your first boat?’ he or she would have got the captain’s usual Italian gentleman’s version of the bum’s rush.)

Soon you’ll become addicted to the high that establishing rapport with so many people gives you. All it takes is reading different sections of the newspaper.





Pump their pulp for even more fuel


Then, when you crave a bigger hit of insider lingo, start reading trade journals. Those are the closed-circulation magazines that go to members of various industries. Ask your friends in different jobs to lend you one so you’ll have even more fuel for the conversational fire.

All industries have one or two. You’ll see big glossy rags with names like Automotive News, Restaurant Business, Pool and Spa News, Trucking Industry, and even Hogs Today for people in the pig business. (Excuse me, they call themselves swine practitioners. Hey, you never know when, to make your next big sale, it will help to speak pig.) Any one issue will give you a sample of their lingo and inform you of the hottest issues in that field.

When it comes to people’s hobbies and interests, browse through magazines on running, working out, bicycling, skiing, swimming, surfing. Large magazine stores carry biker rags, boxer rags, bowler rags, even bull-riding rags. You’ll find thousands of special-interest magazines published every month.

Several years ago, I got hooked on buying a different one each week. It paid off quickly when a potential consulting client invited me to dinner at her home. She had a beautiful garden and, thanks to Flower and Garden Magazine, I could throw out insider terms like ornamentals, annuals, and perennials. I could even keep up when the discussion turned to the advantages of growing from seeds or bulbs.

Because I was so fluent in flower, she invited me to take a longer walk with her to see her private back gardens. As we strolled, I gradually changed the subject from chrysanthemums to the consulting work I could do for her company. Who was leading whom down the garden path?

Technique 41:

Read their rags

Is your next big client a golfer, runner, swimmer, surfer, or skier? Are you attending a social function filled with accountants or Zen Buddhists – or anything between? There are untold thousands of monthly magazines serving every imaginable interest. You can dish up more information than you’ll ever need to sound like an insider with anyone just by reading the rags that serve their racket. (Have you read your latest copy of Zoonooz yet?)





Is the world getting smaller, or are we getting bigger? Today’s Renaissance man or woman is comfortable and confident anywhere and the next technique helps you be an insider wherever you find yourself on the planet.





How to be a global insider


Say you’re travelling abroad on business. What’s the first thing on your to-do list? Get a passport and a phrase book, right? After all, who wants to wander around Rome not knowing how to ask for a restroom? Or be thirsty in Kuala Lumpur not knowing how to ask for a Coke? However, there’s something most of us forget to pack, often to dire consequences – a book on international customs.

A friend of mine, a fellow speaker named Geraldine, was excited about her first speech in Japan. To be comfy on her long flight to Tokyo, she donned her favourite designer jeans and a casual jacket. Fourteen hours and 6, 737 miles later, four impeccably dressed Japanese gentlemen greeted her at Narita Airport. Smiling and bowing low, they handed her their business cards. With her bag in one hand, Geri took their cards with the other. She thanked them, glanced briefly at the cards, and packed them safely into her back pocket. She then pulled one of her business cards out of her purse and, sensitive to the fact that they might have difficulty pronouncing Geraldine, wrote her nickname ‘Geri’ above her printed name. The gentlemen hovered over her card, turning it over to examine it a few times, before one of them put it in his briefcase.

When the five of them arrived at the hotel, they invited Geri for tea in the lobby. While sipping tea, the gentlemen presented her with a small gift which she eagerly opened. One of Geri’s most charming qualities is her instinctive warmth and effusiveness. She was thrilled with the gift and, in typical Geri style, she squealed, ‘Oh, it’s beautiful!’ as she gave each of the gentlemen a little hug.

At this point, the four Japanese gentlemen stood up in unison like four frowning Siamese twins and, bowing only very slightly, mumbled ‘Sayonara’ and promptly left. Poor Geri was flabbergasted. What did she do wrong?

Everything! First, the jeans. Even if you’re coming off a bicycle in Asia, you do not meet clients casually dressed. The second mistake was Geri’s vulgar handling of their business cards. In Asia, the business card is one of the most important protocol tools. It is always presented and accepted reverently with both hands. (Except in Moslem Asia where the left hand is considered unclean.)

Geri then put their cards away much too quickly. In Asia, people use business cards as a conversation starter. You chat about each other’s cards and work and do not put theirs away until they gently and respectfully place yours in safekeeping. Shoving it into her back jeans pocket was the ultimate disrespect.

Geri didn’t discover her fourth gaffe until she returned home. One of her colleagues, Bill, a seasoned business traveller, analyzed the fiasco for her. Bill told her the reason the gentlemen had turned Geraldine’s card over and over when she gave it to them at the airport was to find her name, title, and company printed in Japanese on the other side. The flip side of Geri’s card was, of course, blank.

Then, fifth horror of horrors, Geri should not have written on the card. Cards in Asia are not exactly sacred, but one should never deface them with messy handwriting.

The sad tale of Geri and the Japanese gets worse. Bill broke the bad news to her: she should not have opened the gift in front of her clients. Why? Because in a land where saving face is critical, it would be embarrassing to discover the gift they gave was not as nice as the one they received. (Yikes, Geri hadn’t even given them a gift!) Gaffe number seven.

Geri’s little squeal when receiving the gift was also a boo-boo. In Asia, the lower the tone of voice, the higher the rank. The final flub was, of course, giving the gentlemen a thank-you hug. Hugging, highly revered in certain parts of the world is, in Japan, absolutely unacceptable with a new client.

Needless to say, Geri has not been invited back to Japan. However, she does have a gig coming up in El Salvador. This time she’s smart. She’s studying up on the customs there. Happily, she’s finding she can hug to her heart’s content. However she shouldn’t use her (or anybody else’s) first name. Oh, and she must not introduce herself as an ‘American.’ After all, Salvadorans are Americans, too!

The differences around the world go on and on. Whenever I travel, I have to hit myself over the head and realize I’m not in the anything-goes ol’ USA. I love to travel in jeans, I’m an incurable hugger, and I can’t wait to see what’s in a gift box anybody gives me. However, whenever I plan to leave Uncle Sam’s shores, I check on foreign customs to see how much of myself I can be.

There are some excellent books on international customs. You’ll find the names of a few in the notes. 17–19

Technique 42:

Clear ‘customs’

Before putting one toe on foreign soil, get a book on dos and taboos around the world. Before you shake hands, give a gift, make gestures, or even compliment anyone’s possessions, check it out. Your gaffe could gum up your entire gig.





Don’t be like another hapless colleague of mine who almost blew a big business deal with a Brazilian. Just before signing the contract, he gave the OK sign with his thumb and forefinger. Little did he know he was telling his new business partner to go have intercourse with himself. You never know until it’s too late.

Now we come to where being an insider shows immediate, tangible, and calculable rewards. And where being an outsider really hurts – right in your pocket or purse.





Getting what you want at the insider price


Never underestimate human ingenuity when it comes to getting what you want. Many people expand the adage, All’s fair in love and war to All is fair in love, war, and buying what I want. To get a table at a posh restaurant on a busy night, using a celebrity name is an old ploy. My favorite maitre d’ told me he gets a lot of Robert De Niros phoning in a reservation. When their party of six or eight arrives, he hears, ‘I’m so sorry, Rob wasn’t feeling well this evening.’

One woman, frustrated when her fake celebrity name didn’t work, shouted at him, ‘Look, who the hell do I have to be to get a table? I’ll be anyone you want me to be, Goldie Hawn, Steffi Graf, Fergie – just tell me.’ Some people try a last-minute approach. They simply walk up to the maitre d’ at an overbooked restaurant, point to any name on the reservation book and say, ‘That’s us.’

You’ll witness the same cunning at overbooked hotels. Several months ago I was checking into a popular hotel for which, fortunately, I had a confirmed reservation. A loudmouthed man in front of me in line shouted at the desk clerk, ‘Whaddaya mean, no room? I’m staying in this hotel tonight. If you don’t have a room, I’m sleeping right here on the floor.’ His temper tantrum was not working.

‘And I warn you,’ he continued, ‘I sleep in the nude!’

He got a room.

These crafty childish tactics are not recommended. Rather, I suggest a more principled technique called Bluffing for Bargains. It was born one afternoon sitting with an insurance broker, Mr. Carson. He was trying to sell me a homeowner’s policy. Of course I wanted the most coverage for the least cash. Carson was a smooth operator and he was patiently explaining to me in layman’s terms the benefits of certain riders he was pushing.

Just as he started discussing disasters like wars and hurricanes, his phone rang. With apologies, he picked up the receiver. It was one of his colleagues. Suddenly a metamorphosis took place before my eyes. The sophisticated salesman became a palsy-walsy regular down-home kinda guy chatting it up with his old buddy about umbrellas. I thought they were discussing the weather.

Then the conversation turned to floaters. I now assumed they were talking about an eye problem. It took a while for me to realize that umbrella policies and floaters were part of the insurancese they were speaking.

A few minutes later, Carson said, ‘Yeah, OK, so long, buddy,’ and put the phone down. He cleared his throat and again transmogrified back into the formal sales agent patiently defining damages and deductibles to a naive client.

Sitting there listening to bafflegab like subrogation and pro rata liability, I began to ponder: If Carson’s colleague who just called wanted to buy insurance, he would have got a much better policy, much cheaper. In practically every industry, vendors give two prices on goods or services – one to insiders, and one to you and me.



Before I let myself get angry about this, I thought it through. Is it unfair? Not really. If the vendor doesn’t have to spend time being salesman or psychologist answering the endless stream of novice questions, he can afford to give his best price. Carson wouldn’t have had to take twenty minutes explaining to his colleague (as he did to me) why, if a tornado takes your house, it’s considered ‘an act of God.’ Therefore, you lose. When knowledgeable associates buy products, the vendor is happily reduced to nothing more than a purchasing agent. For very little work, he makes a small profit and is satisfied.

A little bit of knowledge goes a long way when you’re buying something. If you have insight into your real estate broker’s bottom line, he’s more apt to give you the better price. If you are facile with the insider words caterers and car salesmen use to pad their profits, if you’re savvy to techniques moving companies and mechanics use to bilk the unsuspecting, if you are on the lookout for lawyers’ methods of fattening fees – in short, if you know the ropes, you will not get ripped off. You don’t need to know a lot, just a few insider terms. The pro assumes, since you are conversant in some esoteric industry terms, you also know the best deal and rock-bottom price.

No one put it better than my housepainter, Iggy. ‘Sure,’ he told me, ‘you gotta know how to talk to a painter. Not me, but a lotta them other guys, they’re gonna get whatever they can. It’s only human nature. Especially if you’re a woman and you deal with ’em smart, like I’m gonna tell you how, their hair will stand on end. They’ll say to themselves, “Hey, dis is no babe in the woods. I better deal straight.”’

‘OK, Iggy, how?’

He said, ‘Tell them guys, “Look the walls need very little prepping. You’re not going to have to spend much time scraping and spackling. It’s a clean job.”’ Iggy told me these few sentences alone can save you a great deal of money. Why? Right away the painter knows you know the score and that the most time-consuming part for him is preparing the surface (prepping in painterese). Therefore, it’s his biggest markup item.

‘Then,’ Iggy continued, ‘when you tell ’em there will be no cutting in (painting two colours next to each other), your price goes down again. Be sure and tell ’em not to leave any holidays (unpainted or sparsely painted spots) and you get a more careful job.’ I’m only sorry I don’t have an Iggy in every field to give me a crash course in how to deal.





How to deal when there’s no Iggy in your life


Here’s how to get the best price and the best deal from anyone. Find your Iggy Informer. If you have a friend in the business, get the lingo from him. If not, instead of going straight to the vendor you want to buy from, visit several others first. Talk with them. Learn a little lingo from each.

For instance, suppose you want to buy a diamond. Instead of going right to your favourite jewellery shop and asking dumbbell diamond questions, go to the competition. Make friends with the salesclerk and pick up a few gems of diamondese. You’ll learn jewellers say stones, not diamonds. When you’re talking about the top of the stone, they say table ; the widest part is the girdle ; the bottom is the cutlet. If the stone looks yellow, don’t say yellow, say cape. If you see flaws, don’t say flaws, say inclusions or gletz. If you still don’t like the stone, don’t say ‘I’d like to see something better,’ say finer. (Don’t ask me why. That’s just the way the diamond crowd talks.)

Then, when you’ve got your lingo down, go to where you want to buy. Because you now speak diamond, you get a much better price.

Technique 43:

Bluffing for bargains

The haggling skills used in ancient Arab markets are alive and well in contemporary America for big-ticket items. Your price is much lower when you know how to deal.

Before every big purchase, find several vendors – a few to learn from and one to buy from. Armed with a few words of industryese, you’re ready to head for the store where you’re going to buy.





Soon you’ll be asking furriers where the skins were dressed, moving companies for their ICC performance record, and lawyers the hourly rate of paralegals and associates. Then these folks, like Iggy the painter, will say to themselves, ‘Hey, dis is no babe in the woods – I better deal straight.’

Let us now delve deeper into the world of being an insider. This time we explore how to give your Conversation Partner the sense that you share not only experiences, but the heavy stuff. You share beliefs and values in life.



