

If you squint your eyes and look up carefully at a flight of birds, you’ll see finches flying with finches, swallows soaring with swallows, and yellow birds winging it with yellow birds. The avian apartheid escalates. You’ll never see a barn swallow with a bank swallow, or even a yellow bird hanging out with a yellow finch. Somebody said it shorter: Birds of a feather flock together.

Happily, humans are smarter than birds. In one respect, at least: we have brains capable of overcoming bias. Really smart human beings work together, play together and break bread together. Does that mean their comfort level is high? Well, that depends on the human being. Our purpose here is not to examine the absurdity of apartheid. It is to leave no stone unturned in making sure people are completely comfortable doing business or pleasure with you.

It has been proven beyond a doubt, people are most receptive to those they feel have the same values in life. In one study, individuals were first given a personality and beliefs test.20 They were then paired off with a partner and told to go spend time together. Before meeting, half the couples were told they were very similar in beliefs to their partner. The other half were told they were dissimilar. Neither statement was true.

However, when quizzed afterward on how much they liked each other, partners who believed they were similar liked each other a lot more than the couples who thought themselves to be dissimilar, demonstrating we have a predisposition toward people we believe are just like us. We are most comfortable giving our business and friendship to those we feel share our values and beliefs in life. To that end I offer six techniques to create sensations of similarity with everyone you wish.

Along with making more profound rapport with customers, friends, and associates, using the following techniques develops a deeper understanding and empathy with people of all races and backgrounds. They also open doors that might otherwise be closed to you.





Watch their every move


Just like the finch flaps its wings faster than the gliding eagle, people of different backgrounds move differently. For example, in the US people from the wide-open plains tend to stand farther from each other. City people, systematically sardined into subways and crowded buses, stand closer. Asian Americans make modest movements. Italian Americans make massive ones.

At teatime, the finishing-school set genuflects and gracefully lowers derrieres onto the sofa. When the ladies reach for a cup, they hold the saucer in one hand and the cup in the other, pinkie ever so slightly extended. Folks who never finished any manners school make a dive into the middle of the sofa and clutch the cup with both hands.

Is one right? Is the other wrong? No. However, Top Communicators know when doing business with a derriere-dipping pinkie extender or two-fisted mug grabber, they darn well should do the same. People feel comfortable around people who move just like they do.

I have a friend who travels the country giving an outrageous seminar called ‘How to Marry the Rich.’ Genie was once in a Las Vegas casino when a television reporter asked if she could tell the real rich from the great pretenders.

‘Of course,’ Genie answered.

‘All right,’ challenged the reporter. ‘Who is the wealthiest man in this room?’ Convened at the next table were three men in tailored suits (Hayward of Mayfair, London, no doubt), handmade shirts (Charvet of Place Vendôme in Paris, no doubt), and sipping scotch (single-malt Laphroaig from the Scottish island of Islay, no doubt). The reporter, naturally, assumed Genie would choose one of these likely candidates.

Instead, with the scrutiny of a hunting dog, Genie’s eyes scanned the room. Like a trained basset hound, she instinctively pointed a long red fingernail at a fellow in torn jeans at a corner table. She murmured, ‘He’s very rich.’

Flabbergasted, the reporter asked Genie, ‘How can you tell?’

‘He moves like old money,’ she said. ‘You see,’ Genie went on to explain, ‘there’s moving like old money. There’s moving like new money. And there’s moving like no money.’ Genie could tell the unlikely chap in the corner was obviously sitting on big assets, and all because of the way he moved.

Technique 44:

Be a copycat

Watch people. Look at the way they move. Small movements? Big movements? Fast? Slow? Jerky? Fluid? Old? Young? Classy? Trashy?

Pretend the person you are talking to is your dance instructor. Is he a jazzy mover? Is she a balletic mover? Watch his or her body, then imitate the style of movement. That makes your Conversation Partner subliminally real comfy with you.





They’re buying you, too


If you’re in sales, copy not only your customer’s class but the class of your product as well. I live in a section of New York City called Soho, which is a few blocks above the famous-for-being-trashy Canal Street. Often, clutching my purse tightly and dodging the crowds on Canal Street, I’ll pass a pickpocket-turned-salesman-for-the-day. He furtively looks around and flashes a greasy handkerchief at me with a piece of jewellery on it. ‘Psst, wanna buy a gold chain?’ His nervous thief’s demeanor alone could get him arrested.

Now, about sixty blocks uptown, you’ll find the fashionable and very expensive Tiffany’s jewellery store. Occasionally, clutching my fantasies of being able to afford something therein, I stroll through the huge gilt doors. Imagine one of the impeccably dressed sales professionals behind the bevelled glass counters furtively looking around and saying to me, ‘Psst, wanna buy a diamond?’

No sale!

Match your personality to your product. Selling handmade suits? A little decorum please. Selling jeans? A little cool, please. Selling sweat suits? A little sporty, please. And so on for whatever you’re selling. Remember, you are your customers’ buying experience. Therefore you are part of the product they’re buying.





‘We’re like peas in a pod’


Have you ever been gabbing with a new acquaintance and, after a few moments, you’ve said to yourself, ‘This person and I think alike! We’re on the same wavelength.’ It’s a fabulous feeling, almost like falling in love.

Lovers call it chemistry. New friends talk of instant rapport, and business people say a meeting of minds. Yet it’s the same magic, that sudden sense of warmth and closeness, that strange sensation of ‘Wow, we were old friends at once!’

When we were children, making friends was easier. Most of the kids we met grew up in the same town and so they were on our wavelength. Then the years went by. We grew older. We moved away. Our backgrounds, our experiences, our goals, our lifestyles became diverse. Thus, we fell off each other’s wavelengths.

Wouldn’t it be great to have a magic surfboard to help you hop right back on everybody’s wavelength whenever you wanted? Here it is, a linguistic device that gets you riding on high rapport with everyone you meet. If you stand on a mountain cliff and shout ‘hello-oh’ across the valley, your identical ‘hello-oh’ thunders back at you. I call the technique Echoing because, like the mountain, you echo your Conversation Partner’s precise words.





It all started across the ocean


In many European countries, you’ll hear five, ten, or more languages within the language. For example, in Italy, the Sicilians from the south speak a dialect that seems like gobbledygook to northern Italians. In an Italian restaurant, I once overheard a diner discover his waiter was also from Udine, a town in northeastern Italy where they speak the Friulano dialect. The diner stood up and hugged the waiter like he was a long-lost brother. They started babbling in a tongue that left the other Italian waiters shrugging.

In America we have dialects, too. We just aren’t conscious of them. In fact we have thousands of different words, depending on our region, our job, our interests, and our upbringing. Once, when travelling across the country, I tried to order a soda like a Coke or 7-Up in a highway restaurant. It took some explaining before the waitress understood I wanted what she called a pop. Perhaps because the English-speaking world is so large, Americans have a vaster choice of words for the same old stuff than any language I’ve encountered.

Family members find themselves speaking alike. Friends use the same words, and associates in a company or members in a club talk alike. Everyone you meet will have his or her own language that subliminally distinguishes them from outsiders. The words are all English, but they vary from area to area, industry to industry, and even family to family.





The linguistic device that says ‘we’re on the same wavelength’


When you want to give someone the subliminal feeling you’re just alike, use their words, not yours. Suppose you are selling a car to a young mother who tells you she is concerned about safety because she has a young toddler. When explaining the safety features of the car, use her word. Don’t use whatever word you call your kids. Don’t even say ‘child-protection lock,’ which was in your sales manual. Tell your prospect, ‘No toddler can open the window because of the driver’s control device.’ Even call it a ‘toddler-protection lock.’ When Mom hears toddler coming from your lips, she feels you are ‘family’ because that’s how all her relatives refer to her little tyke. Suppose your prospect had said kid or infant. Fine, echo any word she used. (Well, almost any word. If she’d said my brat, you might want to pass on Echoing this time.)





Echoing at parties


Let’s say you are at a party. It’s a huge bash with many different types of people. You are first chatting with a lawyer who tells you her profession is often maligned. When it comes your turn to speak, say profession too. If you say job, it puts a subconscious barrier between you.

Next you meet a construction worker who starts talking about his job. Now you’re in trouble if you say, ‘Well, in my profession …’ He’d think you were being hoity-toity.

After the lawyer and the construction worker, you talk to several freelancers – first a model, then a professional speaker, finally a pop musician. All three of these folks will use different words for their work. The model brags about her bookings. The professional speaker might say bookings, but he is more apt to boast of his speaking engagements. A pop musician might say, ‘Yeah, man, I get a lot of gigs. ’ It’s tough to memorize what they all call their work. Just keep your ears open and echo their word after they say it.

Echoing goes beyond job names. For example if you are chatting with a boat owner and you call his boat an it, he labels you a real landlubber. (He reverently refers to his beloved boat, of course, as a she.) If you listen carefully, you hear language subtleties you never dreamed existed. Would you believe using the wrong synonym for a seemingly uncomplicated word like have labels you a know-nothing in somebody else’s world? For example, cat lovers purr about having cats. But horse people would say owning horses. And fish folk don’t own fish. They talk about keeping fish. Hey, no big deal. But if you use the wrong word, your Conversation Partner will assume, correctly, that you are a stranger in his or her hobbyland.





The peril of not echoing


Sometimes you lose out by not Echoing. My friend Phil and I were talking with several guests at a party. One woman proudly told the group about the wonderful new ski chalet she had just purchased. She was looking forward to inviting her friends up to her little chalet in the mountains.

‘That’s wonderful,’ said Phil, secretly hoping for an invitation. ‘Where exactly is your cabin?’ KERPLUNK! There went Phil’s chances for an invitation to the lady’s chalet.

I couldn’t resist. After the conversation, I whispered to my friend, ‘Phil, why did you insult that woman by calling her chalet a cabin?’ Phil scratched his head and said, ‘What do you mean insult her? Cabin is a beautiful word. My family has a cabin in Cape Cod and I grew up loving the word, the associations, the joy of a cabin.’ (In other words, the connotations of cabin.) Well, fine, Phil. The word cabin may be beautiful to you, but obviously the skier preferred the word chalet.





Professional echoing


In today’s sales environment, customers expect salespeople to be problem solvers, not just vendors. They feel you don’t grasp their industry’s problems if you don’t speak their language.

I have a friend, Penny, who sells office furniture. Among her clients are people in publishing, advertising, broadcasting, and a few lawyers. Penny’s sales manual says office furniture. However, she told me, if she used the word office with all of her clients, they’d assume she knew nothing about their respective industries.

She told me her client, the purchasing officer in advertising, talks about his advertising agency. Penny’s publishing client says publishing house. The lawyers talk about furniture for their firm, and her radio clients use the word station instead of office. ‘Hey,’ Penny says, ‘it’s their salt mine. They can call it whatever the heck they please. And,’ she added, ‘if I want to make the sale, I’d better call it the same thing.’

Technique 45:

Echoing

Echoing is a simple linguistic technique that packs a powerful wallop. Listen to the speaker’s arbitrary choice of nouns, verbs, prepositions, adjectives – and echo them back. Hearing their words come out of your mouth creates subliminal rapport. It makes them feel you share their values, their attitudes, their interests, their experiences.





Echoing is politically correct insurance


Here’s a quiz: You’re talking with a pharmacist and you ask her, ‘How long have you worked at the drugstore?’ What’s wrong with that question?

Give up? It’s the word drugstore. Pharmacists abhor the word because it conjures up many industry problems. They’re used to hearing it from outsiders, but it’s a tip-off that they are unaware of, or insensitive to, their professional problems. They prefer pharmacy.

Recently, at a reception, I introduced one of my friends, Susan, as a day-care worker. Afterward Susan begged, ‘Leil, pul-eeze do not call me a day-care worker. We’re child-care workers.’ Whoops! Time and recent history quickly make certain terms archaic.

A group’s intense preference for one word is not arbitrary. Certain jobs, minorities and special-interest groups often have a history the public is not sensitive to. When that history has too much pain attached to it, people invent another word that doesn’t have bitter connotations.

I have a dear friend, Leslie, who is in a wheelchair. She says whenever anyone says the word handicapped, she cringes. Leslie says it makes her feel less than whole. ‘We prefer you say person with a disability. ’ She then gave a moving explanation. ‘We people with disabilities are the same as every other able-bodied person. We say ‘AB,’ she added. ‘ABs go through life with all the same baggage we do. We just carry one extra piece, a disability.’

It’s simple. It’s effective. To show respect and make people feel close to you, Echo their words. It makes you a more sensitive communicator – and keeps you out of trouble every time.





Old-boy analogies are unsportsmanlike conduct with the girls


I recently had to make a presentation to fifteen men in a corporate meeting. ‘OK,’ I said to myself as I stood up, ‘fifteen Martians and one Venusian.’ No problem! I’d read Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus. I’d explored neurological differences in men’s and women’s brains. I knew all about gender-specific bodylanguage signals. Hey, I teach communications differences. I was well prepared to talk to these men, get my point across, and fend any questions.

Everything started out fine. I’d conceived my presentation clearly and concisely, developed each theme, and presented it flawlessly. Then, I sat down and confidently invited questions and open discussion.

That’s when it fell apart. All I remember is a horrifying barrage of questions couched in football analogies.

‘Do you think we dropped the ball on that one?’ one man asked.

‘Yeah,’ another responded. ‘But can we make a fumble recovery?’

Those two I understood. However, when it got to pass coverage and intentional grounding, I started to lose it. When one guy raved about a Hail Mary pass being needed to save the deal, I suffered the ultimate humiliation. I had to ask, ‘Uh, what does that mean?’ The guys looked at each other knowingly, and then smiled condescendingly as they explained it to me.

That night I had sadistic fantasies of fifteen women running the company and one man left scratching his head as we bandied about childbirth analogies.

‘We won’t get his new proposal ’till the third trimester,’ reports the account exec.

‘Yeah, but that’s six months away. Let’s get it by C-section,’ responds the comptroller.

‘Why bother?’ asks the marketing VP. ‘All his ideas are developed in vitro anyway.’

‘I’m about to go into postpartum depression,’ murmurs the CEO. The lone male employee is left as confused and humiliated as I was in the face of football analogies.

Ahem, the aim of this book is not to feed fiendish fantasies, but to improve communications. To that end, I offer the following technique based on analogies, not just football analogies.





On-target analogies hit bull’s-eye


Analogies can be an effective communications tool – if you evoke images from the life of the person you are talking to. Men don’t use football analogies to obfuscate matters or to confuse women, but to clarify situations for each other. Analogies from the sport bring situations to life for men because generally they watch more football than women.

Moving on to other sports analogies: everyone knows what the speaker means when he or she hears, ‘We’ll never strike out with this solution.’ Nevertheless, a baseball fan would find it a more compelling image as he would analogies like caught on the fly, hitting the dirt, or throwing a spit ball.

You’ve heard people say, ‘This solution is right on target.’ We all understand it. But the phrasing would be more dramatic for archery enthusiasts. If your listener were a bowler, speaking of gutter balls or big splits would bring whatever you were discussing to life. If your business buddies were basketball fans, analogies like hook shot or air ball would land right in their basket. If your client wrestles, saying feints and scissor holds would be the way to grab him.

These analogies might sound far-fetched to you. But they are potent communications tools when they evoke your Conversation Partner’s world. Why not use the most powerful terms possible to get your point across and make the sale? I call the technique Potent Imaging.

Technique 46:

Potent imaging

Does your customer have a garden? Talk about sowing the seeds for success. Does your boss own a boat? Tell him or her about a concept that will hold water or stay afloat. Maybe he is a private pilot? Talk about a concept really taking off. She plays tennis? Tell her it really hits the sweet spot.

Evoke your listener’s interests or lifestyle and weave images around it. To give your points more power and punch, use analogies from your listener’s world, not your own. Potent Imaging also tells your listeners you think like them and hints you share their interests.





Pardon me while I return momentarily to my sadistic fantasies of the hopelessly confused lone male employee. The all-female management team is now arguing the corporate strategy using, not football of course, but ballet analogies.

‘I say let’s do the corporate takeover allegro,’ she suggests.

‘Nah, you gotta go adagio in these matters,’ her colleague responds.

‘But what if they do a tour jeté while we’re poised in fifth?’

‘C’mon did you ever see a good pas seul from their president?’

The top woman settles it. ‘I say let’s just give him a little révérence, and then a grand battement in the balls.’





Beyond ‘yep, uh huh, yeah’


While listening to someone talk, we often vocalize ‘uh huh’ or purr throaty little ‘umm’ sounds to reassure the speaker we have heard their words. In fact, with some it’s such a habit, the noises escape their throats unconsciously. My friend Phil is a consummate, constant, and incontinent ‘ummer’ whenever I’m talking. Occasionally, if I’m feeling contentious after he’s given one of his agreeable ‘umms’ in response to something I’ve said, I challenge him with, ‘OK, Phil, what did I say?’

‘Uh, well, gosh …’ Phil has no idea. It’s not his fault. He’s male. Men are especially guilty of the not-really-listening umm habit. Once, when I was on a monologue about nothing in particular, Phil was on a real umm roll. To test his listening skills, I slipped in, ‘Yes, this afternoon I think I’ll go out and get tattooed all over my body.’

Phil nodded his habitual ‘uh huh.’

Well, umming is better than a blank stare. However, it’s not the choice of Top Communicators. Try replacing your umms with full-blown empathizers.





What are empathizers?


Empathizers are simple, short, supportive statements. Unlike ‘uh huh,’ they are complete sentences such as ‘I can appreciate you decided to do that,’ or ‘That really is exciting.’ Empathizers can be one-sentence positive critiques like ‘Yes, that was the honorable thing to do’ or ‘It’s charming you felt that way.’

When you respond with complete sentences instead of the usual grunts, not only do you come across as more articulate, your listener feels that you really understand.

Technique 47:

Employ empathizers

Don’t be an unconscious ummer. Vocalize complete sentences to show your understanding. Dust your dialogue with phrases like ‘I see what you mean.’ Sprinkle it with sentimental sparklers like ‘That’s a lovely thing to say.’ Your empathy impresses your listeners and encourages them to continue.

Of course, you pay a price. In order to use the right empathizers, you do need to listen.





Now let’s fine-tune this technique and explore advanced empathizing.





A sound idea


About ten years ago, I had a room-mate named Brenda. Brenda was a tap dance teacher who didn’t just tap dance to make a living. She lived to tap. Posters of famous American tap dancers Bill ‘Bojangles’ Robinson and Charles ‘Honi’ Coles plastered her walls. She didn’t walk around the house. She tapped her way from room to room. It was noisy but at least, when a phone call came for Brenda, I never had trouble finding her.

Once I asked Brenda when she got interested in tap. She said, ‘From the moment I first opened my ears.’ Her ears? I thought, that’s strange. Most people say ‘from the moment I opened my eyes.’ At that moment, I realized Brenda ‘saw’ the world more through her ears than her eyes.

We all perceive the world through five senses. We see the world. We hear the world. We feel the world. We smell the world. And we taste the world. Therefore, we talk in terms of those five senses. Proponents of neurolinguistic programming (NLP) tell us, for each person, one sense is stronger than others. For Brenda, it was her hearing.

Brenda told me she grew up in a dark apartment below street level in New York City. She remembers, as an infant, hearing the pitter-patter of feet walking just above her crib on the pavement. As a toddler, her tiny ears were bombarded with honking horns, shrieking sirens and tyre chains slapping the icy streets. She especially remembers the clumpety-clomp of police horses’ hoofs on the pavement outside her window. Her first perceptions of the outside world came to her through her ears. To this day, sound dominates her life. Brenda, the tap dancer, is an auditory person.

Since neurolinguists suggest invoking our listener’s strongest sense, I tried a few auditory references on Brenda. Rather than saying, ‘That looks good to me,’ I’d say ‘That sounds good.’ Instead of saying, ‘I see what you mean,’ I’d say, ‘I hear you.’ When I used these auditory references, I felt she paid more attention.

So I started listening very carefully to all my friends to discover which was their primary perception. Sometimes I’d hear visual references like I see what you mean.

That looks good to me.

I can’t picture myself doing that.

I take a dim view of that idea.

From my perspective …

Wow, I thought I was really on to something!





A wrinkle develops


But then, whoops, at other times, I’d hear that same friend say Yeah, I hear you.

Sure, that sounds good to me.

I kept saying to myself it would work.

That has a negative ring to it.

He really tuned out on the whole idea.

Something tells me …

This wasn’t going to be quite as easy as I’d expected. However, I wasn’t ready to give up.

Once Brenda and I went skiing with several friends. That night we were at a party. One of our friends was telling a group of people, ‘The ski slopes were beautiful. Everything was so crystal clear and white.’

‘A visual person?’ I asked myself.

Another skier added, ‘The feel of the fresh snow on our faces was terrific.’

‘Aha, a kinesthetic person,’ I mused silently.

Sure enough, just then, Brenda said, ‘Today was so silent. The only sound you could hear was the wind in your ears as you came swooshing down the slopes.’ That little riff convinced me there was something to it.

However, I still found it difficult to discern one’s primary sense.





A simple solution


Here’s what I’ve found does work, and it doesn’t take too much detective work on your part. I call the technique Anatomically Correct Empathizers, and it’s easy to master. Unless it is obvious the person you are speaking with is primarily visual, auditory, or kinesthetic, simply respond in his or her mode of the moment. Match your empathizers to the current sense someone is talking through. For example, suppose a business colleague describing a financial plan says, ‘With this plan, we can see our way clear in six months.’ Since this time she’s using primarily visual references, say ‘I see what you mean’ or ‘You really have a clear picture of that situation.’

If, instead, your colleague had said, ‘This plan has a good ring to it,’ you’d substitute auditory empathizers like ‘It does sound great’ or ‘I hear you.’

A third possibility. Suppose she had said, ‘I have a gut feeling this plan will work.’ Now you give her a kinesthetic empathizer like ‘I can understand how you feel,’ or ‘You have a good grasp of that problem.’

Technique 48:

Anatomically correct

empathizers

What part of their anatomy are your associates talking though? Their eyes? Their ears? Their gut?

For visual people, use visual empathizers to make them think you see the world the way they do. For auditory folks, use auditory empathizers to make them think you hear them loud and clear. For kinesthetic types, use kinesthetic empathizers to make them think you feel the same way they do.





What about the other two senses, taste and smell? Well, I’ve never run up against any gustatory or olfactory types. But you could always compliment a chef by saying, ‘That’s a delicious idea.’ And if you are talking to your dog (olfactory, of course), tell him ‘The whole idea stinks.’

The next technique helps create affinity with a single word.





‘We talked like old friends at once’


By just eavesdropping for a few moments on any two people chatting, you could tell a lot about their relationship. You could tell if they were new acquaintances or old friends. You could tell whether a man and a woman were strangers or a couple.

You wouldn’t even need to hear friends call each other pal, buddy, or mate. You wouldn’t need to hear a man and a woman whisper dear, sweetheart, or turtle dove. It wouldn’t matter what they were discussing, or even their tone of voice. You could even be blindfolded and tell a lot about their relationship because the technique I’m about to share has nothing to do with body language.

How? A fascinating progression of conversation unfolds as people become closer. Here’s how it develops:





LEVEL ONE: CLICHÉS


Two strangers talking together primarily toss clichés back and forth. For instance, when chatting about the universally agreed-upon world’s dullest subject, the weather, one stranger might say to the other, ‘Beautiful sunny weather we’ve been having.’ Or, ‘Boy, some rain, huh?’ That’s level one, clichés.





LEVEL TWO: FACTS


People who know each other but are just acquaintances often discuss facts. ‘You know, Joe, we’ve had twice as many sunny days this year to date as last.’ Or, ‘Yeah, well, we finally decided to put in a swimming pool to beat the heat.’





LEVEL THREE: FEELINGS AND PERSONAL QUESTIONS


When people become friends, they often express their feelings to each other, even on subjects as dull as the weather. ‘George, I just love these sunny days.’ They also ask each other personal questions: ‘How about you, Betty? Are you a sun person?’





LEVEL FOUR: WE STATEMENTS


Now we progress to the highest level of intimacy. This level is richer than facts and creates more rapport than feelings. It’s we and us statements. Friends discussing the weather might say, ‘If we keep having this good weather, it’ll be a great summer.’ Lovers might say, ‘I hope this good weather keeps up for us so we can go swimming on our trip.’

A technique to achieve the ultimate verbal intimacy grows out of this phenomenon. Simply use the word we prematurely. You can use it to make a client, a prospect, a stranger feel you are already friends. Use it to make a potential romantic partner feel the two of you are already an item. I call it the Premature We. In casual conversation, simply cut through levels one and two. Jump straight to three and four.

Ask your prospect’s feelings on something the way you would query a friend. (‘George, how do you feel about the new governor?’) Then use the pronoun we when discussing anything that might affect the two of you. (‘Do you think we’re going to prosper during his administration?’) Make it a point to concoct we sentences, the kind people instinctively reserve for friends, lovers and other intimates. (‘I think we’ll survive while the governor’s in office.’)

The word we fosters togetherness. It makes the listener feel connected. It gives a subliminal feeling of ‘you and me against the cold, cold world.’ When you prematurely say we or us, even to strangers, it subconsciously brings them closer. It subliminally hints you are already friends. At a party, you might say to someone standing behind you at the buffet line, ‘Hey, this looks great. They really laid out a nice spread for us.’ Or, ‘Uh-oh, we’re going to get fat if we let ourselves enjoy all of this.’

Technique 49:

The premature we

Create the sensation of intimacy with someone even if you’ve met just moments before. Scramble the signals in their psyche by skipping conversational levels one and two, and cutting right to levels three and four. Elicit intimate feelings by using the magic words we, us, and our.





Well, we have just explored how to copy our Conversation Partners’ movements with Be a Copycat, Echo their words, evoke Potent Images from their world, create a bond through their primary sense with Anatomically Correct Empathizers, and establish subliminal friendship with words like we.

What else do friends, lovers, and close associates have in common? A history. The final technique in this section is a device to give a fairly new acquaintance the warm and fuzzy feeling the two of you have been together for a long, long time.





Our own private joke


Lovers whisper phrases in each others’ ears that mean nothing to anyone but themselves. Friends crack up over a few words that sound like gobbledygook to anyone overhearing them. Close business associates chuckle about shared experiences.

One company I’ve worked with has seen re-engineering, empowerment, TQM, and team building come and go in one decade. At company parties, the employees never fail to crack up over the time when the whole company – managers to mail-room clerks – scrambled up a twenty-nine-foot pole together all in the name of team building. The CEO slipped down the pole and broke his big toe. At the next weekly meeting, the CEO shook his crutch and caustically announced, ‘No more team exercises!’ Thus, the death of team building – and the birth of a private joke.

Out of shared experiences like this, a company culture grows. These employees have a history, and a language to go with it. To this day, whenever they want to put an abrupt end to any idea, they say, ‘Let’s shake a crutch at it’ or ‘Let’s slide that one down the flagpole.’ They all smile. Nobody knows what they mean except fellow employees.

The playwright Neil Simon, sometimes with a single word, can make an entire Broadway audience understand two performers onstage are either married or longtime friends. The actor simply says something to the actress that makes no sense to the audience. Then both of them laugh uproariously. Everybody gets the message: these two people are an item.

Every time my friend Daryl and I meet, we don’t say ‘Hello.’ We say ‘Quack.’ Why? We met at a party five years ago and, in our first conversation, Daryl told me he grew up on a duck farm. When I told him I’d never seen a duck farm, he performed the best human imitation of a duck I’d ever seen. He flipped his head side to side looking at me first out of one eye, then the other, all the while flapping his arms and quacking. I got such a laugh out of his performance that it inspired him to do a full flat-footed duck waddle for me. It was contagious. Together we waddled around the room flapping and quacking. We made absolute fools of ourselves that evening.

The next day, my phone rang. I picked up the receiver to hear, not ‘Hello, this is Daryl,’ but simply, ‘Quack.’ I’m sure that’s what started our friendship. To this day, every time I hear his ‘Quack’ on the phone, it floods me with happy, if a tad embarrassing, memories. It recalls our history and renews our friendship no matter how long it’s been since we last quacked at each other.

Technique 50:

Instant history

When you meet a stranger you’d like to make less a stranger, search for some special moment you shared during your first encounter. Then find a few words that reprieve the laugh, the warm smile, the good feelings the two of you felt. Now, just like old friends, you have a history together, an Instant History.





With anyone you’d like to make part of your personal or professional future, look for special moments together. Then make them a refrain.





Now what’s left?


Chemistry, charisma, and confidence are three characteristics shared by Big Winners in all walks of life. Part One helped us make a dynamic, confident, and charismatic first impression with body language. In Two, we put smooth small-talk lyrics to our body ballet. Then in Three, we seized hints from the Big Boys and Girls so we’re contenders for life’s Big League. Part Four rescued us from being tongue-tied with folks with whom we have very little in common. And in Five, we learned techniques to create instant chemistry, instant intimacy, instant rapport.

What’s left? You guessed it – making people feel really good about themselves. But compliments are a dangerous weapon in today’s world. One mishandling and you can butcher the relationship. Let us now explore the power of praise, the folly of flattery, and how you can use these potent tools effectively.


