


Kids are experts at getting what they want. Perched on papa’s knee, ‘Oh Daddy, you’re so wonderful. I know you’ll buy me that new doll.’ The next morning with mama in the supermarket, ‘Oh Mummy, I love you. You’re the most bestest mummy in the world. I know you’ll buy me that chocolate munchie.’

From the hungry infant’s instinctive cooing as mummy approaches the crib to the car salesman’s calculated praise as the prospect walks into the showroom, compliments come naturally to people when they want something from somebody. In fact, compliments are the most widely used and thoroughly endorsed of all getting-what-you-want techniques. When Dale Carnegie wrote ‘Begin with praise,’ fifteen million readers took it to heart. Most of us still think praise is the path to extracting what we want from someone.

And yes, if it’s as simple as dolls from daddy and munchies from mummy, it may be. But the business world has changed dramatically since Dale Carnegie’s day. In today’s world, not every smiling flatterer has the power to procure through praise.





The malaise of unskilled praise


You give someone a compliment. You smile, waiting to see the warm feelings engulf the recipient. You may have to wait a long time.

If he or she has a speck of suspicion that your praise is self-serving, it has the opposite effect. If your compliment is insincere or unskilled, it can wreck your chances of ever being trusted by that person again. It can abort a potential relationship before it ever gets off the runway.

However, skilled praise is a different story. When done well, it gives the relationship immediate lift-off. It can make a sale, win a new friend, or rejuvenate a marriage on a golden anniversary.

What is the difference between praise that lifts and flattery that flattens? Many factors enter the equation. They include your sincerity, timing, motivation and wording. They also involve the recipient’s self-image, professional position, experience with compliments, and judgment of your powers of perception. Of course it entails the relationship between the two of you and how long you have known each other. If you’re complimenting someone by phone, e-mail, or snail mail, it even involves subtleties such as whether you’ve ever seen their face, either in person or a photograph.

Mind boggling, isn’t it? Sociologists’ research shows: (1) a compliment from a new person is more potent than from someone you already know, (2) your compliment has more credibility when given to an unattractive person or an attractive person whose face you’ve never seen, (3) you are taken more seriously if you preface your comments by some self-effacing remark – but only if your listener perceives you as higher on the totem pole. If you’re lower, your self-effacing remark reduces your credibility. Complicated, this complimenting stuff.

Rather than dizzying ourselves with the surfeit of specific studies, let’s just put some terrific techniques in our little bag of tricks. Each of the following meets all the criteria of social scientists’ findings. Here are nine effective ways to praise in the new millennium.





Depend on their keen sense of rumour


The risk in giving a compliment face-to-face is, of course, that the distrustful recipient will assume you are indulging in shameless obsequious pandering to achieve your own greedy goals.

It’s a sad reality about compliments. If you lay a big one out of the blue on your boss, your prospect, or your sweetie, the recipient will probably think you’re brown-nosing. Your main squeeze will assume you’re suffering guilt over something you’ve done. So what’s the solution? Hold back your sincere esteem?

No, simply deliver it through the grapevine. The grapevine has long been a trusted means of communication. From the days when Catskills comics insisted the best ways to spread news were ‘telephone, telegraph, and tell-a-woman,’ we have known it works. Unfortunately the grapevine is most often associated with bad news, the kind that goes in one ear and over the back fence. But the grapevine need not be laden only with gossip and sour grapes. Good news can travel through the same filament. And when it arrives in the recipient’s ear, it is all the more delectable. This is not a new discovery. Back in 1732, Thomas Fuller wrote, ‘He’s my friend that speaks well of me behind my back.’ We’re more apt to trust someone who says nice things about us when we aren’t listening than someone who flatters us to our face.





No-risk praise (do it behind their back)


Instead of telling someone directly of your admiration, tell someone who is close to the person you wish to compliment. For instance, suppose you want to be in the good graces of Jane Smith. Don’t directly compliment Jane. Go to her close associate Diane Doe and say, ‘You know, Jane is a very dynamic woman. She said something so brilliant in the meeting the other day. Someday she’ll be running this company.’ I place ten-to-one odds your comment will get back to Jane via the grapevine in twenty-four hours. Diane will tell her friend, ‘You should hear what so ’n’ so said about you the other day.’

Technique 51:

Grapevine glory

A compliment one hears is never as exciting as the one he overhears. A priceless way to praise is not by telephone, not by telegraph, but by tell-a-friend. This way you escape possible suspicion that you are an apple-polishing, bootlicking, egg-sucking, back-scratching sycophant trying to win brownie points. You also leave recipients with the happy fantasy that you are telling the whole world about their greatness.





When you gave Grapevine Glory to Jane, Diane became the carrier pigeon of that compliment. Which leads us to the next technique where you become the carrier pigeon of other people’s compliments.





Bring joy to the world like the brave little birdies


Carrier pigeons have a long and valiant history. The dauntless winged messengers, often maimed by shellfire and dying after delivering their messages, have saved the lives of thousands. One tenacious little bird named Cher Ami is credited with saving 200 lives during the Battle of the Argonne in World War I. The brave one-legged little birdie, one of his wings shot through, carried a message dangling from his remaining ligament. The blood-smeared little ball of feathers arrived just in time to warn that the Germans were about to bomb the city.

Stumpy Joe, another plucky pigeon, had such a heroic battle-scarred career that his fans stuffed him, mounted him, and put him on display in the National Air Force Museum in Dayton, Ohio. And millions of other brave birds have brought joyful messages to racing-pigeon enthusiasts around the world. In that fine tradition, I present the complimenting technique I call Carrier Pigeon Kudos.

Whenever you hear a laudatory comment about someone, don’t let it end there. You don’t need to write it, roll it up in a capsule, strap it to your leg like Stumpy Joe, and fly it to the recipient. Nevertheless, you can remember the kudos and verbally carry it to the person who will get the most pleasure – the person who was complimented.

Keep your ears open for good things people say about each other. If your colleague Carl says something nice about another colleague, Sam, pass it on. ‘You know, Sam, Carl said the nicest thing about you the other day.’

Your sister tells you your first cousin is a dynamite relative. Go ahead and call Cuz’.

Your mother tells you she thinks David did a great job mowing the lawn. Pass it on to him. Hey, we all like a little appreciation, even from Mum.

Here’s where it benefits you. Everyone loves the bearer of glad tidings. When you bring someone third-party kudos, they appreciate you as much as the complimenter. Call it gossip if you like. This is the good kind.

Technique 52:

Carrier pigeon kudos

People immediately grow a beak and metamorphosize themselves into carrier pigeons when there’s bad news. (It’s called gossip.) Instead, become a carrier of good news and kudos. Whenever you hear something complimentary about someone, fly to them with the compliment. Your fans may not posthumously stuff you and put you on display in a museum like Stumpy Joe. But everyone loves the Carrier Pigeon of kind thoughts.





Carry more cargo than compliments


Another way to warm hearts and win friends is to become a carrier pigeon of news items that might interest the recipient. Call, mail, or e-mail people with information they might find interesting. If your friend Ned is a furniture designer in North Carolina and you see a big article in the Los Angeles Times about furniture trends, fax it to him. If your client Sally is a sculptor in Seattle and you see her work in someone’s home in New York, sent her a note.

I have a friend, Dan, in San Francisco who, whenever he runs across anything in the paper on communications, clips it and sends it to me. No note, just ‘FYI – Regards, Dan’ in the corner. He’s like my own private West Coast clipping service.

Try it. Think of the money you’ll save on greeting cards. A relevant clipping is the Big Winner’s way of saying, ‘I’m thinking of you and your interests.’





‘My exalted opinion of you just slipped out’


Here’s yet another caress for someone’s ego. Don’t give a blatant compliment. Merely imply something magnificent about your Conversation Partner. Several months ago, I was visiting an old friend in Denver whom I hadn’t seen in a long time. When he came to my hotel to pick me up, he said, ‘Hello, Leil, how are you?’ Then he paused, looked at me, and said, ‘You’ve obviously been well.’ Wow, I felt terrific. He implied I looked good and that made my evening.

Guess the Good Lord decided I shouldn’t have too swollen a head, however, because later that evening, after my friend dropped me off, I got into the hotel elevator. A maintenance man entered at the third floor. He smiled at me. I smiled back. He looked at me again and said, ‘Gosh, ma’am, was you a model?’ (Oh, man, was I feeling on top of the world now!) ‘… when you was young? ’ he continued.

CRASH! Why couldn’t he have zipped his lip before the zinger? I loved the implication in the first part of his comment. But the second implied I was now an old lady. Ruined my next day. Heck, his unintentional low blow ruined my week. In fact I still feel wretched about it.

You have to be careful of unintentional bad implications. If, visiting a new city, you stop someone on the street and say, ‘Excuse me, could you tell me if there are any fine dining restaurants nearby?’ you are implying the passerby is a person of taste. If, however, you ask that same passerby, ‘Hey, know any down and dirty bars in this burg?’ your implication is entirely different. Find a way to imply magnificent qualities of those you wish to indirectly compliment.

Technique 53:

Implied magnificence

Throw a few comments into your conversation that presuppose something positive about the person you’re talking with. But be careful. Don’t blow it like the well-intentioned maintenance man. Or the southern boy who, at the prom, thought he was flattering his date when he told her, ‘Gosh, MaryLou, for a fat gal you dance real good.’





Be an undercover complimenter


Next in our agglomeration of joy spreaders is a technique I call Accidental Adulation. Once, at a small dinner party, the subject turned to space travel. The gentleman seated to my right said, ‘Leil, you’re much too young to remember this, but when Apollo 11 landed on the moon …’

If my life depended on it, I couldn’t tell you what the chap said next. I simply remember smiling to myself and stretching to get a glimpse of my youthful self in the dining-room mirror. Of course I remember July 1969. Like the rest of the world, I was glued to the television watching Neil Armstrong’s size 9½ B boot hit the moon. However, I certainly was not thinking of moon travel at that dinner party. I was too busy reveling in the fact that this lovely man didn’t think I was old enough to remember 1969. I assumed his opinion of my youthfulness just slipped out. Therefore it must be sincere.

Sure! Now that I think about it, he probably knew darn well I was old enough to remember the moon landing. I bet he was using the manoeuvre I call Accidental Adulation. But it doesn’t matter. My warm memories of him remain. Accidental Adulation is slipping praise into the secondary part of your point, putting it in verbal parentheses.





Try it. You’ll like it. They’ll love it.


Try Accidental Adulation and see smiles break out on the faces of the recipients. Tell your sixty-five-year-old uncle: ‘Anyone as fit as you would have zipped right up those steps, but boy, was I out of breath.’ Tell a colleague: ‘Because you’re so knowledgeable in contract law, you would have read between the lines, but stupidly, I signed it.’

You run the danger, of course, that you will please the recipient so profoundly with your parenthetical praise, he or she won’t hear your main point.

Technique 54:

Accidental adulation

Become an undercover complimenter. Stealthily sneak praise into the parenthetical part of your sentence.

Just don’t try to quiz anyone later on your main point. The joyful jolt of your accidental adulation strikes them temporarily deaf to anything that follows.





So far we have explored four covert compliments: Grapevine Glory, Carrier Pigeon Kudos, Implied Magnificence, and Accidental Adulation. There are times, of course, when blatant praise does work. The next techniques will hone your skills in this precarious but rewarding venture.





Knock ’em out in the first round


Would you like to have a little trick up your sleeve potent enough to kick start commerce, ignite a friendship or even a love affair? I’ll give you one, but only if you heed its warning label. You must register your tongue as a lethal weapon once you’ve mastered the following technique. It’s called the Killer Compliment.

It was born one night some years ago after my then-roommate Christine and I had just returned home from a holiday party. As we were taking off our coats, she had a silly smile on her face and a faraway look in her eye.

‘Christine, are you OK?’ I asked.

‘Oh yes,’ she purred. ‘I’m going to go out with that man.’

‘Man? What man?’

‘Oh, you know,’ she said, chastising me for not knowing, ‘the one who told me I had beautiful teeth.’

Teeth!

That night I happened to walk by the bathroom door as Christine was getting ready for bed. I saw her grinning at herself in the mirror, tilting her head from side to side, and brushing each individual tooth. All the while she kept her eyes glued to the mirror inspecting each one for the beauty her new admirer commented on. I realized the fellow who had given Christine the unusual compliment had made her day – and had made a killer impression on her. Thus the Killer Compliment came into being.

What is the Killer Compliment? It is commenting on some very personal and specific quality you spot in someone. A Killer Compliment is not ‘I like your tie’ or ‘You’re a very nice person.’ (The first is not personal enough and the second is not specific enough.) A Killer Compliment is more like ‘What exquisite eyes you have,’ (very specific) or ‘You have a wonderful air of honesty about you’ (very personal).

Because delivering your first Killer Compliment is difficult, I trick my seminar participants into pulling it off. About midway through the programme, I’ll ask them to close their eyes and think about a partner they had in an earlier exercise. Then I say, ‘Now recall one attractive physical quality or personality trait you observed in your partner. Not one you would necessarily comment on,’ I caution. ‘Perhaps your partner had a lovely smile or a twinkle in her eye. Perhaps he exuded a sense of calm or credibility. Got it in your mind?’

Then the thunderbolt: ‘OK, now go find your partner and tell them the nice quality you noticed.’ ‘What? Tell them?’ The thought paralyzes them. One by one, however, they courageously seek their partners and deliver their Killer Compliments. As people hear a stranger tell them they have beautiful hands or penetrating brown eyes, joy fills the room. Laughter explodes in every corner. I am now looking out at a sea of smiles and happy blushes. Everyone loves receiving his or her personal Killer Compliment. And everyone develops friendly feelings toward the giver.

Technique 55:

The killer compliment

Whenever you are talking with a stranger you’d like to make part of your professional or personal future, search for one attractive, specific, and unique quality he or she has.

At the end of the conversation, look them right in the eye. Say their name and proceed to curl their toes with the Killer Compliment.





The killer compliment user’s manual


Just like a cannon, if you don’t use the Killer Compliment correctly, it can backfire. Here’s the user’s manual that comes with the mighty missile.

Rule 1: Deliver your Killer Compliment to the recipient in private. If you are standing with a group of four or five people and you praise one woman for being fit, every other woman feels like a barrel of lard. If you tell one man he has wonderful carriage, every other feels like a hunchback. You also make the blushing recipient uncomfortable.

Rule 2: Make your Killer Compliment credible. For example, I’m tone-deaf. If I’m forced to sing even a simple song like ‘Happy Birthday,’ I sound like a sick pig. If anyone in earshot were foolish enough to tell me they liked my voice, I’d know it was hogwash.

Rule 3: Confer only one Killer Compliment per half year on each recipient. Otherwise you come across as insincere, grovelling, obsequious, pandering, and a thoroughly manipulative person. Not cool.

With careful aim, the Killer Compliment captures everyone. It works best, however, when you use it judiciously on new acquaintances. If you want to praise friends every day, employ the next technique.





Itty-bitty boosters


In contrast to the big guns of Killer Compliments for strangers, and the Tombstone Game for loved ones, which we will learn shortly, here’s a little peashooter you can pop off at anyone, anytime. I call it Little Strokes.

Little Strokes are short, quick kudos you drop into your casual conversation. Make liberal use of Little Strokes with your colleagues in the office: ‘Nice job, John!’

‘Well done, Kyoto!’

‘Hey, not bad, Billy!’

I have one friend who uses a lovely Little Stroke. If I do something he likes, he says, ‘Not too shabby, Leil.’

You can also use Little Strokes on the everyday achievements of your loved ones. If your spouse just cooked a great meal,’ ‘Wow, you’re the best chef in town.’ Just before going out together, ‘Gee, honey, you look great.’ After a long drive, ‘You did it! It must have been tiring.’ With your kids, ‘Hey, gang, great job cleaning up your room.’

I once read a poignant Reader’s Digest article about a little girl who often misbehaved. Her mother had to continually reprimand her. However, one day, the little girl had been especially good and hadn’t done a single thing that called for a reprimand. The mother said, ‘That night after I tucked her in bed and started downstairs, I heard a muffled noise. Running back up, I found her head buried in the pillow. She was sobbing. Between the sobs she asked, “Mummy haven’t I been a pretty good girl today?”’

The question, the mother said, went through her like a knife. ‘I had been quick to correct her,’ she said, ‘when she was wrong. But when she tried to behave, I hadn’t noticed it and I put her to bed without one word of appreciation.’

Adults are all grown-up little girls and little boys. We may not go to bed sobbing if the people in our lives don’t notice when we are good. Nevertheless, a trace of those tears lingers.

Technique 56:

Little strokes

Don’t make your colleagues, your friends, your loved ones look at you and silently say, ‘Haven’t I been pretty good today?’ Let them know how much you appreciate them by caressing them with verbal Little Strokes like ‘Nice job!’ ‘Well done!’ ‘Cool!’





Little things mean a lot


Little Strokes are indeed, little. But as every woman knows, they mean a lot. I’ve yet to meet a woman who wouldn’t agree with these lyrics from an old song sung by Kitty Kallen: Blow me a kiss from across the room.

Say I look nice when I’m not.

Touch my hair as you pass my chair.

Little things mean a lot.

Send me the warmth of a secret smile To show me you haven’t forgot.

For always and ever, now and forever, Little things mean a lot.

To further complicate the art of the compliment, one must consider timing. Blatant, barefaced, brazen flattery turns all but the blindest egomaniacs off. But the human animal never fails to amaze observers. There are moments when, if you don’t give a blatant, barefaced, brazen compliment – even to a bright individual – you lose. The following technique defines those moments.





Too little, too late


I’ll never forget the first time I gave a luncheon speech in front of strangers. I’d practised for the stuffed animals on my bed and my roommate Christine, but this was my debut in front of a real audience.

As I shakily got to my feet, I looked out at seventeen smiling Rotarians waiting for my words of wit and wisdom. My tongue was dry as chalk dust, my palms as wet as a fish. The audience might as well have been seventeen thousand judges waiting to sentence me to eternal humiliation if I didn’t inform and entertain each. I gave a last panic-stricken glance at Christine, who had driven me to the club, and began, ‘Good afternoon. It gives me great pleasure …’

Thirty minutes later, amidst scattered applause which I feared was obligatory, I crawled back to my seat next to Christine. I looked expectantly at her. She smiled and said, ‘You know this dessert isn’t bad. Have some.’

Dessert? ‘Dessert! Dammit, Christine, how did I do?’ I silently screamed at her. A few minutes later Christine told me how much she and, she assumed, everyone else enjoyed my talk. Nevertheless, by then it was too late. The crucial compliment-craving moment had passed.





Quick as a hiccup, you must compliment NOW


When the doctor sadistically smacks your knee with that nasty little rubber hammer, you instantly give a knee jerk. And when people make a coup, you must instantly hit them with a knee-jerk ‘Wow, you were great!’

Say they’ve just successfully negotiated a deal, cooked a terrific Thanksgiving turkey, or sung a solo song at the birthday party. No matter whether their accomplishment is trivial or triumphant, you must praise it immediately – not ten minutes later, not two minutes later – immediately. The moment the winner walks out of the boardroom, the kitchen, the spotlight, there’s only one sound the victor wants to hear: ‘WOW!’

Technique 57:

The knee-jerk ‘wow!’

Quick as a blink, you must praise people the moment they a finish a feat. In a wink, like a knee-jerk reaction say, ‘You were terrific!’

Don’t worry that they won’t believe you. The euphoria of the moment has a strangely numbing effect on the achiever’s objective judgment.





But what if they really bombed?


‘Are you asking me to lie?’ you ask. Yes. Absolutely, positively, resoundingly, YES. This is one of the few moments in life where a lie is condoned by the most ethical individuals. Big Winners realize that sensitivity to an insecure performer’s ego takes momentary precedence over their deep commitment to the truth. They also know, when sanity returns to the recipient and they suspect they screwed up, it won’t matter. He or she will retroactively appreciate your sensitivity and forgive your compassionate falsehood.

We’ve talked a lot about giving compliments, both covert and overt. Now let’s talk about a skill that, for many, is even harder – receiving them.





A national weakness


I would like to dedicate the following technique to my French friends who contend the French are better at everything. Well, I concede one point. The French are, indeed, better at receiving compliments. I’ll explain how shortly.

Americans, unfortunately, are beastly at accepting adulation. If someone compliments you and you react clumsily out of embarrassment, you unwittingly start a vicious cycle. A friend ventures a compliment:

He: (smiling) ‘Hey, that’s a nice dress you’re wearing.’

She: (frowning) ‘Oh, this old thing?’

He: (thinking) ‘Whoops, she didn’t seem to like hearing that. She thinks I have terrible taste to like that dress. I’d better keep my mouth shut.’

Three weeks later …

She: (thinking grumpily) ‘He doesn’t ever give me compliments anymore. What a boor!’

He: (thinking gloomily) ‘What’s her problem?’





‘Girls don’t like what?’


Several months ago in one of my seminars, the group was discussing compliments. One fellow insisted that ‘Girls don’t like compliments.’

‘Girls don’t like what?’ I asked incredulously.

He explained, ‘I once told a woman she had beautiful eyes. And she said, “Boy, are you blind.” The poor chap was so wounded by her reaction, he became gun-shy and had not aimed a compliment at a female since. What a shame for womankind and what a blight on his social skills.

Upon receiving a compliment, many people demur or proffer an embarrassed little ‘Thank you.’ Worse, they protest, ‘Well, not really but thanks anyway.’ Some people toss it off with, ‘just luck.’ When you react this way, you visit a grave injustice on the complimenter. You insult a well-meaning person’s powers of perception.





‘Vous êtes gentil’


Leave it to French folks to come up with a congenial catchall phrase. Upon receiving a compliment, they say, ‘Vous êtes gentil.’ Loosely translated, that is ‘How kind of you.’

An American saying ‘How kind of you’ could sound stilted – like the little flower girl in My Fair Lady trying to be cultured. Nevertheless, we can express the French gentil sentiment with a technique I call Boomeranging.

When you toss a boomerang, it makes an almost 180-degree swerve in midair, and soars back to land at the feet of the thrower. Likewise, when someone tosses a compliment your way, let the good feelings soar back to the tosser. Don’t just say ‘Thanks.’ (Or worse, ‘Oh it’s nothing.’) Let them know of your gratitude and find a way to compliment them for their compliment. A few examples:

She says, ‘I like those shoes.’ You say, ‘Oh I’m so happy you told me. I just got them.’

He says, ‘You really did a good job on this project.’ You say, ‘Oh, that’s so nice of you to tell me. I appreciate your positive feedback.’

You can also Boomerang the good feelings back when people ask you a question about your family, a project, an event, or anything that shows they are interested in you.

Your colleague asks, ‘How was your vacation in Hawaii?’ You answer, ‘Oh, you remembered I went to Hawaii! It was great, thanks.’

Your boss asks, ‘Are you over your cold now?’ You answer, ‘I appreciate your concern. I feel much better now.’

Whenever someone shines a little sunshine on your life in the form of a compliment or concerned question, reflect it back on the shiner.

Technique 58:

Boomeranging

Just as a boomerang flies right back to the thrower, let compliments boomerang right back to the giver. Like the French, quickly murmur something that expresses ‘That’s very kind of you.’





Incidently, in that seminar, I decided to do womankind a favour by setting malekind straight on compliments once and for all. I asked the fellow who swore women hated praise to give three women sitting near him a sincere compliment. He chose the woman with ‘the beautiful silver hair sitting behind him,’ the girl with the ‘hands like a pianist’ to his left, and the lady with ‘the lovely deep-blue eyes’ on his right. He told them all.

Three women waltzed out of the room that night feeling a little better about themselves than when they walked in. And, I hope, for all the women he would yet meet in his life, one man left with a changed attitude about compliments.

As we come to the end of our exploration of praise, I want to make sure you’re aiming dead centre for people’s hearts. Whether you’re giving little Carrier Pigeon Kudos or laying a Killer Compliment on your Conversation Partner, this next technique keeps you on target.





The ultimate praise for someone near and dear


Do you remember when you were a kid the hundreds of times our parents’ friends asked, ‘And what do you want to be when you grow up?’ That was our cue to regale our adoring audience with dreams of being a ballerina, a firefighter, a nurse, a cowboy, or a movie star. Well, most of our lives wound up being a little closer to butcher, baker, or candlestick maker. Nevertheless, we all still have fantasies of our own greatness.

Even though most of us cashed in our childhood dreams of being the star we thought we’d be (so we could make some money), we all know that deep down we are very, very, very special. We say to ourselves, ‘Maybe the world will little note nor long remember how brilliant, how wonderful, how witty, how creative or caring I really am. However, those who truly know and love me – they will recognize my greatness, my magic, my specialness over all other ordinary mortals.’ When we find people with the supernatural powers of perception to recognize our remarkableness, we become addicted to the heady drug of their appreciation.

Praising someone you know and love requires a different set of skills from complimenting a stranger. The formula to bring someone even closer to you personally or professionally follows. I call it the Tombstone Game. It requires a little setup.

Step One: In a quiet moment chatting with your friend, your loved one, or your business partner, tell him or her you were reading something the other day about, of all things, tombstones! ‘The piece was about,’ you say, ‘what people fantasize inscribed above their grave after they die.’ You learned that people want the quality they are most proud of in life etched in stone. Then say, ‘The variety is surprising. Everyone has a different self-image, a different deep source of pride.’ Examples:

Here lies John Doe. He was a brilliant scientist.

Here lies Diane Smith. She was a caring woman.

Here lies Billy Bucks. By golly, he could make people laugh.

Here lies Jane Wilson. She spread joy wherever she went.

Here lies Harry Jones. He lived life his way.

Step Two: Reveal to your partner what you would like carved on your tombstone. Be serious about your revelation to encourage him or her to do likewise.

Step Three: Now, you pop the question, ‘You know, Joe, when all is said and done, what are you most proud of? What would you like the world to most remember about you? What would you want the world to see carved on your tombstone?’

Perhaps your business partner Joe says, ‘Well, I guess I’d sort of like people to know that I’m a man of my word.’ Listen carefully. If he expounds on it, take note of every nuance. Then file it away in your heart and don’t say a word about it again. Joe will forget you ever played the tombstone game with him.

Step Four: Let at least three weeks pass. Then, whenever you want to improve the relationship, feed the information back to your partner in the form of a compliment. Say ‘Joe, you know the reason I really appreciate being in business with you is because you’re a man of your word.’

WOW, that hits Joe like a 747 out of the sky. ‘Finally,’ he says to himself, ‘someone who appreciates me for who I really am.’ Telling him you admire him for the same reason he admires himself has an impact on Joe like no other compliment in the world.

Now, suppose your friend is Billy Bucks, the one who wanted his wit carved on his tombstone. You’d say, ‘Billy, ol’ buddy, you’re terrific. I loves ya ’cause you can really make people laugh.’





‘I love you because … (you fill in the blank)’


Suppose your significant other is Jane Wilson in the preceding example. Tell your beloved, ‘Jane, I love you because you spread joy wherever you go.’

Suppose your life partner is Harry Jones. You take his hand and say, ‘Harry, I love you because you live life your way.’ BLAM! You have found that tender spot where the heart and the ego blend.

Technique 59:

The tombstone game

Ask the important people in your life what they would like engraved on their tombstone. Chisel it into your memory but don’t mention it again. Then, when the moment is right to say ‘I appreciate you’ or ‘I love you,’ fill the blanks with the very words they gave you weeks earlier.

You take people’s breath away when you feed their deepest self-image to them in a compliment. ‘At last,’ they say to themselves, ‘someone who loves me for who I truly am.’





Tombstone Game compliments are not interchangeable. Billy Bucks might not appreciate your calling him a man of his word. Billy’s thing is humour. Jane might not value your thinking she lives life her way. Her source of pride is spreading joy wherever she goes.

It’s wonderful to tell people you appreciate or love them. When it matches what they appreciate or love about themselves, the effect is overpowering.


