


Hundreds of people have formed impressions of you through that little device on your desk, your bed table, your kitchen wall. And they’ve never actually met you. They’ve never seen your smiles, felt your frowns. They’ve never grasped your hand or enjoyed your hugs. They’ve never read your body language or seen how you dress. Everything they know about you came through tiny filaments, sometimes from hundreds of miles away. But they feel they know you just from the sound of your voice. That’s how powerful the telephone is.

Powerful, yes, but not always accurate. For years I dealt with my travel agent only by phone. Rani, my faceless agent whom I’d never met in person, got me rock-bottom prices on airfares, cars, and hotels. But her snippy phone personality really ticked me off. A dozen times I vowed to find another agent.

One Monday morning several years ago, I received bad news and had to book an immediate flight home for a family emergency. There was no time to wait in line at the airport. So I jumped in a cab and asked the driver to wait in front of the travel agency while I grabbed tickets and a boarding pass.

Like a lit fuse, I zipped into Rani’s agency for the first time. The woman sitting at the front desk, seeing my frenzied rush, sympathetically jumped up. She gave me a reassuring smile and asked how she could help me. As I blithered on about my need for an emergency ticket, she smiled, nodded, and lunged immediately into action. ‘What a terrific lady!’ I thought as she printed out the tickets.

Moments later, darting out gratefully grasping the tickets in my fist, I called out over my shoulder, ‘By the way, what’s your name?’

‘Leil, I’m Rani,’ she said. I whirled around and saw a thoroughly congenial woman with a big smile on her face waving to wish me a safe trip. I was dumbfounded! Why had I previously thought she was so snippy? Rani was, well, so nice.

Sitting back in the cab on the way to the airport, I figured it all out. Rani’s friendliness – her warm smile, her nods, her good eye contact, her body language, her ‘I’m here for you’ attitude – were all silent signals that didn’t travel through wires. I closed my eyes and tried to remember the voice I had heard moments ago. Yes, it was Rani’s same crisp, curt pronunciation. But her friendly body language made her seem like a different person from the brusque agent I’d dealt with on the phone. Rani’s phone personality and her demeanour in person were completely different shows.

I realized it’s the same with all of us. Your personality, mine, and everyone’s could be likened to a show, a theatrical performance. You want to make sure yours is a box-office smash, not a flop. The following ten techniques will get your phone personality rave reviews.





Make your manner fit the medium


I have a friend, Tina, who designed costumes for an off-off-Broadway show that became a smash hit last year. The tiny show was such a critical success, it won the heart of an angel – a backer – and it went to Broadway. There the show laid a big fat egg.

When I read the bad news, I called Tina. ‘Tina, why did the show get such bad reviews on Broadway?’ Tina told me that, sadly, the director didn’t insist the actors and actresses change their performances to adapt to the new surroundings. The actors’ understated movements, which moved small audiences alternately to laughter and tears, were lost in the big Broadway house. Audiences couldn’t see their subtle gestures and poignant facial expressions. Tina told me the performers neglected to make their movements much bigger to fit the new medium.

That excellent advice is not just for actors. Whenever you are talking, you must consider your medium. If your face were on a big movie screen, you might get your message across with a wink or an eyebrow raise. On radio, however, that would be meaningless. Because listeners couldn’t see your wink, you’d have to say something like ‘Hi, Cutie.’ Because listeners couldn’t see your raised eyebrows, you’d have to say, ‘Wow, I’m surprised!’

Your body language and facial expressions comprise more than half your personality. When people don’t see you, they can get an entirely wrong impression as I did with Rani. To get your personality across on the phone, you must translate your emotions into sound. In fact, you have to exaggerate the sound because studies have shown people lose 30 per cent of the energy level in their voices on the phone.

Say you meet an important new contact tomorrow. When you’re introduced, you shake her hand, you fully face her. You make good, strong eye contact and let a sincere smile flood over your face. You even nod and smile, listening intently as she speaks. She likes you a lot.

But how good an impression could you make on that VIP if both you and she were blindfolded and the two of you had your hands tied behind your backs? That’s the handicap you suffer on the phone.

If she couldn’t see you, you’d have to substitute words to let her know you’re agreeing or listening. You’d have to somehow verbalize that you’re smiling and use her name more to replace the eye contact. You’d be using the technique I call Talking Gestures.

To make up for your missing eye contact, punctuate your phone conversations with ‘Uh huh’ or ‘I hear you.’ So your listener knows you’re nodding in approval, verbalize ‘I see,’ ‘Oh that’s great,’ ‘No kidding,’ ‘Interesting,’ and ‘Tell me more!’

She didn’t see you hitting your head in surprise? Better say ‘What a surprise!’ or ‘You don’t say!’

He just said something impressive and he can’t see your look of admiration? Try ‘That was wise of you’ or ‘You’re no dummy!’

Of course, you need a big verbal smile in your repertoire. Try ‘Oh, wow, that’s funny!’ Obviously you’re going to choose phrases that match your personality and the situation. Just make sure your phone listeners hear your emotions.

Technique 60:

Talking gestures

Think of yourself as the star of a personal radio drama every time you pick up the phone. If you want to come across as engaging as you are, you must turn your smiles into sound, your nods into noise, and all your gestures into something your listener can hear. You must replace your gestures with talk. Then punch up the whole act 30 per cent!





A verbal caress


When you’re not sitting across from each other resting your elbows on the same desk, your forks on the same table, or your heads on the same pillow, you need a substitute for intimacy. How can you create closeness when the two of you are hundreds of miles apart? How can you make the person you’re talking to on the phone feel special when you can’t pat their back, or give them a little hug?

The answer is simple. Just use your caller’s name far more often than you would in person. In fact, shower your conversations with his or her name. When your listener hears it, it’s like receiving a verbal caress: ‘Thanks, Sam.’

‘Let’s do it, Betty.’

‘Hey, Demetri, why not?’

‘It’s really been good talking to you, Kathi.’

Saying a person’s name too often in face-to-face conversation sounds manipulative. However, on the phone the effect is dramatically different. If you heard someone say your name, even if you were being jostled around in a big noisy crowd, you’d perk up and listen. Likewise, when your phone partner hears his or her own name coming through the receiver, it commands attention and re-creates the familiarity the phone robs from you.

If your listener is drifting, it brings him right back. If she’s opening mail, she stops. If he’s picking his teeth, he pulls the pick out. When you say someone’s name on the phone, it’s like yanking the person into the room with you.

Technique 61:

Name shower People perk up when they hear their own name. Use it more often on the phone than you would in person to keep their attention. Your caller’s name re-creates the eye contact, the caress, you might give in person.

Saying someone’s name repeatedly when face-to-face sounds pandering. But because there is physical distance between you on the phone – sometimes you’re a continent apart – you can spray your conversation with it.





Who wants to be a Cheshire cat?


Brr-ing! No matter whether you hear the ring in the boardroom, the bedroom, or the bathroom, self-styled telephone experts tell you, ‘Smile before answering.’ Some pros even suggest you perch a mirror right next to your phone to monitor your grin.

Been there, done that, doesn’t work. One evening, in the middle of my weekly mud-pack facial, the phone rang. The horror of seeing myself in the phone mirror made my voice as hideous as my face. I immediately trashed the pro’s advice along with the mirror. Who wants to sound like a dizzy Pollyanna? A no-brain Cheshire cat? A lonely recluse whose life is so dull that the big thrill of the day is a phone call? Any phone call? From anybody!

Big Winners don’t smile before answering. They put a smile in their voices after they hear who is on the line. That’s when it counts. Answer the phone unemotionally, professionally. Say your name or the name of your company. Then when you hear who is on the line, the little trick is to let a big smile flood over your face.

‘Oh Joe, (smile) how nice to hear from you!’ ‘Sally, (smile) how are you?’ ‘Bill, (smile) I was hoping it would be you.’

I have a friend, Steve, in Washington, D.C., who heads a major trade association that lobbies on Capitol Hill. Whenever I call Steve, I never know which of his dozens of assistants is going to answer. Nevertheless, whoever answers gives me the same warm response.

First they say, ‘Cable Telecommunications Association,’ their name, and ‘How may I direct your call?’ No fake friendliness. No prefab smiles in their voices. I am sure they’re not beaming back at themselves in any mirror.

When I say ‘Is Mr Effros available? This is Leil Lowndes calling,’ that’s when they become superfriendly. ‘Oh yes, Ms Lowndes,’ they purr. ‘Definitely! Let me put you right through.’

Wow, does that make me feel special! As I’m waiting for Steve to come to the phone, I fantasize him sitting at the head of a long mahogany table in his weekly staff meeting. I can just hear him instructing his staff, ‘Now if the president or some higher-ups in the White House call, put them right through. Oh, and of course, if that important woman Leil Lowndes calls, put her right through, too.’

While visiting Washington last year, I had lunch with Steve. I took the opportunity to tell him what a pleasure it was to call his office and how I appreciated his staff’s warm phone reception. I thanked him for familiarizing each with my name and mentioning I might be calling from time to time. Steve looked across the table at me and blinked. ‘Leil,’ he said, ‘you teach telephone skills. Haven’t you caught on?’

‘Huh?’

‘Forgive me if I’m bursting a bubble,’ Steve said, ‘but everyone gets that reception, no matter who’s calling.’

‘Oh!’





When a pain in the neck calls


‘But Steve,’ I protested when I’d recuperated from the initial disappointment that I was a victim of a technique and not a VIP, ‘what if the caller is unknown, a complete stranger? Surely your staffers shouldn’t fake they know the caller.’

‘Of course not, Leil. In that case, I instruct them to show energy and enthusiasm over the reason they’re calling. For example, suppose the caller is a cable operator wanting to join our association. The caller would get a smile and a sincere, ‘Oh yes, Mr Smith, I’ll put you right through.’

‘Yeah, but suppose the caller is selling office furniture?’ I challenged.

‘Doesn’t matter,’ Steve said. ‘The salesperson gets the same reception after the staffer hears why he’s calling. If my staffer says warmly, “Oh, office furniture!” the caller feels good. And I find the salesperson is a lot easier to deal with later.’

I told him, ‘OK, Steve, starting tomorrow morning, I’m going to put that “Oh wow, I’m so happy you called for that reason” attitude in my voice.’

The next morning, the first call was my dentist’s office. ‘Ms. Lowndes, this call is to remind you you’re overdue for your six-month checkup.’

‘Oh, of course, you’re so right,’ I cooed. ‘I’m so glad you called.’ The receptionist sounded surprised but very pleased at my reaction. ‘I can’t book an appointment right now,’ I continued, ‘but I’ll call you as soon as my schedule frees up.’ She didn’t hassle me with her usual ‘Well, when do you expect that to be?’ She just hung up satisfied. (And I got what I wanted – no call from my dentist’s office for at least another six months.)

The second time the phone rang, it was a man who had ordered my tape set calling to complain that one of the tapes broke. ‘Oh my goodness, I’m so glad you told me about that,’ I said with the enthusiasm of having won the lottery. The caller sounded a little shocked, but obviously pleased at my reaction. ‘Of course, I’ll get another set out to you and I hope you accept my apologies.’ Caller hung up satisfied. (And I got what I wanted – his good will and word of mouth in spite of my tape duplicator’s blooper.)

The third call was tougher. This was from a vendor I had completely forgotten to pay. ‘Oh, I’m so glad you reminded me of that bill,’ I lied. Again, shocked pleasure was the caller’s reaction. (I was probably the first creditor in history who ever sounded happy she’d called.) ‘In the back of my mind I felt there was one bill I had overlooked. I’m writing the cheque as we speak.’

Then I got my reward. The dunner said, ‘By the way, don’t worry about the 2 per cent per month late-payment charge. As long as we get your cheque by the end of the week, it will be OK.’ She hung up happy. (And I got a present – no finance charges in spite of my oversight.)

And so it went throughout the rest of the day, the rest of the week, and ever since. Try it. You’ll find you get a lot more from anyone when you smile, after you find out who it is or why they’re calling. Use the ‘Oh Wow, It’s You’ technique on almost every call.

Technique 62:

Oh wow, it’s you!

Don’t answer the phone with an ‘I’m just sooo happy all the time’ attitude. Answer warmly, crisply, professionally. Then, after you hear who is calling, let a huge smile of happiness engulf your entire face and spill over into your voice. You make your caller feel as though your giant warm fuzzy smile is reserved for him or her.





‘No, no, aaaaaagh, not the screen!’


Picture a torture device called The Screen. The mad scientist, laughing maniacally, forces the victim into a giant meat grinder that mashes him through a heavy-metal screen. It slices his body into a million molecules before he’s reconstituted on the other side. Being screened when you call someone’s office is the emotional version of that ordeal.

You place your cold call. ‘May I speak to Mr Jones?’ you pleasantly ask.

‘Who’s calling?’ a haughty voice responds. Of course, your name is not prestigious enough for the screener to grant you the exalted status of speaking to Jones.

Her ruthless interrogation continues, ‘And what company are you with?’ You submit your company’s name, praying it will score with her. And then to top it off, she has the pluck to ask, ‘And what’s this in reference to?’ Aaaaaagh!

Several weeks after my luncheon with Steve, I had the occasion to call him again. ‘Is Steve Effros available? This is Leil Lowndes calling.’

‘Oh yes, Ms Lowndes, definitely. Let me put you right through.’ I start humming happily as I wait for Steve to come to the line.

A moment later his assistant came back and said sympathetically, ‘I’m so sorry Ms Lowndes. Steve just stepped out to lunch. I know he’ll be sorry he missed your call.’ Meanwhile, I’m still smiling. Do I suspect that Steve didn’t ‘just step out to lunch’? Do I suspect he’s sitting right there? Do I ever, in my wildest paranoid dreams, think he doesn’t have the time or inclination to talk to me? Do I feel screened? No way! I’m as happy as a carefree kitten as I leave my number for a callback. You see, I have probably fallen for the Sneaky Screen.

Technique 63:

The sneaky screen

If you must screen your calls, instruct your staff to first say cheerfully, ‘Oh yes, I’ll put you right through. May I tell her who’s calling?’ If the party has already identified himself, it’s ‘Oh of course, Mr Whoozit. I’ll put you right through.’

When the secretary comes back with the bad news that Mr or Ms Bigwig is unavailable, callers don’t take it personally and never feel screened. They fall for it every time. Just like I did.





The power behind the phone


I know a secret about a Big Cat who owns an international hotel chain with properties in six countries. He hires and fires thousands, awards or pulls immense contracts, borrows from major financial institutions, and makes lavish contributions to charities. Mr Big Cat (we’ll call him ‘Ed’) has a respected and immediately recognizable name in his industry. And here’s the secret: Mrs Big Cat is the real brains behind the operation.

I became friends with Mrs Big Cat (we’ll call her ‘Sylvia’) when I did some consulting for her husband’s organization. Sylvia invited me to tea one afternoon. She sweetly apologized that this was ‘maid’s day off’ so we’d have to fend for ourselves. As we happily perched on the patio and were about to dive into our tea and crumpets, the phone rang. She excused herself to answer it.

I heard Mrs Big Cat say, ‘No, I’m sorry, he’s not in. Shall I tell him who called? … No, I don’t know when he is planning on returning, but if you give me your name and … No, I said I don’t know what time he’ll be back … Yes, I’ll tell him you called.’

As Sylvia returned to the patio, I could she was annoyed by the call. Always on the lookout for a good phone story, I ventured a questioning look.

Picking up on my curiosity, she said, ‘That fool thinks he’s going to get a contribution from Ed. Ha!’ she laughed wryly. Her candour emboldened me to ask her more. It turns out the caller, a Mr Creighton, was a fund-raiser for a major charity Ed was considering contributing to. My hostess said Creighton had called twice in the past two weeks when Ed was out. ‘And not once did he greet me, ask how I was, or apologize for the disturbance.’ This did not please Mrs Big Cat.

Was it a major irritation for Mrs. Big Cat? No, only minor. But did it mean a major loss for the little cat who called? It sure did. In Ed and Sylvia’s Big Cat household, subtleties count. At the dinner table, Mrs Big Cat could say to her husband, ‘A very nice man named Creighton called for you today, dear.’ Or she might say, ‘A rather irritating chap named Creighton called for you today.’ One comment or the other could mean millions won or lost by Creighton’s charity. And all because little cat Creighton mildly ruffled Mrs Big Cat’s whiskers.

Technique 64:

Salute the spouse

Whenever you are calling someone’s home, always identify and greet the person who answers. Whenever you call someone’s office more than once or twice, make friends with the secretary. Anybody who is close enough to answer the phone is close enough to sway the VIP’s opinion of you.

Home advice: Salute the Spouse. Office advice: Salute the Secretary.





A surprising number of Big Cat spouses – and secretaries – have deep claws into important business decisions. When it comes to hiring time, firing time, promoting time, or buying time, many spouses have a say. When it comes to whose calls get through, whose proposals get put on the top of the boss’s desk, who gets luncheon appointments made, secretaries’ opinions count!

Only foolish callers don’t realize all spouses and secretaries have names. All spouses and secretaries have lives. All spouses and secretaries have feelings. All spouses and secretaries have influence. Deal accordingly.





‘Are you red, yellow, or green?’


When Alexander Graham Bell invented the phone, he and his comrades had no use for such trite phrases as ‘Hi, how ya doin’?’ Bell and his boys never just started spouting their ideas into their listener’s ears. The first words out of their mouths in those times were ‘Can you talk?’ Bell and his buddies were, of course, referring to technical capabilities.

Little did they know, more than a hundred years later, Big Winners would use a form of that same greeting. Today, of course, ‘Can you talk?’ means ‘Is it convenient to talk?’ Before launching into conversation, they always ask ‘Is this a good time to chat?’ ‘Did I catch you at a good time?’ ‘Do you have a minute to discuss the widget account?’

All folks have a Big Ben in their brain that determines how receptive they are going to be to you and your ideas. When you mess with their internal cuckoo clock, they won’t listen to you. No matter how interesting your information, or how pleasant your call, bad timing means bad results for you.

It’s not your fault. Whenever you call someone at home, you never know whether she was sleeping or whether there’s a fire raging in the kitchen stove. Whenever you call someone at work, you never know whether he’s got two hours to get a report in or whether the big boss is not-so-patiently sitting on his desk.

Whenever you place a call, always – not occasionally, not frequently – always ask about your timing. Make it a habit. Make it a rule. Make it a self-punishable crime if the first words out of your mouth don’t concern the convenience of your timing:

‘Hi, Joe, is this a good time to talk?’

‘Hello, Susan. Have you got a minute?’

‘Hi, Carl, did I catch you good or did I catch you bad?’

‘Sam, do you have a second for me to tell you about what happened at the game last Saturday?’

There are many ways to say it, but it all boils down to ‘Is this a good time to talk?’

My friend Barry, a broadcaster, accomplishes more in a day than most people do in a week. He came up with a clever conversational device that assures he’ll never shatter anyone’s emotional sundial. He calls it What Colour Is Your Time? Barry introduces the device by telling people he’s calling he has great respect for their time. He then asks permission to start his future conversations with a question that assures he’ll never disturb them at an inopportune moment. Barry says he’s going to ask what colour their time is. They should honestly answer, ‘red,’ ‘yellow,’ or ‘green.’

Red means ‘I’m really rushed.’

Yellow means ‘I’m busy but what’s on your mind? If it’s quick, we can deal with it.’

Green means ‘Sure, I’ve got time. Let’s talk.’

Red, like the stoplight at the corner, means stop. Yellow means hurry up, time is short, or stop and wait for the next green light. Green means go.

Busy people pick up quickly on his artful device and enjoy the game. Most especially, they enjoy Barry’s sensitivity and respect for their time. In fact, he says, most of his callers play the same sensitive game when they call him. ‘Hi Barry, what colour is your time? Are you green?’

Technique 65:

What colour is your time?

No matter how urgent you think your call, always begin by asking the person about timing. Either use the What Colour Is Your Time? device or simply ask, ‘Is this a convenient time for you to talk?’

When you ask about timing first, you’ll never smash your footprints right in the middle of your telephone partner’s sands of time. You’ll never get a ‘No!’ just because your timing wasn’t right.





Salesfolks, wait for the green light


A note here for salespeople. If you ask a prospect if he or she has time to talk and the answer is ‘Not really, but tell me what’s on your mind,’ DON’T! Do not make your sales pitch while they’re red. Do not talk with them when they’re yellow. Wait until they’re green, very green. (If you ever want to see any green coming from them, that is.)





Whoops, your paranoia is showing


You can tell a lot about people just from the outgoing messages they leave on their voice mail. ‘Hello,’ his machine answers. ‘I’m not in right now. But you probably don’t want to talk to me anyway.’ Beep. Would you suspect this fellow has an inferiority complex?

‘Hello,’ her machine answers. ‘The sound you hear is the barking of our killer Doberman pinscher, Wolf. Please leave a message after the tone.’ Beep. Would you suspect this woman is worried about break-ins? Most of us don’t record our personal foibles so conspicuously for the world to hear. Nevertheless, people can hear a lot between the lines of what we say on our voice mail.

Last month I needed a graphic artist to do some work for one of my extremely conservative clients. I phoned Mark, an artist whose work I had seen and liked a lot. His answering machine blasted ear-splitting rock music through the receiver. Then his voice boomed over the electric guitar, ‘Hey there, dude, don’t be crude. Jes’ croon me an earful of sweeeeeeet sounds right at that lone tone. Yeah, yeah, yeah.’ Beep. I banged the receiver quickly back into the cradle to shut out horrible fantasies of how my client would react if he had to call Mark. His thirty-second talent show might have been an appropriate sample of a rock musician’s talent. But a businessperson should opt for a more sedate outgoing message. The message you leave on your answering machine reflects your work. Keep yours friendly, neutral, and up-to-date.

And here’s the secret: to give the impression you are really on top of your business, change your message every day. Studies show that callers perceive people to be brighter and more efficient when they hear an updated message each time they call. If appropriate, let callers know where you are and when you intend to be back. If you have customers who need to be attended to, this is crucial.

Try something like this on your office phone: ‘This is (name). It’s Thursday, May 7th, and I’ll be in a sales meeting until late this afternoon. Please leave your message and I’ll get back to you as soon as I return.’ That way, if you don’t call a client back until 4 P.M. he isn’t steaming.

Also, keep it short. Some people change their message every day, but it’s too long. I had a colleague, a public speaker named Dan, who in his finest mellifluous voice imposed his thought for the day on all unsuspecting callers.

Last year I was working on a project with Dan and had to call him three times in the same day to leave a progress report. Each time his machine answered:

‘Hello, this is Dan, and here’s my daily motivator.’ He cleared his throat for his big recorded performance and then continued. ‘Did someone say something today that offended you? So what? That’s their problem.’ He paused dramatically. ‘Did someone look at you the wrong way? So what? That’s their problem.’ Again, a pause for the magnitude of that sentiment to sink in. ‘Replace your petty thoughts of anger, exasperation, and spite with thoughts of strength. Calm down. Rise above those little insignificant irritations in life. Focus your thoughts in the direction of fulfillment and accomplishment. Once again, this is Dan.’ I’m surprised he didn’t also leave his agent’s phone number here. ‘Leave your message at the tone. And have a great peaceful day.’ Beep.

The first time I listened to Dan’s ‘inspirational’ message, the length mildly irritated me. The second time, I found myself hyperventilating while waiting for him to get through his unbearably long message. By the third call, his schmaltzy message seemed interminable. I was filled with those ‘petty thoughts of anger, exasperation, and spite’ he warned against because of his darn message. I found it impossible to ‘rise above it’ and ‘focus my thoughts in the direction of fulfillment and accomplishment.’ I wanted to punch him in the nose. Outgoing messages are not the venues to give inspirational messages nor to impress the world with one’s accomplishments.

Another friend of mine, a writer, earned herself a few little cat stripes with this one on her machine:

‘Hello, this is Cheryl Smith. Cheryl is on her national book tour,’ (she paused so all callers could be appropriately impressed) ‘making appearances in twelve cities.’ (Another pause as though awaiting applause.) ‘She’ll be returning on October 7.’ (What’s this she bit? Cheryl herself is speaking.) ‘Please leave your message for her at the tone.’ Beep.

Yes, Cheryl, we know you’re an important author. But your third-party reference to self, your narcissistic tone of voice, and topping it off with twelve cities would make any Big Cat snicker through his whiskers.

One last codicil: Avoid one particular message many businesspeople use these days – ‘I’m either away from my desk or on the other line.’ The subtext of this message is ‘I’m a slave chained to my desk and it is an amazing fact that I have escaped for the moment.’ One night I was working into the wee hours. At 4 A.M. I decided to leave a message on a colleague’s business phone so she’d get it as soon as she came in at nine. ‘Hello,’ the message chirped. ‘This is Felicia. I’m either away from my desk or on the other line right now, but leave your message at the tone.’ Beep. Felicia, of course you’re away from your desk – it’s 4 a.m. on Sunday morning! ‘On the other line?’ At this hour? I hope not!

You never know how your message is going to affect someone. Just keep yours neutral, friendly, constantly changing, short, and understated. No boasts, no bells, no whistles.

Technique 66:

Constantly changing outgoing

message

If you want to be perceived as conscientious and reliable, leave a short, professional, and friendly greeting as your outgoing message. No music. No jokes. No inspirational messages. No boasts, bells, or whistles. And here’s the secret: change it every day. Your message doesn’t have to be flawless. A little cough or stammer gives a lovely unpretentious reality to your message.





Neeexxxt!


Producers of big Broadway musicals can be brutal during auditions. An anxious wanna-be star, after rehearsing his audition song for weeks, steps onstage. He opens his mouth to sing. After a few notes, the heartless producer shouts, ‘Thank you. NEEEXXXT!’ Dreams of stardom dashed in ten seconds!

Businesspeople’s professional dreams can also be dashed in the first ten seconds of their ‘audition.’ Their audition is the message they leave on someone else’s answering machine.

Competent businesspeople wouldn’t dream of sending a messy handwritten business letter to a VIP on cheap yellow-stained paper and expect a response. They know the recipient would toss it in the bin. Nevertheless, some of these same folks will leave a lacklustre message on a VIP’s voice mail and expect a call back. No one ever told them that Big Winners scrutinize messages on their voice mail with the same consideration of a big Broadway producer. If you sound good, you’ve got a chance. If you don’t, you are fast-forwarded out of their life.

Salespeople, suitors, candidates, and competitors who leave crisp, intelligent, upbeat messages on voice mail get called back. Losers with lacklustre tones and uncrafted messages never hear from Mr or Ms Make It Happen. Make sure your message reflects three Cs: Confidence, Clarity, and Credibility. In addition, make it entice, entertain, or interest the listener. A flat ‘This is Joe, call me back’ doesn’t score with Big Winners.





Stay tuned for …


Radio DJs use tricks to keep their listeners tuned in. Top salespeople have similar little tricks to entice prospects to call them back. Here’s one called a cliff hanger. To make sure listeners won’t switch stations during the radio commercial, the broadcaster throws out a mini-mystery: ‘And right after the commercial we’ll be back with the winning ticket … It could be yours … Stay tuned!’ Whenever you leave a voice mail message for anyone, try to include a cliff-hanger: ‘Hi Harry, this is Andrew. I have the answer to that question you asked me last week.’ Or ‘Hi Diane, this is Betsy. I have some big news about that project we were discussing.’ Now Harry and Diane have a reason to call Andrew and Betsy back.

Pitch personality into your message, too. Picture the people listening to it. Say something to pique their curiosity or make them smile. The message you leave is your ten-second audition. Make it good.

Technique 67:

Your ten-second audition

While dialling, clear your throat. If an answering machine picks up, pretend the beep is a big Broadway producer saying ‘Nexxxt.’ Now you’re on. This is Your Ten-Second Audition to prove you are worthy of a quick callback.





Incidentally, if someone’s voice mail unexpectedly comes on and you are unprepared, quickly hang up (before the beep so they don’t get a hang-up message.) Take a moment to craft your entertaining, enticing, or interesting message. Rehearse it once with confidence, clarity, and charisma. Then redial to leave your great hot message.

A funny thing happens. If your party answers this time, you’ll be disappointed.





Ho hum, business as usual


The inspiration for this next telephone technique comes from personal experiences with mid-Manhattan toilets (a less-than-refined origin, to be sure). New York City, in spite of all its reputed sophistication, lags behind some of the shabbiest European cities in one respect. Manhattan has few public toilets. And none of those European-style, charming, and at times very much appreciated, freestanding structures on street corners.

In the days when I made sales calls around the busy city of New York, this presented a problem. Several times a day. I often found myself at the mercy of coffee-shop cashiers who jealously guarded their restroom facilities. Some shops even put menacingly scribbled signs in the window, ‘Bathrooms are for customers only.’

I often found that if I played it straight – going up to the cashier and asking if I could use the amenities – I’d get shot down. So I used the following technique. Without casting a glance at the cashier, I’d strut confidently into the coffee shop. I’d march right past the bathroom bouncer and keep my gaze fixed on one of the booths. She’d assume I was coming for lunch or had simply returned to collect my forgotten gloves. Once past the gatekeeper of the loo, I’d wait for her to be busy ringing up the next cheque. Then, like greased lightning, I’d sprint into the john.

I dubbed this deception the Ho-Hum Caper after my feigned attitude of ‘Ho hum, business as usual. I come here every day with nothing on my mind but lunch.’

Let us now translate that sneaky subterfuge into a seldom-fail phone technique. You can use the manoeuvre to sneak around secretaries and dodge their heartless screening. Instead of playing it straight and asking for your party by name, just say ‘Is he in?’ or ‘Is she in?’ Using the pronoun is verbally sprinting past the secretary with a business as usual, ‘Ho hum, I call every day’ attitude.

Technique 68:

The ho-hum caper

Instead of using your party’s name, casually let the pronoun he or she roll off your tongue. Forget ‘Uh, may I speak to Ms Bigshot please?’ Just announce, ‘Hi, Bob Smith here, is she in?’ Tossing the familiar she off your tongue signals to the secretary that you and her boss are old buddies.





‘Do you really have to take care of that fire in your kitchen?’


Whenever you’re on the phone with someone, you hear a lot more than their voices. In the background you might hear dogs barking, babies crying, or a crackling sound. For all you know, the dog has his tail caught in the refrigerator, the baby has to be fed, or the house is on fire. When you acknowledge the sound by asking if they have to take care of it, you warm the hearts of your listeners.

When you are talking to someone at work, you often hear another phone ringing. Say immediately, ‘I hear your other line. Do you have to answer it?’ Even if not, he or she will appreciate the gesture. If he does have to catch the other call, you can be sure he heard nothing you said after the first ring. He’s only thinking ‘How can I interrupt this babbling person without being rude so I can answer my other phone?’ In fact with every brr-ing, irritation sets in that you are holding him hostage from doing what he has to do.

Here is the technique guaranteed to save you from being in that uncomfortable position.

Technique 69:

‘I hear your other line’

When you hear a phone in the background, stop speaking – in midsentence if necessary – and say ‘I hear your other line’ (or your dog barking, your baby crying, your spouse calling you). Ask whether she has to attend to it. Whether she does or not, she’ll know you’re a Top Communicator for asking.





The subtext, of course, is that you are sensitive to what’s going on in your caller’s world. If you’re talking to someone far away or in another country, another way to show you’re tops in the communications department is to translate time references into their time zone. When you leave a message, say ‘I can be reached between three and five your time.’

And don’t forget foreign holidays. Last July 1, I was on the phone with a client from Australia. I was impressed when he wished me ‘Happy Independence Day weekend.’ So impressed, in fact, I ran out to find a chart of international holidays. I made a note in my calendar next April 25 to wish my Aussie friend ‘Happy ANZAC Day’(after I figure out what it means). If you do business with people around the world, be sure to extend good wishes to them for their holidays. Forget about your own if they’re not shared. I’m still mortified about the time last November when I was on a conference call with a Canadian client and seven of his salespeople. I wished them all ‘Happy Thanksgiving.’





It’s much better the second time around


The first time I saw The Wizard of Oz, the story bewitched me. The second time I saw The Wizard of Oz, the special effects amazed me. The third time I saw The Wizard of Oz, the photography dazzled me. Have you ever seen a movie twice, three times? You notice subtleties and hear sounds you completely missed the first time around.

It’s the same on the phone. Because your business conversations are more consequential than movies, you should listen to them two, maybe three times. Often we have no clear idea of what really happened in our phone conversation until we hear it again. You’ll find shadings more significant than the colour of Toto’s collar – and more scarecrows than you imagined who ‘haven’t got a brain!’

How do you listen to your important business conversations again? Simply legally and ethically tape record them. I call the technique of recording and analyzing your business conversations for subtleties Instant Replay.

Having a tape recorder on her phone could have made a dramatic difference in the career of my friend Laura. Laura, a nutritionist, had developed an excellent health drink. It deserved to be marketed nationally.

I was in Laura’s office one day discussing her plans and I said, ‘Laura, I’ve got just the contact for you’. Several months earlier, I had met Fred, a man who owned a chain of supermarkets. Fred owed me a favour because, at his request, I’d given a pro bono talk for a social club he belonged to. Fred was a Big Banana in the supermarket world, and with one ‘yes’ he could put my friend’s health drink in his stores. That would launch Laura nationally.

I placed the call and, lo and behold, he was in. And, an even bigger lo and behold, Fred sounded interested in Laura’s beverage.

‘Put her on,’ Fred said.

I proudly handed Laura the phone and their conversation started out fine. ‘Oh sure, I’ll send you a sample,’ Laura said. ‘What’s the address?’ Then I heard Laura say, ‘Uh, wait a minute, let me get something to write with.’ (I rapidly rolled a pen and pushed a pad in front of her nose.) ‘Uh, what’s that again? Did you say 4201 or 4102?’ (I moan inaudibly.) ‘And how do you spell the name of the street?’ (My moan becomes audible.) ‘Whoops, this pen just ran out of ink. Leil, do you see another pen on my desk? (I did, and this time I felt like throwing it at her.) ‘Sorry, what’s that again?’

Yikes, now I wanted to grab the phone out of Laura’s hands. She shouldn’t be bothering a busy Big Banana for details like repeating addresses. She could have called his secretary back later for clarification. But even that would have been unnecessary if she were recording the conversation with the technique I call Instant Replay. She could have merely mentioned that she was flipping on the recorder (most heavy hitters are comfortable with that concept) and she would have had it on tape.

Fred was nice to Laura that day. But my friend never heard back from him. And to this day, she wonders why. She’ll never know the confused phone exchange nixed the deal.

Was Fred being unfair just because Laura was a little slow on the phone? Absolutely not. Fred figures, ‘If this woman is as insensitive about my time at the beginning of a possible business relationship, what’s she going to be like down the pike?’ Wise choice, Fred. I still like Laura. She’s still my friend. But will I introduce her to any other Big Winners who might help her? I can’t take the chance.





How to set up your instant replay


Instant Replay is simple and cheap. Go to your local electronics store and ask for a recorder for your telephone. Slap it on your phone receiver, and plug the other end into a cassette recorder. Then turn the recorder on during your next important conversation. The device could earn you hundreds of dollars on your first call. In some states the law requires you inform the other party you are recording them. Make sure to check with the authorities about the legality in the state where you live. If it’s one-party consent, don’t worry. You’re the one party. Obviously you must never ever use the tape for any other purpose than for your own second listening. Not only would that be unlawful, it would be unconscionable. For extra security, don’t leave people’s taped conversations lying around. Keep the same tape in your cassette machine and use it over and over to record important details.

With Instant Replay, you can catch balls your Conversation Partner throws out on the first bounce. You’re on the phone with your boss. He rambles off four or five names in a law firm you’re supposed to write to, then the address, then the nine-digit zip code. Realizing he’s pitched you some pretty fast balls, he asks, ‘Shall I repeat that for you?’ ‘No thanks, I got it,’ you proudly say, silently tapping your little tape recorder. Boss is impressed.

Technique 70:

Instant replay

Record all your business conversations and listen to them again. The second or third time, you pick up on significant subtleties you missed the first time. It’s like football fans who often don’t know if there was a fumble until they see it all over again in Instant Replay.





Yet another benefit of Instant Replay – it helps hide your ignorance. Recently I was on the phone with a cameraman negotiating a price on a videotape to use as a speaker’s demo. Luckily I was recording the conversation because his flurry of Hi-8, VHS, Super VHS, Beta SP, and three-quarter inch U-matic had me wanting to crawl into a rodent hole in the wall. But I listened to the tape of our conversation afterward. I wrote down all the words I didn’t understand and then asked a video friend what they meant. Now I was able to call the cameraman back and say, ‘I’d like a two-camera shoot on Beta SP. And can you give me a VHS dub so I can do some off-line editing?’ Don’t you think I got a much better price than if I’d asked, ‘Duh, what’s a Beta SP?’





Forget what they said, hear what they meant


Instant Replay also makes you sensitive to levels of communication far deeper than just your callers’ words. You tune in to their real enthusiasm or hesitation about an idea.

When we want something, our minds play funny tricks on us. If we desperately crave ‘yes’ from someone, we hear ‘yes.’ But ‘yes’ isn’t always what it seems. A client’s forceful ‘YES’ and her hesitant ‘yeee-sss’ are different as heaven and hell. Last month I asked a woman who’d booked me for a speech if her office could reproduce my ten-page handout. She gave me the answer I wanted, which was ‘yes.’ Later, however, I re-listened to our conversation on tape. Her answer about the handouts had been a very hesitant, ‘Hmm, well, yes.’ I immediately called her back and said, ‘By the way, don’t worry about those handouts.’

‘Oh, I’m so glad!’ she purred. ‘Because we really don’t have the budget for things like that.’ I gained much more in my client’s goodwill than the value of reproducing a few sheets of paper.

Let us now return to your live, in-person show. We’re going to talk not only about how to be a hit at a party, but how to smoothly hit on all the folks you want – just like a politician.


