


Every week, when I was a kid, my mother took me to the National Geographic Society to see a film. The one on tigers invades my nightmares these many years later. Sitting there in the darkened theatre, I watched a mother give birth to three tiny cubs. One was born with a mangled leg. I witnessed how all the other tiger cubs excluded him. And right there in front of the cameras, he was tortured to death by the others. I remember crying and thinking how the healthy cubs were like a few of the kids in my school. Sometimes they could be very cruel.

My best friend in high school was named Stella. Stella was a beautiful girl inside and out. But she had a speech defect, a cleft palate. And many of our classmates laughed at her behind her back and excluded her from their games.

Kids haven’t changed much. When I give talks for colleges and young people’s groups, the discussion often turns to popularity. Everyone wants to be liked. Occasionally students tell me stories about how some girl has a minor physical defect, say a crossed eye or a nervous twitch. They say some kids laugh and make fun of her. Or a boy has a limp so no one chooses him for their baseball team. Even if he can run just as fast as the other kids, some of his classmates don’t like image of ‘a cripple’ being on their side.

The years go by and kids become adults. Not too much changes. Adults are not as cruel, happily, about physical disabilities. But they can be brutal about social disabilities. Social disabilities are insidious because often we don’t recognize them in ourselves. We can be blind to our social handicaps and deaf to our verbal deficiencies. But we’re quick to recognize them in others.

How many times has one of your associates made a dumb, insensitive gaffe? How often have you written somebody off because of some stupid move? Do you think he knew what he was doing? Of course not. He had no idea he was crossing a line or stepping on your toes. Probably no one ever told him about the subtleties we’re going to discuss in this final section of How to Talk to Anyone.

We’ve all heard about the glass ceiling some companies construct over women and minorities. People seldom discuss another kind of glass ceiling. This one is even more treacherous because you can’t legislate against it and only Top Communicators recognize it. Yet it’s a rock-hard shield. Many bright individuals hit their heads on the thick glass as they try to climb up the next rung of the ladder to join the Big Boys and Girls on top. The folks able to crash through are the ones who abide by the unspoken rules that follow.

Consider each of the following techniques. If you find any of them obvious, give yourself a pat on the back. It means you’re already a tiger on that one. Be on the lookout for those communications sensitivities where you find yourself saying, ‘You gotta be kidding! What’s wrong with that?’

Watch out! It means someday, somewhere, you might commit that particular insensitivity. Then, when a Big Winner responds coolly to your suggestion, doesn’t return your phone call, doesn’t give you the promotion, doesn’t invite you to the party, doesn’t accept your date, you’ll never know what happened. Read each of the following techniques to assure you’re not making any of these subtle mistakes, that let the Big Players lacerate you and keep you from getting what you want in life.





‘Gesundheit!’ ‘Whoops!’ ‘Butterfingers!’


One remarkable reaction opened my eyes to yet another difference between Big Winners and little losers. Several years ago I was doing a project for a client. I had the pleasure of being taken to lunch by the four biggest fish in the firm. They wanted to familiarize me with communications problems their company was experiencing.

We went to a busy midtown restaurant at peak lunchtime. Every table was filled with a variety of corporate creatures. Upper-and middle-management types were lunching in their suits and ties or high-collar blouses. Workers and secretaries were munching in their blue shirts or short skirts. The restaurant was buzzing with conversation and conviviality.

Over the entrée, we were in deep discussion about the company’s challenges. The CFO, Mr. Wilson, was talking about the financial outlook when suddenly, BLAM! Not six feet away, a waiter dropped a tray full of dishes. Glasses broke, silverware clattered against the marble floor, and a hot baked potato rolled under our table in a direct path for Wilson’s feet.

Practically everyone in the restaurant turned toward the humiliated waiter. We heard a cacophony of ‘Uh-oh,’ ‘Butterfingers!’ ‘Whoops, watch it!’ ‘Boy, that’s his last lunch here,’ and a variety of tittering and derisive laughter.

Wilson, however, didn’t miss a word of his monologue. Not one Big Player at my table turned or blinked an eye. It was as though nothing had happened. The restaurant gradually quieted down around us as we continued our deliberations. (A few minutes later the baked potato shot back out from under our table. At that moment, I found myself wondering whether Wilson had been a soccer player in his youth.)

Over coffee, the director of marketing, Ms Dawson, was discussing the company’s planned expansion. Suddenly she made an expansive gesture with her arms that knocked over her coffee cup. Just as I was about to say, ‘Oh dear,’ I bit my tongue. Before I could grab my napkin to help, Dawson was dabbing the muddy puddle with hers, and not missing a syllable of her soliloquy. None of her cool colleagues at the table even seemed to notice the overturned cup.

At that instant, I realized Big Boys and Girls see no bloopers, hear no bloopers. They never say ‘Butterfingers.’ Or ‘Whoops.’ Or even ‘Uh-oh.’ They ignore their colleagues’ boners. They simply don’t notice their comrades’ minor spills, slips, fumbles and blunders. Thus, the technique See No Bloopers, Hear No Bloopers was born.





Let me suffer in your silence


I have one friend who every time I sneeze says, ‘Oh, are you coming down with a cold?’ Every time I miss a step on a kerb, it’s ‘Be careful!’ Every time he sees me after a long day’s work he asks, ‘Are you tired?’ Granted, this is small fry in the great bouillabaisse of bloopers. And the poor guy probably genuinely thinks he’s being sensitive to my needs. But, darnit, coming down with a cold, missing the kerb, and looking tired are less than cool. Let me suffer – in YOUR silence.

If you’re having dinner with a friend and she makes a boob, be blind to her overturned glass. Be deaf to her sneeze, cough, or hiccups. No matter how well-meaning your ‘gesundheit,’ ‘whoops,’ or knowing smile, nobody likes to be reminded of their own human frailty.

‘Fine,’ you say, ‘for small slips, but what should one do in extreme circumstances?’ Say a rippling tide of Coca-Cola is flooding across the table in your direction and it will be impossible to ignore by the time it reaches your lap?

If possible, deftly flip your napkin to obstruct the current and keep talking. Try not to miss a syllable of the sentence you started before the oncoming tide. At this point, your companion might mutter incoherent apologies. Adroitly weave a parenthetical ‘It’s nothing’ into your current phrase and continue talking. On such small sands the castles of Big Cat camaraderie are built.

Technique 78:

See no bloopers, hear no bloopers

Cool Communicators allow their friends, associates, acquaintances, and loved ones the pleasurable myth of being above commonplace bloopers and embarrassing biological functions. They simply don’t notice their comrades’ minor spills, slips, fumbles, and faux pas. They obviously ignore raspberries and all other signs of human frailty in their fellow mortals. Big Winners never gape at another’s gaffes.





If people hate to be reminded of the moments when they’re not shining, there is another event almost as disillusioning. It is when a talker is shining, and the spotlight abruptly pivots to a more urgent matter. The speaker is forgotten in the flurry.

Top Communicators put the glow back in the gloomy gabber’s eyes with the technique that follows.





‘Now, please get back to your story’


In ancient Japan, if you saved someone’s life, it was their self-imposed task to spend the rest of their life serving you. Nowadays, if you rescue someone’s story, a molecule of that ancient instinct still gushes through his or her veins.

It happens all the time. Someone in a group is telling a story and, just before their big point, BOOM! There’s an interruption. Someone new joins the group, a catering person with a tray of crackers and cheese comes over, or a baby starts crying. Suddenly everyone’s attention turns to the new arrival, the nibbles on the tray, or the ‘adorable’ little tyke. Nobody is aware of the interruption – except the speaker. They forget all about the fact that the speaker hasn’t made his or her point.

Or you’re all sitting around the living room and someone is telling a joke. Suddenly, just before their big punch line, little Johnny drops a dish or the phone rings. After the crash, everyone talks about little Johnny’s clumsiness. After the call, the subject turns to the impending marriage or medical operation of the caller. Nobody remembers the great punch line got aborted – except the joke teller. (When it’s you regaling everyone at a restaurant, have you ever noticed how you can almost set your clock by the waiter coming to take everyone’s order just before your hilarious punch line?)

Most joke and story tellers are too timid to say, after the invasion, ‘Now, as I was saying …’ Instead, they’ll spend the rest of the evening feeling miserable they didn’t get to finish. Here’s where you come in. Rescue them with the technique I call Lend a Helping Tongue.

Watch the gratitude in the storyteller’s eyes as he stabilizes where his story sunk and he sails off again toward the centre of attention. His expression and the recognition of your sensitivity by the rest of the group are often reward enough. You are even more fortunate if you can rescue the story of someone who can hire you, promote you, buy from you, or otherwise lift your life. Big Winners have elephantine memories. When you do them subtle favours like Lend a Helping Tongue, they find a way to pay you back.

Technique 79:

Lend a helping tongue

Whenever someone’s story is aborted, let the interruption play itself out. Give everyone time to dote on the little darling, give their dinner order, or pick up the jagged pieces of china.

Then, when the group reassembles, simply say to the person who suffered story-interruptus, ‘Now please get back to your story.’ Or better yet, remember where they were and then ask, ‘So what happened after the … (and fill in the last few words.)’





Harvey Mackay, the world’s most notable networker who rose from envelope salesman to corporate CEO and one of America’s most sought-after business and motivational speakers, teaches us that the world goes around on favours. How right he is! The next three techniques reveal unspoken subtleties of this critical balance of power.





‘Look, here’s what’s in it for me – here’s what’s in it for you’


Savvy businesspeople know everyone is constantly tuned to the same radio station – WIIFM. Whenever anyone says anything, the listener’s instinctive reaction is What’s in It for Me? Sales pros have elevated this constant query to the exalted status of acronym, WIIFM. They pay such strict attention to the WIIFM principle that they don’t open their pitch with the features of their product or service. Top pros start by highlighting the benefits to the buyer.

Except for tactical reasons during sensitive negotiating, Big Winners lay both What’s in It for Me? and What’s in It for You? (WIIFY) right out on the table. This is so critical that, if one camouflages WIIFM or WIIFY, the concealer is relegated to the status of little loser.

I once invited a casual acquaintance to lunch. I had hoped to consult with Sam, the head of a marketing association, on my speaking business. I told him my desire and jokingly asked if an hour of his valuable time was available in return for lunch at a great restaurant. That was my way of saying, ‘Look Sam, I know there’s no real benefit to you except a tasty lunch and the dubious pleasure of my company.’ (In other words, I was revealing WIIFY.) To make the meeting even more convenient for him, I said, ‘Sam, choose the date and the best restaurant in your neighbourhood.’

The day of our lunch consultation lunch rolled around and I travelled forty-five minutes across town to his chosen restaurant. As I entered, I was surprised to see an assortment of people arranged around the largest table in the room with Sam as the smiling centrepiece. Obviously, this was not the setting in which I could consult with him. Unfortunately, Sam had already spotted me by the coat check. I was trapped.

It wasn’t until after-lunch coffee arrived that I realized why Sam had assembled the group. He wanted each to donate presentations on their particular expertise to his organization. The sly fox hadn’t revealed his own What’s in It for Me?

Had Sam been a straight shooter and Big Player, he would have told me on the phone, ‘Leil, I’m getting a group of speakers who might be helpful to my organization together for a Dutch-treat lunch. I will, of course, try to answer your questions about your speaking business, but we will be a group of ten. Would you like to join us, or shall we choose another date when we can have more privacy?’

I would gladly have spoken pro bono for Sam’s group had he been up-front about it. Instead, by not revealing WIIFM, we both lost. I lost a half day and, because of his trickiness, he lost my free speech for his group.





Don’t deny them the pleasure of helping you


Big Winners also lay their cards on the table when asking someone for a favour. Many well-meaning folks are embarrassed to say how important the favour is to them. So they ask as though it’s a casual inquiry when it’s not.

A friend of mine named Stefan once asked me if I knew any bands his organization could hire for their annual event. I told him ‘No, I’m sorry. I really don’t.’ But Stefan didn’t let it go at that. He pressed, ‘Leil, didn’t you once work with bands on ships?’

I told him ‘Yes, but I no longer have contact with them.’ I thought that was the end of it. But Stefan didn’t. He grilled me further and I found myself getting confused and irritated. Finally I said, ‘Stefan, who’s in charge of getting the band?’

He sheepishly said, ‘I am.’

‘Criminy jicketts, Stefan, why didn’t you tell me it was your responsibility? In that case, let me do some research and see if I can find a good one for you.’ I was happy to do my friend a favour. But Stefan, by not telling me how important it was to him, risked not getting help. He also went down a notch or two in his friend’s esteem by not revealing WIIFM.

When asking someone for a favour, let them know how much it means to you. You come across as a straight shooter, and the joy of helping you out is often reward enough. Don’t deny them that pleasure!

Technique 80:

Bare the buried WIIFM

(and WIIFY)

Whenever you suggest a meeting or ask a favour, divulge the respective benefits. Reveal what’s in it for you and what’s in it for the other person – even if it’s zip. If any hidden agenda comes up later, you get labelled a sly fox.





Asking or granting favours is a fabric that holds together only when woven with utmost sensitivity. Let us explore more ways to stitch this delicate cloth so your relationship doesn’t rip.





Let the sun set – and rise again – before you make your move


Susan Evans, one of my clients, heads up a large real estate firm. Once, sitting in her office discussing an upcoming project, her secretary buzzed. ‘Excuse me, Ms Evans, it’s your brother-in-law Harry on the phone.’

‘Oh, of course,’ she smiled, ‘put him on.’ My client, making apologies for the interruption, picked up the phone. I left the room for a few moments to give her privacy.

When I returned, Susan was just hanging up, saying, ‘Sure, have him phone me.’ She told me the call was from her brother-in-law whose young cousin worked in a gas station but was interested in a career in real estate. ‘The young man is going to call me and I’ll see if I can help him out.’ It was obvious she was happy to do her brother-in-law a favour. We picked up our discussion where we left off.

Not four minutes later, the secretary buzzed again. ‘Ms Evans, a Sonny Laker is on the line. He says he’s your brother-in-law Harry’s cousin and he’s supposed to call you.’ My client was taken aback. I could tell from her expression she was saying to herself, ‘Boy, my overanxious brother-in-law didn’t waste any time, did he?’ It seemed obvious to both of us what had happened. Like greased lightning, Harry must have hot-breathedly called Cousin Sonny to give him the big headline: Evans Would See Him! Then, by dialling Ms Evans immediately, Sonny made it seem the big-deal interview was the most important event in his otherwise dull and dismal life.

True or not, one verity remained – Little Cousin was insensitive to an unspoken rule Big Winners always obey: don’t jump immediately when someone is doing you a favour. Allow the person granting the favour time to savour the pleasure of agreeing to it, before having to pay up.

Both brother-in-law and potential employee slipped in Evans’s estimate, and all because of timing. To ensure the kid wouldn’t call his real-estate-mogul sister-in-law too quickly, Harry should have waited a day before telling his cousin the good news. Also, young Sonny should have asked Cousin Harry about Evans’s schedule. Sometimes an immediate call is advantageous, but not when someone is granting you a favour.

Technique 81:

Let ’em savour the favour

Whenever a friend agrees to a favour, allow your generous buddy time to relish the joy of his or her beneficence before you make them pay the piper.

How long? At least twenty-four hours.





One might think Evans was unfair judging Sonny harshly just because he didn’t let her Savour the Favour. It runs deeper than that. Evans’s subconscious thought process goes something like this: ‘If this kid is insensitive to the subtleties of timing when getting a job, how sensitive is he going to be when negotiating the sale of a house?’ One agent’s overanxious call to an owner can mean thousands lost in commissions for the firm.

Big Winners have supernatural vision into your future. They see every communications blunder you make as a visible blotch on your x-ray. It dims your prognosis for being successful in life.

Let’s look at yet another tenuous thread between favour asker and favour grantor that must not be severed lest the relationship unravel.





‘I did it just because i like you’


I once asked a well-connected friend who works in a top Los Angeles talent agency if she knew any celebrities I could contact for a project I was working on. Tania flipped though her Rolodex and came up with just the names I needed. It was obvious to both of us, I owed her big time.

When I thanked her profusely on the phone, Tania said, ‘Oh I’m sure you’ll find a way to pay me back.’

‘Well, of course I will,’ I said. ‘That goes without saying.’ And well it should have gone without saying. She was reminding me the favour wasn’t out of friendship, but because she expected something in return.

Two days later, Tania called and said she was coming to New York in a few months. She was just checking now if I could put her up then. Naturally I could, but blatantly cashing in on the return favour so quickly was not a smooth move. When someone does something nice for you, you find yourself with an elephant’s memory. In fact, you consciously look for ways to return the favour. Had Tania called, even years later, of course I would have remembered ‘I owed her one.’ Frankly, I was glad it came up so quickly so I could even the score. Nevertheless, I do wish the whole barter aspect had been left unspoken. It tarnished what should have been a generous sharing on both sides. Tarnish always wears off on the tarnisher.

When you do someone a favour and they obviously ‘owe you one,’ wait a few weeks. Don’t make it look like tit for tat. Allow the favour asker the pleasurable myth that you joyfully did the favour with no thought of what you’re going to get in return. They know that’s not true. You know that’s not true. But only little losers make it obvious.

Technique 82:

Tit for (wait … wait) tat

When people do you favours and it’s obvious ‘they owe you one,’ wait a suitable amount of time before asking them to ‘pay.’ Let them enjoy the fact (or fiction) that you did it out of friendship. Don’t call in your tit for their tat too swiftly.





The next three techniques also involve timing, not of favours, but of important discussions.





The first of three safe havens


When police were hot on the tail of a thief in ancient times, he’d frantically seek a church to duck into. The crook knew if he could get to an altar, the frustrated posse could not arrest him until he came out.

When a pack of wolves in the jungle is in hot pursuit of a jackrabbit, the frightened bunny’s eyes seek a hollow log. He knows the wolves can’t devour him until he emerges.

Likewise in the human jungle, Big Cats have certain safe havens. Although unspoken, they are as secure as the tenth-century altar or a hole in the log. There are clearly understood times and places where even the toughest tiger knows he must not attack.

I have a friend, Kirstin, the president of an advertising agency who each year invites me to her company’s Christmas party. One year, the holiday spirit was in extra-high swing. Conviviality was high and champagne flowed freely. It was a terrific bash.

The evening wore on, more bubbly flowed, and the decibel level of the holiday revellers went up and up. So high, in fact, that Kirstin told me she was going to tiptoe out the back door and offered to drop me off at my place.

As we were making our way toward the exit, we heard a woozy voice in the crowd, ‘Oh Kirrr-stin, Kirrr-stin!’ A mail-room worker, warped with too much seasonal spirit, wobbled up to her boss and said, ‘You know, thish ish a great party, a grr-reat party. But I been doin’ some figuring. If half what it cost went into a child-care facility for the seven, count ’em, seven mothers with pre-school children who work here …’

Kirstin, a Top Communicator, took Jane’s hands in hers and gave her a big smile. She said, ‘Jane, you’re obviously excellent at maths. You’re right, just about half of what this party cost would indeed pay for the opening of such a facility. Let’s talk about it during business hours.’ We then made a swift departure.

On the way back to my place, she let out a big breath and said, ‘Whew, I’m glad that’s over.’

‘Didn’t you enjoy the party, Kirstin?’ I asked.

‘Well, sure,’ she said, ‘But you never know what’s going to happen. For instance,’ she said, ‘that remark Jane made.’ She went on to explain management had already had several meetings about opening a child-care facility for employees. In fact, plans for turning an unused storage area into a beautiful nursery were already in the works. Naively, I asked Kirstin why she hadn’t mentioned that to Jane.

‘It wasn’t the right time or place.’ Kirstin had handled the situation at the party the way any Big Winner would – no spoken confrontation now (but probable silent condemnation later).

Jane, unfortunately, had broken the first unspoken safe-haven rule, Parties Are for Pratter. Did Kirstin chastise Jane? Did she punish her inappropriate behaviour? Not then, of course. Nevertheless, Jane would probably feel the repercussions a few months down the pike when it came to promotion time. But by then poor Jane wouldn’t even know why she was passed over.

Will it be because of a one-time over-imbibing? Jane might grumble, ‘Yes.’ Jane is wrong. It’s simply that Big Players can’t take the chance that one of their key people will feel too much holiday spirit at another party, and next time confront an important client.

Technique 83:

Parties are for pratter

There are three sacred safe havens in the human jungle where even the toughest tiger knows he must not attack. The first of these is parties.

Parties are for pleasantries and good fellowship, not for confrontations. Big Players, even when standing next to their enemies at the buffet table, smile and nod. They leave tough talk for tougher settings.





Let’s move to the second safe haven where Big Cats can escape the claws of Bigger Cats and, they hope, the growls of lesser ones.





Tough negotiating can kill your appetite


Did you ever wonder why business lunches between Big Bosses go on interminably long, sometimes well into the afternoon? Did you ever suspect it’s just because they like to sit, drink, and massage each other on the company expense account? Perhaps there’s an element of that. But the main reason is because the dining table is an even more sacred safe haven than a party. Big Boys and Girls realize, whether it’s a business dinner, lunch, or breakfast, breaking bread together is a time when they must discuss no unpleasant aspects of the business.

Let’s listen in on an average business lunch between Big Players. We hear the clanking of glasses as they consume drinks over convivial conversation. They are discussing golf, the weather, and making general observations about the state of the business. During the main course, the discourse turns to food, the arts, current affairs, and other nonthreatening subjects.

‘Wasted time?’ one might ask. Not at all! The Big Players are watching each other’s moves very carefully, calculating each other’s skills, knowledge, prowess. Like NFL scouts observing college football practice, they’re determining who’s got the right stuff. Big Players know how people handle themselves at a social occasion is an accurate barometer of their big-business muscle. As they are smiling and laughing at each other’s jokes, they are all making silent critical judgments.

Finally, coffee arrives. At this point one or more of the biggies gently broaches the business at hand. Naturally, he or she does it with supposed reluctance, trying to repress the obvious relief that at last they can get down to significant stuff. He exudes, ‘What a shame such genial company should have to concern itself with mundane matters like making money.’

Only after they have played out this crucial charade can they discuss business. But no dirty business. The Biggies can brainstorm over coffee. They can discuss proposals over dessert. They can toss around new ideas over cordials. They can explore the positive side of the merger, the acquisition, or the partnership while waiting for the cheque.

However, should any disagreement, misunderstanding, or controversial aspect arise, they must immediately relegate it to another table, the conference table.

Technique 84:

Dinner’s for dining

The most guarded safe haven respected by Big Winners is the dining table. Breaking bread together is a time when they bring up no unpleasant matters. While eating, they know it’s OK to brainstorm and discuss the positive side of the business: their dreams, their desires, their designs. They can free associate and come up with new ideas. But no tough business.

This convention probably arose out of a prudent agreement not to inflict indigestion on each other. Tough negotiating is unpalatable and can ruin an otherwise perfectly mouthwatering veal chop.





Incidentally, the same rule applies in the social jungle. If one partner in a friendship or a love relationship has some heavy relationship issues to discuss, save them for after dessert. Even if you don’t solve the problem, you want to enjoy the delicious chocolate soufflé.

Let’s crawl into our third and final safe haven to explore it.





‘Ahha, I’ve got you now!’


William, who sells widgets, has been trying to get Big Winner on the phone for weeks to see if B.W.’s company will buy his line of widgets. Big Winner is still considering Willie’s widgets and plans eventually to return his call. However, at this point in our story, our little hero’s phone has not rung.

It just so happens, one evening Willie finds himself standing behind Big Winner in the supermarket line.

‘What good fortune!’ thinks Willie.

‘Oh hell! ’ thinks Big Winner. ‘I hope he’s not going to hit me with talk of his widgets at this hour.’

Those who appreciate safe havens know there are two very different endings to this story. The Willie who brings up widgets with an ‘Aha, I’ve got you now’ gleam in his eye, never gets his call returned. Even if Big Winner preferred Willie’s widgets above all others, he would find the supermarket entrapment sufficiently painful to punish the little loser.

However, the Willie who just says ‘Hello there, B.W. How good to see you,’ with nary a word of widgets, shows he’s a Big Player, too. This Willie will most certainly get his call returned – probably the next day – out of Big Winner’s relief and gratitude for Willie’s graciousness.

Technique 85:

Chance encounters are for

chitchat

If you’re selling, negotiating, or in any sensitive communication with someone, do NOT capitalize on a chance meeting. Keep the melody of your mistaken meeting sweet and light. Otherwise, it could turn into your swan song with Big Player.





Consistently create safe havens for people if you want them to elevate you to the status of Big Winner. You may find yourself dining with them, going to parties with them, getting big hellos in the hall, and closing deals much faster than during business hours. Who knows? If it’s your desire, you even make yourself eligible for some heavy socializing at the top. Big Winners make it safe for each other to accept invitations to play golf, spend the weekend in their country homes, or relax by each other’s pools. They know there will be no sharks swimming in the water, no razor blades buried in the shrimp cocktail.





‘Tell me about your cracked skull later. What’s your insurance number?’


Once night, several years ago on a New York City street, I caught a man trying to break into a car. I shouted for him to stop. Instead of being content with escaping, the burly would-be burglar decided to retaliate. As he raced past me, he shoved me down onto the cement and I cracked my skull against the kerb.

Dizzily, I wobbled into the emergency room of a nearby hospital. Holding an ice pack against my throbbing head, I was grilled by the emergency room triage nurse on my address, telephone, and social security numbers, insurance carrier, policy number, ad nauseam.

Don’t bother me with that minutia! All I wanted to do was tell somebody, anybody, what happened to me. It wasn’t until the very end of her ruthless and sadistic interrogation that she asked, ‘So what happened?’

I later told my sad story to a friend, Sue, a nurse who works in admitting in another emergency room. She said, ‘I know. I can’t believe they print the forms that way. Injured people don’t get to tell what happened to them until the last line of the form. Sue said getting crucial numerical details from people suffering in the A & E with broken bones and burns was a real challenge. Until, she said, she switched her questioning around. She’d first ask them what happened. They’d tell her all about it. She’d listen sympathetically. ‘Then,’ she said, ‘they were only too happy to give me the information I needed.’

Good bosses understand this human need to talk. Robert, a colleague of mine who owns a small manufacturing firm, says whenever one of his employees complains about a problem, he never holds the griper’s feet to the fire for facts first. He hears the employee out completely. He lets him carry on about the cantankerous customer, the uncooperative co-worker. ‘Then, after he’s gotten it off his chest,’ Robert says, ‘I get the facts a lot more clearly.’





When you have important information to impart


Any kid working in a garage knows you can’t pump more gas into a full tank. Too much topping it off, and it splashes onto the cement. Likewise, your listener’s brain is always full of his or her own thoughts, worries and enthusiasms. If you pump your ideas into your listener’s brain, which is full of her own notions, you’ll get a polluted mixture, then a spill. If you want your supersupreme ideas to flow into her tank unpolluted, drain her tank completely first.

Whenever you are discussing emotionally charged matters, let the speaker finish completely before you jump in. Count to ten if you must. It will seem like an eternity, but letting the flustered fellow finish is the only way he’ll hear you when it’s your turn.

Technique 86:

Empty their tanks

If you need information, let people have their entire say first. Wait patiently until their needle is on empty and the last drop drips out and splashes on the cement. It’s the only way to be sure their tank is empty enough of their own inner noise to start receiving your ideas.





‘I’m going to make you miserable before you can enjoy being my customer’


Companies that run mail-order operations could take a hint from this technique. One reason I enjoy ordering from L.L. Bean, a mail-order clothing and sports-equipment outfit, is they let me ask questions about the wearable or widget I want first. They let me ramble on with my questions about the quality, the available colours, how it looks, how it feels, how it smells, and how it works. Then, when I’m all whacked up about receiving my four size-ten, red-and-chartreuse, soft, odourless widgets, they tastefully ask my credit card number.

Other companies have first grilled me on the number, the expiration date, my customer number (which I can never find on the back of the catalogue), and how often I’ve ordered from them in the past before I even get to fantasize about the wonderful widget I might want to buy from them. Takes all the joy out of the purchase and sometimes kills the sale.

Top Communicators do more than just let you babble on. They use the next technique while you’re in the process of dribbling down.





Hear the facts, but smear the EMO


EMO is a word invented by Helen Gurley Brown, the grand dame of Cosmopolitan magazine. EMO translated is ‘Give more emotion!’ Once Cosmopolitan asked me to write an article on communicating sensitive matters (most specifically advising young women on how to make their boyfriends more passionate). I interviewed a number of psychologists, communications experts, and sexologists. My draft came back from Cosmo all marked up with ‘MORE EMO’ scribbled on every page.

I called my editor and asked what it meant. She said that was Helen’s way of saying downplay all that factual stuff with the sex therapists and so-called experts. Write about the emotion the young woman feels when her boyfriend isn’t passionate enough, the emotion the accused male feels when confronted, and the emotion the couple feels about discussing their quandary. Helen Gurley Brown, a certified Big Winner, liked to have it all and knew just how to get it. Helen recognized, when the time is right, reject the rational and empathize with the emotions. In other words, smear on the EMO.





‘Oh, no! He must have been mortified!’


L. L. Bean recently smeared EMO all over me. Several months ago, my friend Phil wanted to buy some trousers and asked for a recommendation. I dragged him to my closet to show him the quality and construction of the L. L. Bean clothes. That convinced him, and Phil ordered a pair of navy-blue dress trousers.

Phil wore his brand new L. L. Bean trousers for the first time on a big date with a new girlfriend at an elegant restaurant. While following the maitre d’ to the cosy corner booth which he’d requested, his date happened to drop her evening bag. Phil promptly bent over to pick it up. Riiiiiiip! Right down the middle seam.

Most of the diners facing Phil’s derriere mercifully looked away. A few tittered. Phil, tugging the torn seams together to blanket his buns, backed his way into the booth. The cool upholstery on his bottom the rest of the evening reminded him of his humiliation.

When I heard of Phil’s tribulations, I was furious at L. L. Bean. I immediately called one of their customer service agents. She sympathized as I told her of Phil’s ordeal, but I was still simmering. She patiently listened and even asked me details of the disaster. When I finished the long sad story, the agent said, ‘Oh that’s terrible. I understand, your friend must have felt awful.’

‘Yes, he did,’ I agreed.

‘He must have been mortified!’ she said.

‘He definitely was,’ I said, surprised at her excellent grasp of the situation.

‘And you, when you heard about it. You must have felt terrible, too, especially after you’d recommended our products so highly.’

‘Well, your products usually are excellent,’ I said, calming down a bit.

‘I’m so sorry we caused you this pain and aggravation,’ she said.

‘Oh,’ I interrupted. ‘It’s not your fault.’ Now I was completely appeased. ‘It must have just been a fluke that this one pair of trousers was …’

Technique 87:

Echo the EMO

Facts speak. Emotions shout. Whenever you need facts from people about an emotional situation, let them emote. Hear their facts but empathize like mad with their emotions. Smearing on the EMO is often the only way to calm their emotional storm.





There’s more to this story, but let me pause here to interject the Echo the EMO technique.

The clever customer service rep not only Emptied My Tanks and softened me up with Echo the EMO. She completely dissolved me with the next technique.





Make ’em happy you messed up


The next day, UPS delivered not only the replacement slacks, but tucked into the package was a handwritten apology and a hefty gift certificate. Would I order from that company again? You bet I would. Would I recommend their clothes to someone else? You bet I would. Top customer service folks welcome mistakes because they know it gives their firm a chance to shine. Whenever you mess up and someone suffers because of it, make sure they come out ahead, way ahead. I call the technique My Goof, Your Gain.

Visiting an important client’s office, I once tripped on a rug and took a nose dive, making a three-point landing in a vase on her desk. My nose was spared but her vase shattered into smithereens. Two tubes of crazy glue and lots of ‘Where the heck does this piece go’ later, the vase was back on her desk, and we agreed it looked pretty good. Nevertheless, the next day I had a messenger deliver a beautiful vase, ten times the value of the almost-totalled one, with a dozen roses in it.

Whenever we speak, my client tells me every time she looks at the new vase, she smiles. (A better ‘incentive gift’ than a pen with your name on it, no?) The next time I visit her office, my client may hide some of her more valuable breakables. But, thanks to My Goof, Your Gain, there will be a next time.

Technique 88:

My goof, your gain

Whenever you make a mistake, make sure your victim benefits. It’s not enough to correct your error. Ask yourself, ‘What could I do for this suffering soul so he or she will be delighted I made the flub?’ Then do it, fast! In that way, your goof will become your gain.





Now, suppose it’s not your boo boo. It’s theirs. How can you make their goof your gain? Read on.





A genteel way to say, ‘freeze, punk, while I frisk you’


In Japan, some citizens prefer to lose their lives than to lose face. In America, the same death wish exists, with one modification. The Yank dreams of the death of the mortal who made him lose face.

Why make enemies? Unless it is your obligation to catch cheaters or entrap liars, let them get away with it. Then immediately get them out of your life and the lives you’re responsible for. Even when the case is open and shut against someone – when you’ve got the rat fink trapped – leave him an escape hatch.

The best example I heard of this high sensitivity was from one of my clients. She was invited to brunch at the home of a wealthy socialite known as ‘Lady Stephanie.’ Lady Stephanie’s home was filled with beautiful objets d’art. Not the least among them was an exquisite collection of extremely valuable Fabergé eggs, which all the guests admired.

At the end of the elegant champagne brunch, my client told me she was walking out the door chatting with several other guests. Just then, Lady Stephanie sidled up to one woman leaving at the same time as my client. ‘Oh, I’m so happy you were admiring my Fabergé collection,’ Lady Stephanie said, sliding her hand into the pocket of the guest’s mink coat and plucking out one of her priceless eggs. ‘You must have wanted to see this one in the sunlight. Come, let us look at it together. It does reflect the bright light beautifully.’

The mink-clad thief gulped and furtively looked around to see who had witnessed her gentle entrapment. My client and everyone in the foyer saw what happened, but took Lady Stephanie’s lead and pretended naïveté of the attempted heist.

Carrying the charade a step further, Lady Stephanie and the sticky-fingered guest ‘admired the egg in the sunlight’. Then Lady Stephanie, with her Fabergé egg secured safely between her perfectly manicured fingers, marched home to put the treasure in its rightful place. The attempted egg snatcher crawled back to her car, from her last attendance at Lady Stephanie’s coveted bashes. The hostess let the foiled filcher get away with a few slivered shreds of her ego left intact.

Why did Lady Stephanie come out ahead? Everyone who witnessed – and subsequently heard about – the thwarted burglary has renewed respect for Lady Stephanie. Snaring the thief, yet sparing her pride, helped Lady Stephanie keep her reputation of ‘hostess with the mostest’.

Why do Big Winners let bad-news people get away with bummers? Because, like mothers confronting naughty children to correct them, confronting creeps is a way of saying ‘I care.’ By closing your mouth (and then the door forever), you are saying, ‘You are so beneath me I’m not going to even waste my words on you.’





‘Mea culpa!’


Big Winners leave an escape hatch for the small foibles of friends they wish to keep by taking the blame themselves. If a friend gets lost and is an hour late arriving at your house, tell her ‘Those directions I gave you were terrible.’ He breaks your Limoges bowl? ‘Oh I shouldn’t have left it in such a precarious position.’ It’s the old mea culpa routine that endears you to everyone, especially when they realize it wasn’t your fault.

Technique 89:

Leave an escape hatch

Whenever you catch someone lying, filching, exaggerating, distorting, or deceiving, don’t confront the dirty duck directly. Unless it is your responsibility to catch or correct the culprit – or unless you are saving other innocent victims by doing so – let the transgressor out of your trap with his tricky puss in one piece. Then resolve never to gaze upon it again.





Residents of Toronto, Canada, have a well-earned reputation for grace. They demonstrated it last year in a downtown Toronto drug-store. A shopper attempted to stroll out through the security system with a purloined object in his pocket. Instead of a shrill alarm shattering all shoppers’ eardrums, as in many American cities, a tasteful little chime sounded. A charming voice came across the public address. ‘Excuse us, we have failed to inactivate the inventory control system. Thank you for your patience while you wait for a customer care representative to come help you.’ Isn’t that a nicer way of saying ‘Freeze, punk, while we come frisk you?’

Now let’s move on to the next technique to keep people from messing up – and to help them give you their very best.





‘You’re great! What’s your boss’s name?’


A complimentary letter is called a buttercup because it butters up the recipient. Buttercups are nice. Even nicer are buttercups about someone to their boss.

I once needed a massive photocopying job. It was so immense that the assistant manager of Staples office-supply store didn’t think it could be finished by the end of the week. Nevertheless, grudgingly, he grumbled, ‘I’ll try.’ In my enthusiasm and hope he could, I gushed, ‘Wow, you’re great! What’s your boss’s name? Your supervisor should get a letter of congratulations on hiring you. You really try harder for your customers.’ To my astonishment, not only was my printing job done two days early, but every time I walk into Staples, the assistant manager rolls out the red carpet.

‘Hmm,’ I began to think. ‘I may be on to something.’ A premature letter of commendation for favours not yet received could be a clever tactic. I decided to check it out with a few Heavy Hitters on my consultation list.

One fellow I know, Tim, a top travel agent, is a real can-do guy. He gets anything his friends ask for in a finger snap. He’s the fellow to call when you want hard-to-get theatre tickets. He’s the guy you call when your airline says the hotel is booked or the flight is oversold.

When I told him of my buttercup experience, Tim laughed and said, ‘Leil, of course. This is news to you? A complimentary letter to someone’s boss – or the promise of one – is a great insurance policy. It’s as good as a written rider that you will be well taken care of in the future.’

Now I have a standard one in my computer. The buttercup reads as follows:

Dear (name of supervisor),

I know how important customer service is to an organization such as yours. This letter is to commend (name of employee). He/She is an example of an (employee title) who gives exceptional customer service. (Name of store or business) continues to have my business thanks in great part to the service given by (name of employee).

Gratefully, (signature)

I’ve sent this letter to supervisors of parking lots, owners of insurance companies, and to managers of dozens of stores where I shop regularly. I’m sure that’s why I never need to worry about getting a parking place when the lot is full, an immediate callback from my insurance agent, and attentive service at my regular shopping haunts.

But be careful! Don’t just ask, ‘What’s the name of your supervisor?’ Hearing those words can make an employee as nervous as a turkey in November. Be sure to couch it in a compliment. Say something like, ‘Wow, you are terrific. What’s your supervisor’s name? I’d like to write him or her a letter.’ Then write it! You’ll forever be a VIP in their book.

The next technique tells you how to stand out as a VIP when you’re in a group.

Technique 90:

Buttercups for their boss

Do you have a store clerk, accountant, law firm junior partner, tailor, auto mechanic, maitre d’, massage therapist, kid’s teacher – or any other worker you want special attention from in the future? The surefire way to make them care enough to give you their very best is send a Buttercup to their boss.





How to tell a leader from a follower


During the McCarthy era in the US, government spies infiltrated underground political rallies to determine who was ‘dangerous to national security’. The agents were trained applause watchers. They photographed and investigated men who clapped first, shouted ‘Bravo’ the loudest, and smiled the longest at the end of politically inflammatory speeches. The spies dubbed those the ‘dangerous ones.’ The infiltrators felt first responders were Confident Cats who had the power to persuade followers and the charisma to lead crowds.

In less politically sensitive gatherings, the same principle applies. People who respond first to a presentation or happening, without looking around to see how everyone else is reacting, are men and women of leadership calibre.





Cool cats clap first


You are sitting in an auditorium with hundreds of fellow employees listening to the president of your firm introduce a new concept. As you’re slouching anonymously in the audience, you think your expression is invisible to the man or woman at the podium. Not so! As a speaker, I guarantee you every one of my colleagues sees every smile, every frown, every light in every eye, and every emblem of extraordinary human intelligence flashing back at him or her.

Likewise, the company president making a presentation anxiously surveys his corporate jungle and, from the pusses peering back at him, senses which employees are sympathetic and which are not. He also knows which in the sea of faces floating in front of him has the potential to be a Heavy Hitter like himself. How?

Because Heavy Hitters, even when they do not agree with the speaker, support the podium pontificator. Why? Because they know what it’s like to be on. They know, no matter how big or little the cat at the front of the room is, when giving a speech he’s concerned about the crowd’s acceptance.

When the company Big Shot delivers his last line, carefully contrived to bring the crowd to its feet or employees to acquiescence, do you think he’s unaware of who starts the trickle, or the riptide, of acceptance? No way! Though his head is down while taking a bow, with the insight of a McCarthy-era spy, he perceives precisely who inaugurated the applause, precisely how long after the last words were uttered, and precisely how enthusiastically! Being the first to put your hands together, being the first to jump to your feet, and, if appropriate, being the first to shout ‘Bravo,’ gets you Big Cat status with the tiger who was talking.

Be the first clapper no matter how small the crowd, no matter how informal the talk. Don’t wait to see how everyone else is going to respond. Even if it’s a small group of three or four people standing around, be the first to empathize with the speaker’s ideas, the first to mutter ‘good idea’. It’s proof positive you’re a person who trusts his or her own instincts.

Technique 91:

Lead the listeners

No matter how prominent the Big Cat behind the podium is, crouched inside is a little scaredy cat who is anxious about the crowd’s acceptance.

Big Winners recognize you’re a fellow Big Winner when they see you leading their listeners in a positive reaction. Be the first to applaud or publicly commend the man or woman you agree with (or want favours from).





Bottom dog bows lower, barks softer


Any minute, any second, football fans know the score. Even beer-guzzling Big George, dozing in front of the TV set on football Sunday knows. Poke his pudgy pot, and in a wink, he’ll tell you who’s winning, who’s losing, and by precisely how many points.

Key Players in the game of life are like George. Even when you think they’re dozing, they are constantly aware of the score between themselves and everyone in their life – friends and family included! They know who is winning, who is losing, and by how many points.

When two Japanese businessmen meet, it’s obvious who is on top. You measure it in millimetres from how close to the floor their noses come when bowing. (Bottom man’s nose dives lower.)

In America, we don’t have carefully choreographed bows showing the score in a relationship. But Boys ’n’ Girls in the business Big League know who is Top Dog and who is bottom dog today. (It can change tomorrow.)

Bottom dog must curtsy deeper. He or she must show deference. Bottom dog must offer to meet at Top Dog’s office, pick up the restaurant tab when appropriate, and be respectful of Top Dog’s time. If bottom dog fails to show the proper deference, he doesn’t get his nose rubbed into the ground. He simply disqualifies himself to bark in the Big League.

That’s what happened to my girlfriend Laura, who had developed the healthy milkshake. (Remember her from Instant Replay?) When we last left Laura, she was blowing her chances with Fred, the Top Banana of a supermarket chain, by grilling him for details of his mailing address, complaining her pen was out of ink, making him wait while she got another, writing numbers down wrong, ad nauseam.

I didn’t tell you the worst part. After Fred was generous enough to invite Laura to send him samples of her health shake, she dropped another bomb by asking him which shipping service she should use. He must have said FedEx because I heard Laura say, ‘Well, my milkshake needs to stay refrigerated. Does FedEx have refrigerated trucks?’

At this point I knew she had strangled the deal by her own phone chord. She shouldn’t nudge Supermarket Czar with dinky shipping details. In fact, Laura should be so grateful, she should personally deliver the drink the next day – rolling it all the way to his supermarket with her nose if need be. Laura was obviously not aware of the Great Scorecard in the Sky. That day the tally was ‘Fred everything, Laura nothing.’

Big Winners – before putting pen to paper, fingers to keyboard, mouth to phone, or hand to someone else’s to shake it – do a quick calculation. They ask themselves ‘Who has the most to benefit from this relationship? What has each of us done recently that demands deference from the other?’ And what can I do to even the score?





Friends keep tabs too


The Great Scorecard in the Sky is not just bobbing over business-people. If family members and friends look carefully over their loved ones’ heads, they’ll spot it. And, like an over-the-counter stock, it goes up or down every day. When you mess up, you have to even your score by doing more for the one who didn’t. To keep love alive, keep your eye on the Great Scorecard in the Sky.

Several months ago, I met a nice chap named Charles at a convention. We started discussing our favourite foods. His was homemade linguine with pesto sauce. I liked Charles and I make a mean pesto sauce. The remarkable coincidence of these two elements emboldened me to invite him to dinner at my place. ‘Great,’ he said. We set it for seven-thirty the following Tuesday.

Tuesday afternoon, I begin preparations for the big date. The cuckoo clock on the wall monitored my progress. At five cuckoos, I run to the store to find pine nuts. By six cuckoos, I’m back home grinding basil and garlic. At seven cuckoos, I’m folding napkins, setting the table, pulling out fresh candles. Whoops, running late. I change clothes and spruce myself up. When seven-thirty strikes, I am all ready. The pesto and I await his arrival.

Eight o’clock rolls around and no friend. Well, I figure, I’ll open the wine and let it breathe. Another hour passes and no Charles. The cuckoo calls me ‘cuckoo’ nine times now. I begin to believe the bird. It is evident Charles isn’t coming. I have been stood up.

The next day Charles called with halfhearted apologies and a semiplausible excuse. His car broke down. ‘Gee, I’m sorry,’ I said. (I wanted to say, ‘Did Martians capture you? Were you transported to another planet where there were no phones to call me?’ I resisted the sarcasm.) However, he did sound contrite so I was almost willing to forget it. Until his next question.

He obviously wasn’t aware of how he’d slipped in the Great Scorecard in the Sky because, instead of inviting me for linguine with pesto at a fine Italian restaurant to make up for his blooper, he asked, ‘When can we reschedule at your house?’

Never, Charlie.

Technique 92:

The great scorecard in the sky

Any two people have an invisible scorecard hovering above their heads. The numbers continually fluctuate, but one rule remains: player with lower score pays deference to player with higher score. The penalty for not keeping your eye on the Great Scorecard in the Sky is to be thrown out of the game. Permanently.





Also by Leil Lowndes





Tap on the cover to buy now





Tap on the cover to buy now





Tap on the cover to buy now





We’ve met many people in How to Talk to Anyone. A few of their names are changed, but each is very real. Recently, I decided to track down some of the folks with whom I’d crossed paths over the years. I wanted to see what they’re up to now.

Laura, my old friend who dreamed of milkshake millions but ignored the Supermarket Czar’s scorecard, is now back at her day job. Sam, who ruffled me by not revealing he wanted me to speak for his organization, no longer has one. Sonny, who hounded his brother-in-law’s cousin by a too-quick call, is still pumping gas. Tania, who insisted on immediate tit for tat, no longer has that terrific job at the talent agency. Poor Jane, the mail-room clerk who confronted her boss at the Christmas party five years ago, is still wrapping packages. And Dan, who left the prolonged inspirational message on his phone, now has an unlisted number – not a good sign for an aspiring speaker.

Whereas Barry who asks everyone he calls, ‘What Colour Is Your Time? ’ was recently chosen Broadcaster of the Year by the National Association of Talk Show Hosts. Joe, who keeps note of everyone on his Business Card Dossier, is now a state senator. Jimmi, the expert at Eyeball Selling, was recently written up in Success magazine. Steve, whose staff insinuates Oh Wow, It’s You! to every caller, is one of the most requested speakers on the cable circuit. Tim, the can-do guy who gets what he wants from workers in every industry by writing Buttercups for Their Boss, now owns the travel agency. And Gloria, my hairdresser who gives the great Nutshell Resume, recently opened a salon on New York’s fashionable Fifth Avenue.

Does this mean to say that just because the first folks irked me and a few others they were exiled to a humdrum existence? And the latter group who made people smile would attain great heights? Of course not. Those isolated moments of their lives we examined were but one move of many they made each day.

But consider: if you had been the one who was ruffled by Laura, Sam, Sonny, Tania, Jane, or Dan and they called you, would you feel like extending yourself for them? Probably not. The memory of their ragged dealing would still smart.

Whereas if you heard from Barry, Joe, Jimmi, Steve, Tim, or Gloria, happy memories of your exchange would flood over you. You’d want to do whatever you could for them.

Multiply your response by many thousands. As we said in the introduction, nobody gets to the top alone. Over the years, the smooth moves of these Big Winners have captured the hearts and conquered the minds of hundreds of people who helped boost them rung by rung to the top of whatever ladder they chose.

How does one become an instinctive smooth mover rather than a ragged rider through life? The answer became blindingly clear one snowy day last winter. Lumbering along a neatly groomed track on cross-country skis, I spotted a Nordic skier swiftly striding toward me in the same trail. I didn’t need to observe his high kick or his snazzy diagonal poling to let me know I was obstructing the path of a pro.

While mustering the energy to lug my throbbing legs out of the track so Super Skier could soar past, he deftly sidestepped out of the groove, leaving the groomed trail all for me. As he whizzed toward me, he slowed slightly, smiled, nodded, and said, ‘Good morning, beautiful day for skiing, isn’t it?’

I appreciated his deference (and insinuation that we were equals on the snow!). I knew he was not thinking ‘Hey look at me. Here I am!’ but ‘Ahh, there you are. Let me make room for you.’

As I implied in the opening words of this book, the difference in the life success between those two types of thinkers is incalculable.

Why was Super Skier able to pull off his move so gracefully? Was he born with the skill? No. His was a deliberate move that grew out of practice.

Practice is also the fountainhead of all smooth communications moves. Excellence is not a single and solitary action. It is the outcome of many years of making small smooth moves, tiny ones like the 92 little tricks we’ve explored in How to Talk to Anyone. These moves create your destiny.

Remember, repeating an action makes a habit.

Your habits create your character.

And your character is your destiny.

May success be your destiny.





1. Ekman, Paul. 1985. Telling Lies: Clues to Deceit in the Marketplace, Politics, and Marriage. New York: W. W. Norton Co., Inc.

2. Cheng, Sha, et al. 1990. ‘Effects of Personality Type on Stress Response.’ Acta-Psychologica-Sinica 22(2):197–204.

3. Carnegie, Dale. 1936. How to Win Friends and Influence People. New York: Simon & Schuster.

4. Goleman, Daniel. 1989. ‘Brain’s Design Emerges as a Key to Emotions,’ quoting Dr. Joseph LeDoux, psychologist at Center for Neural Science at New York University. New York Times, August 15.

5. Kellerman, Joan, et al. 1989. ‘Looking and Loving: The Effects of Mutual Gaze on Feelings of Romantic Love.’ Conducted at the Agoraphobia Treatment & Research Center of New England. Journal of Research in Personality 23(2):145–161.

6. Argyle, Michael. 1967. The Psychology of Interpersonal Behavior. Baltimore: Pelican Publications.

7. Wellens, A. Rodney. 1987. ‘Heart-Rate Changes in Response to Shifts in Interpersonal Gaze from Liked and Disliked Others.’ Perceptual and Motor Skills 64(2):595–598.

8. Ibid.

9. Zig Ziglar, motivational teacher and author of the best-selling books See You at the Top, Secrets of Closing the Sale, Over the Top, and Something to Smile About.

10. Curtis, Rebecca C., and Miller, Kim. 1986. ‘Believing Another Likes or Dislikes You: Behaviors Making the Beliefs Come True.’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 51(2):284–290.

11. Hayakawa, S. I. 1941. Language in Thought and Action. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

12. Aronson, E., et al. 1966. ‘The Effect of a Pratfall on Increasing Interpersonal Attractiveness.’ Psychonomic Science 4:227–228.

13. Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching and Carnegie Institute of Technology studies in the 1930s showing that 85 percent of one’s financial success, even in technical fields such as engineering, is due to communications skills.

14. U.S. Census Bureau of Hiring, Training, and Management Practices conducted a survey of 3,000 employers nationwide. The preferred qualities in job candidates were, rated in order of importance, attitude, communications skills, previous work experience, recommendations from current employer, recommendations from previous employer, industry-based credentials, years of schooling completed, score on interview tests, academic performance (grades), reputation of applicant’s school, teacher recommendations.

15. Walsh, Debra G., and Hewitt, Jay. 1985. ‘Giving Men the Come-on: Effect of Eye Contact and Smiling in a Bar Environment.’ Perceptual and Motor Skills 61(3, Part 1):873–874.

16. Walters, Lilly. 1995. What to Say When You’re Dying on the Platform. New York: McGraw-Hill

17. Axtell, Roger. 1994. Do’s and Taboos Around the World. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

18. Bosrock, Mary. 1997. Put Your Best Foot Forward series. Minneapolis: International Education Systems.

19. Nwanna, Gladson. 1998. Do’s and Don’ts Around the World series. Baltimore: World Travel Institute.

20. Byrne, Donn, et al. 1970. ‘Continuity Between the Experimental Study of Attraction and Real-Life Computer Dating.’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1:157–165.

21. Fast, Julius. 1970. Body Language. New York: Simon & Schuster.

22. Fast, Julius. 1991. Subtext: Making Body Language Work in the Workplace. New York: Viking.

23. Lewis, David. 1989. The Secret Language of Success. New York: Carroll & Graf Publishers Inc.

24. Nierenberg, Gerard, and Caliero, Henry. 1993. How to Read a Person Like a Book. New York: Barnes & Noble Books.

25. Pease, Allan. 1981. Signals: How to Use Body Language for Power, Success and Love. New York: Bantam Books.

26. Sannito, Thomas, and McGovern, Peter J., 1985. Courtroom Psychology for Trial Lawyers. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.





Books


Alessandra, Tony, and Michael J. O’Connor. The Platinum Rule. New York: Warner Books, Inc., 1996.

Apte, Mahadev. Humor and Laughter: An Anthropological Approach. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1985.

Argyle, Michael. The Psychology of Interpersonal Behavior. Baltimore: Pelican Publications, 1967.

Bandler, Richard, and John Grinder. Frogs into Princes: Neurolinguistic Programming. Moab, Utah: Real People Press, 1979.

Bellack, L., and S. Baker. Reading Faces. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1981.

Berscheid, E., and E. H. Walster. Interpersonal Attraction. 2nd ed. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1978.

Bolton, Robert. People Skills. New York: Simon & Schuster, Inc., 1979.

Booher, Dianna. Communicate with Confidence! New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994.

Brooks, Michael. Instant Rapport. New York: Warner Books, 1989.

Brown, Les. It’s Not Over Until You Win! New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997.

Burg, Bob. Endless Referrals. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994.

Carnegie, Dale. How to Win Friends and Influence People. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1936.

Cundiff, Merlyn. Kinesics: The Power of Silent Command. New York: Parker Publishing Co., 1972.

Ekman, Paul. Telling Lies: Clues to Deceit in the Marketplace, Politics, and Marriage. New York: W. W. Norton Co., 1985.

Erickson, M. H., et al. Hypnotic Realities. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1976.

Evatt, Chris. He & She: 60 Significant Differences Between Men and Women. Berkeley, Calif.: Conari Press, 1992.

Farber, Barry. Making People Talk. New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc., 1987.

Fast, Julius. Body Language. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1970.

Fiedler, F. A Theory of Leadership Effectiveness. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967.

Friedman, Nancy J. Telephone Skills from A to Z. Menlo Park, Calif.: Crisp Publications, 1995.

Gabor, Don. How to Start a Conversation and Make Friends. New York: Fireside, 1983.

Glass, Lillian. He Says, She Says. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1992.

Goffman, E. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: Doubleday, 1959.

Gray, John. Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus. New York: Harper Collins Publishers, 1992.

Hayakawa, S. I. Language in Thought and Action. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1941.

Hess, Eckhard. The Tell-Tale Eye. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1975.

Lavington, Camille. You’ve Only Got Three Seconds. New York: Doubleday, 1997.

LeBoeuf, Michael. How to Win Customers and Keep Them for Life. New York: The Berkley Publishing Group, 1987.

Lewis, David. The Secret Language of Success. New York: Carroll & Graf Publishers, Inc., 1993.

Lowndes, Leil. How to Make Anyone Fall in Love with You. Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1996.

Lowndes, Leil. How to Talk to Anyone. New York: Citadel, 1993, revised 1996.

Lowndes, Leil. Shopping the Insider’s Way. New York: Citadel, 1985.

Mackay, Harvey. Dig Your Well Before You’re Thirsty. New York: Doubleday, 1997.

Mackay, Harvey. Swim with the Sharks Without Being Eaten Alive. New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1988.

Martinet, Jeanne. The Art of Mingling. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992.

Mehrabian, A. Nonverbal Communications. Chicago: Aldine, 1972.

Meyer, Paul J. The Art of Creative Listening. Waco, Tex.: Paul J. Meyer, 1980.

Michael, Gary. It Gives Me Great Pleasure. New York: Citadel, 1996.

Morris, Desmond. The Naked Ape. New York: McGraw Hill, 1967.

Nierenberg, Gerard, and Henry Callero. Meta-Talk: Guide to Hidden Meanings in Conversations. New York: Trident Press, 1973.

O’Barr, W., and B. K. Atkins. ‘Women’s Language or Powerless Language?’ in Women and Language in Literature and Society. New York: Prager, 1981.

Pease, Allan. Signals: How to Use Body Language for Power, Success and Love. New York: Bantam Books, 1981.

Perper, Timothy. Sex Signals: The Biology of Love. Philadelphia: ISI Press, 1985.

Qubein, Nido. How to Be a Great Communicator. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1996.

Rabin, Susan. How to Attract Anyone, Anytime, Anyplace. New York: Penguin Books, 1993.

Rackham, Neil. Spin Selling. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1988.

Richardson, Linda. Stop Telling, Start Selling. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994.

Roane, Susan. How to Work a Room. New York: Warner Books, 1989.

Sannito, Thomas, and Peter J. McGovern. Courtroom Psychology for Trial Lawyers. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1985.

Slutsky, Jeff, and Michael An. The Toastmaster’s International Guide to Successful Speaking. Chicago: Dearborn, 1997.

Tannen, Deborah. Conversational Style: Analyzing Talk Among Friends. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1984.

Tannen, Deborah. You Just Don’t Understand. New York: William Morrow and Co., 1990.

Thibaut, J. W., and H. H. Kelley. The Social Psychology of Groups. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1959.

Walters, Barbara. How to Talk to Practically Anybody About Practically Anything. New York: Doubleday, 1970.

Walters, Lilly. What to Say When You’re Dying on the Platform. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995.

Ziglar, Zig. Ziglar on Selling. New York: Ballantine Books, 1991.

Zimmerman, Don H., and Candace West. ‘Sex Roles, Interruptions and Silences in Conversation.’ Language and Sex: Difference and Dominance, 105–129. Edited by Barrie Thorne and Nancy Henley. Rowley, Mass.: Newbury House, 1975.





Studies, papers, commentary in professional journals


Adger, Carolyn. ‘Empowering Talk: African-American Teachers and Classroom Discourse.’ Paper presented at the 1993 annual meeting of the American Education Research Association, Atlanta, 1993.

Anderson, N. H. ‘Ratings of Likableness, Meaningfulness, and Likableness Variances for 555 Common Personality Traits Arranged in Order of Decreasing Likableness.’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1968, 9:272–279.

Aronson, E., et al. ‘The Effect of a Pratfall on Increasing Interpersonal Attractiveness,’ Psychonomic Science, 1966, 4:227–228.

Backman, C. W., and P. F. Secord. ‘The Effect of Perceived Liking on Interpersonal Attraction.’ Human Relations, 1959, 12:379–384.

Bem, D. J. ‘Self Perception Theory.’ Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 1972, 6:1–62.

Bennett, Adrian. ‘Interruptions and the Interpretation of Conversation.’ Discourse Processes, 1981, 4/2:181–188.

Brown, Roger, and Albert Gilman. ‘The Pronouns of Power and Solidarity.’ Style in Language, 1960. Edited by Thomas Sebeok. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Byrne, D., and D. Nelson. ‘Attraction as Linear Function of Proportion of Positive Reinforcements.’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1965, 1:659–663.

Cheng, Sha, et al. ‘Effects of Personality Type on Stress Response.’ Acta-Psychologica-Sinica, 1990, 22(2):197–204.

Cook, Mark. ‘Gaze and Mutual Gaze in Social Encounters.’ American Scientist, 1977, 65:328–333.

Costanzo, F. S., et al. ‘Voice Quality Profile and Perceived Emotion.’ Journal of Counseling Psychology, 1969, 16:27–30.

Curtis, Rebecca C., and Kim Miller. ‘Believing Another Likes or Dislikes You: Behaviors Making the Beliefs Come True.’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1986, 51(2):284–290.

Day, M. E. ‘Eye Movement Phenomenon Relating to Attention, Thought, and Anxiety.’ Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1964, 19:443–446.

Dion, K., et al. ‘What Is Beautiful Is Good.’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1972, 24:285–290.

Eckman, P., and W. Freisen. ‘Detecting Deception from the Body or Face.’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1974, 29(3):294.

Eckman, P., and W. Freisen. ‘Nonverbal Leakage and Clues to Deceptions.’ Psychiatry, 1969, 32:99.

Efran, J. ‘Looking for Approval Effects on Visual Behavior of Approbation from Persons Differing in Importance.’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1968, 10:21–25.

Efran, M. G. ‘The Effect of Physical Appearance on the Judgment of Guilt, Interpersonal Attraction, and Severity of Recommended Punishment in a Simulated Jury Task.’ Journal of Personality, 1974, 8:45–54.

Goguen, J. A., and C. Linde. ‘Linguistic Methodology for the Analysis of Aviation Accidents.’ Report by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Scientific and Technical Information Branch, 1983.

Griffitt, W., and R. Veitch. ‘Hot and Crowded: Influence of Population Density and Temperature on Interpersonal Affective Behavior.’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1971, 17:92–98.

Griffitt, W., and T. Jackson. ‘The Influence of Ability and Nonability Information on Personnel Selection Decisions.’ Psychological Reports, 1970, 27:959–962.

Haase, R., and D. Tepper. ‘Nonverbal Components of Empathetic Communication.’ Journal of Counseling Psychology, 1972, 19:417–424.

Kellerman, Joan, et al. ‘Looking and Loving: The Effects of Mutual Gaze on Feelings of Romantic Love.’ Conducted at the Agoraphobia Treatment & Research Center of New England. Journal of Research in Personality, 1989, 23(2):145–161.

Kleinke, C., et al. ‘Effects of Gaze, Touch and Use of Name on Evaluations of Engaged Couples.’ Journal of Research in Personality, 1972, 7:368–373.

Major, Brenda, et al. ‘Physical Attractiveness and Self Esteem: Attributions for Praise from an Other Sex Evaluator.’ Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 1984, 10(1):43–50.

Maslow, A. H., and N. L. Mintz. ‘Effects of Aesthetic Surroundings.’ Journal of Psychology, 1956, 41:247–254.

Richards, J. Heuer, Jr. ‘Cognitive Factors in Deception and Counter Deception.’ Strategic Military Deception, 1982. Edited by Donald C. Daniel and Katherine L. Herbig. New York: Pergamon Press.

Secord, Paul F. ‘Facial Features and Inference Processes in Interpersonal Perception.’ Personal Perception and Interpersonal Behavior, 1958. Edited by R. Taguiri and L. Petrullo. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Stodgill, R. ‘Personal Factors Associated with Leadership: A Survey of the Literature.’ Journal of Psychology, 1948, 25:35–71.

Walsh, Debra G., and Jay Hewitt. ‘Giving Men the Come-on: Effect of Eye Contact and Smiling in a Bar Environment.’ Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1985, 61(3, Part 1):873–874.

Wellens, A. Rodney. ‘Heart-Rate Changes in Response to Shifts in Interpersonal Gaze from Liked and Disliked Others.’ Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1987, 64(2):595–598.





Articles, audiotapes, and newsletters


Bakin, P. ‘The Eyes Have It.’ Psychology Today, April 1971, 67.

Communication Briefings newsletter. Alexandria, Va.: Capitol Publications, Inc.

Eckman, P. ‘The Universal Smile, Face Muscles Talk Every Language.’ Psychology Today, September 1975.

Goleman, Daniel. ‘Brain’s Design Emerges as a Key to Emotions,’ quoting Dr. Joseph LeDoux, psychologist at Center for Neural Science at New York University. New York Times, August 15, 1989.

Goleman, Daniel. ‘People Who Read People.’ Psychology Today, July 1979, 66–78.

Hess, Eckhard. ‘The Role of Pupil Size in Communication.’ Scientific American, 1965, 233:110–119.

Lowndes, Leil. Conversation Confidence. Audiocassettes. San Clemente, Calif.: Verbal Advantage, 1996.

Mackey, Terry W. ‘Jury Selection: Developing the Third Eye.’ Trial, October 1980, 22–25.

Sacks, Harvey, et al. ‘A Simplest Systematics for the Organization of Turntaking for Conversation.’ Language, 1974, 50/4:696–735.

Schulman, J., et al. ‘Recipe for a Jury.’ Psychology Today, 1963, 6:37–44.

Tracy, Brian. The Psychology of Selling. Audiotapes. Niles, Ill.: Nightingale-Conant Corporation.

Wetzel, Patricia. ‘Are Powerless Communications Strategies the Japanese Norm?’ Language in Society, 1988, 17:555–564.

Zorn, E. ‘Here’s Looking at You: Is Your Face a True Personality Profile?’ Chicago Tribune, May 13, 1981, 18.





Leil Lowndes – a shyness ‘survivor’ – is an internationally acclaimed communications expert who coaches top executives of Fortune 500 companies as well as frontline employees to become more effective communicators. She has spoken in practically every major U.S. city and conducts communications seminars for the U.S. Peace Corps, foreign governments and major corporations. In addition to engrossing audiences on hundreds of TV and radio shows, her work has been acclaimed by the New York Times, the Chicago Tribune and Time magazine. Her articles have appeared in professional journals and popular publications such as Redbook, New Woman, Psychology Today, Penthouse and Cosmopolitan. Based in New York City, she is the author of four books including the top-selling How to Talk to Anyone and How to Make Anyone Fall in Love with You.

If you come across any little tricks of Big Winners in your life, share them with Leil – so she can share them with others, credited in her next book, of course, to you.

Leil’s mailing address is Applause, Inc., 127 Grand Street, New York, NY 10013.

Or e-mail her at leil@lowndes.com

Leil’s website address is http://www.lowndes.com





Copyright

HarperElement

An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers

77–85 Fulham Palace Road

Hammersmith, London W6 8JB

www.harpercollins.co.uk



and HarperElement are trademarks of HarperCollinsPublishers Ltd First published by Thorsons 1999

This edition published by HarperElement 2014

© Leil Lowndes 1999, 2014

Cover layout design © HarperCollinsPublishers Ltd 2014

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library While every effort has been made to trace the owners of copyright material reproduced herein and secure permissions, the publishers would like to apologise for any omissions and will be pleased to incorporate missing acknowledgements in any future edition of this book.

Leil Lowndes asserts the moral right to be identified as the author of this work All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.

Find out more about HarperCollins and the environment at www.harpercollins.co.uk/green

Source ISBN: 9780722538074

Ebook Edition © 2014 ISBN: 9780007369867

Version: 2014-01-14





About the Publisher

Australia

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia http://www.harpercollins.com.au/ebooks

Canada

HarperCollins Canada 2 Bloor Street East – 20th Floor Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada http://www.harpercollins.ca

New Zealand

HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

United Kingdom

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.harpercollins.co.uk

United States

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.





10 East 53rd Street


New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollins.com





