Preface

I thought I would ﬁnd you here. Curious? You should be. Negotiation
is fundamental to your life and the way you distribute, create, protect,
resolve, and manage anything of value. It is central to the viability of every
business, for even non-proﬁt-making organizations. It has delivered peace
in war, resolved bedtime tantrums with our children, helped avoid millions of court cases, and has probably helped save a few marriages along
the way too. It is how you resolve diﬀerences and form agreements based
on mutually acceptable terms. It can represent the diﬀerence between
viability and insolvency, proﬁt making or loss, growth or decline; such is
the power of the outcomes.
Great negotiators often go unnoticed. They are not interested in winning or glory. They have an attitude of mind that is focused on the hard
work of building agreements and protecting this work through the necessary conﬁdentiality that follows. However, great negotiators – and maybe
you – recognize that the return on time invested is dramatic, perhaps in
relationships, time saved, risk reduced, proﬁt made, or even dilemmas
resolved. No other skill oﬀers so much value in return for competent
performance.
This second edition is aimed at providing a modern, up-to-date guide
to how to negotiate in today's world. I have set out to provide you with
an insight into negotiation from a practitioner's perspective. It is not

xii

PREFACE

prescriptive, but aims to help you to get better deals by being aware that
it is you who are responsible for making decisions based on your own
judgement. The amount of time people actually spend negotiating is very
small in the context of their whole job and yet the consequences of their
performance during negotiations will often distinguish how successful
they are. The art and science of negotiation is an interactivity that is inﬂuenced by culture, ever-changing circumstances, expectation, capability,
and personal chemistry. The Complete Skilled Negotiator is an individual
who has both the skills and mindset to do that which is appropriate to
their circumstances and the ability to maximize opportunity during each
and every negotiation.
So why this second edition? Well, over the past decade there is not
much that has changed about how people and companies negotiate. There
has, however, been a rapid change around what they are negotiating over
and the value attributed to time, risk, convenience, and information as the
beneﬁts of technology are realized in all our lives. I've taken a fresh look
at some of these agreements and how, in some industries, information
access has become as valuable as payment terms, or response service times
as important as contract length. Technology is changing what is possible,
what is expected, and what is traded, which is providing a new mix of
variables featuring in all types of agreements. More negotiations are being
conducted through multiple forms of communication. What used to be
face-to-face, telephone, and email negotiations can now include video
conferencing from your telephone, meeting rooms from anywhere round
the world, online data rooms, online auctions, and the list goes on.
The abilities of the Complete Skilled Negotiator, however, remain the
same. They are balanced in their thinking, have their ego in check and
are focused on understanding the interests and priorities of the other
party. They are chameleon like in their approach, in that they know how
to be what they need to be depending on their circumstances, and are not
burdened by personal values that wear away at their consciousness. Their
ability to read situations, take the time to prepare, and have the capacity to
think around the issues, as well as deal with the relationship dynamics at

PREFACE

xiii

the same time, helps them perform in a conﬁdent manner. Most of all, they
focus on the potential of the deal rather than trying to win, understanding
that being competitive will only serve to attract friction, which is generally
counterproductive (unless used for a speciﬁc purpose).
It can be the most rewarding of skills to exercise and the most nerve
wracking. Is it any wonder that to provide a standard that helps everyone to negotiate more eﬀectively has proved such a challenge to so
many in the past? Yet simple disciplines, proactive planning, and a clear,
conscious state of mind can provide a signiﬁcant uplift in what you can
achieve.
So what do I mean by a standard? The Negotiation Bookk covers the traits
and behaviors associated with the Complete Skilled Negotiator. I use
the word complete rather than successful because who are we to judge
if your performances are as successful as they might be? We will never
know. The standard also refers to a clock face model that provides a way
of diﬀerentiating the range of ways we negotiate in a dynamic, capitalist
market. Importantly it also recognizes that, although the concepts of
power, process, and behavior have much to do with performance, so do
the psychology, self-discipline, and human interaction that make up the
framework. The standard is not here to restrict but to empower you as a
Complete Skilled Negotiator to negotiate that which is possible … given
those opportunities you are presented with.
The experience I have gained from practical hands-on involvement in
having negotiated with some of the largest corporations on the planet, including P&G, Walmart, Morgan Stanley, Nestlé, GE, and Vodafone, has
helped me to provide this account of the standard that has been adopted
in the business world. I have also been privileged to work with dozens of
highly skilled negotiation practitioners at The Gap Partnership who have
negotiated with, advised, and developed hundreds of such organizations
globally. It is this experience that has helped us to crystallize what our
clients have come to call “the standard” for negotiating.
I am about to share with you a way of thinking, behaving, and performing,
together with a standard for doing so. There is no magic formula or magic

xiv

PREFACE

wand, but there are principles that will help you to secure agreements
with others who may not always see the world the way you do. This book
is about you gaining more value from every agreement you're involved in,
understanding what to do, when to do it and, most importantly, providing
you with the inspiration to do it.

