CHAPTER 1

So You Think You Can
Negotiate?

“It is what we know already that often prevents us from learning.”
Claude Bernard

SO WHAT IS NEGOTIATION?

Negotiation is a necessity, a process, and an art. It evokes complex
feelings that many seek to avoid and yet it is fundamental to how
business gets done and takes place millions of times a day around the
world. If you can take control of yourself, your values and prejudices,
your need for fairness, and your ego, you may start to realize the best
possible outcomes in your negotiations. The biggest challenge here is
not in educating you in how to be a better negotiator, but motivating
you to change the way you think about negotiations and yourself. Of
the many thousands of negotiation workshops I have provided at The
Gap Partnership, the greatest change I see clients make is that of selfawareness. Learning about negotiation is an exercise in self-awareness
because understanding yourself and what effect a negotiation can
have on you, enables you to accommodate the pressures, dilemmas,
and stresses that go with it. Self-awareness helps us to recognize why
we do the things we do and the effect this has on our results. It also
helps us adapt our approach and our behavior to suit each negotiation

2

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

rather than trying to make one approach fit every situation, simply
because it suits our personal style.
Why bother negotiating?

Just because everything is negotiable doesn’t mean that everything has
to be negotiated. The value of your time versus the potential beneﬁt that
can be achieved by negotiating is always a consideration. Why spend ten
minutes negotiating over the price of a $10 notebook when you normally
make $100 an hour? So you may save $2 – that’s 20 cents a minute! However, if it is your next car and a 5% saving could equate to $1500, the time
is probably worth investing.
There will be situations involving more important decisions where you
are mutually dependent and yet hold diﬀerent views. When an agreement
needs working through, eﬀective negotiation can help provide not only a
solution but potentially a solution that both of you are motivated to carry
through.
There is no other skill set that can have such an
volume threshold
immediate and measurable level of impact on your
This term is used to determine a
bottom line than negotiation. A small adjustment
level at which benefits such as
to the payment terms, the specification, the volume
pricing, discounts, delivery, or
threshold, or even the delivery date will all impact
other services become applicable.
on the value or profitability of the agreement.
Understanding the effects of these moves, and
the values they represent to you from the outset, is why planning is
fundamental to effective negotiation. The skill in building enhanced
agreements through trading off against different interests, values,
and priorities is negotiation. In the business context it is known as
the skill of profit maximization.
So, eﬀective negotiation provides the opportunity to build or dissolve
value – but what does value really mean? It can be too easy and is too
often a focus on price. The question of “how much?” is one, transparent,
measurable issue and, because of this, is also the most contentious issue
in the majority of negotiations.

SO YOU THINK YOU CAN NEGOTIATE?

3

variable
Yet price is but one variable you can negotiate over.
It is possible to get a great price and feel as though you This can be a price or any term of
have won and yet get a very poor deal at the same time. condition that needs to be agreed.
For example, because the item did not arrive on time,
or it fell apart after being used twice, or it had no ﬂexibility about it, and
so on. (Ever heard the saying “you get what you pay for”?)
In negotiation, your ego and your competitiveness might fuel the need
to “win,” especially where you allow a sense of competition to become
involved. However, negotiating agreements is not about competing or
winning; it is about securing the best value. This means understanding:
•
•
•

what the other person or party wants, needs or believes;
what they do; and
how that aﬀects the possibilities.

pressure points
Pressure
points are things, times
As a Complete Skilled Negotiator your focus needs to
be on what is important to the other party: theirr inter- or circumstances which influence
ests, priorities, options, if any, their deadlines, and their the other party’s position of
power.
pressure points. Try to see the deal as they see it. If you

set out to understand them and their motivations, you
may be able to use these insights to your advantage and, ultimately, increase
the value of the deal for yourself. Being driven to beat the other party will
distract you from your main objective, which is usually to maximize value
from the agreement.
Proactivity and control

Your ﬁrst task is to be proactive – to take control of the way you negotiate.
To map out the issues, formulate an agenda which helps you to negotiate agreement in a way that will serve your objectives. Try to be honest
with yourself when deciding or agreeing on what these are. Remember,
price is only one element of the deal and winning on price may not result
in your attracting the best deal. You may need cooperation to the point
where the other party not only agrees to go ahead but is also prepared to

4

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

honorr their commitment. There is absolutely no place for your ego in your
negotiations. The single thing that matters is the total value over the life
time of the agreement.
Becoming comfortable with being uncomfortable

The person on the other side of the negotiating table may well take up a
tough position, which could make you feel challenged or even competitive. Becoming more comfortable with being uncomfortable in situations
like this, where you are also likely to experience pressure and tension is
one of the most important prerequisites of a skilled negotiator. Without
this, our ability to think and perform can become compromised. So you
need to recognize that, by negotiating, you are involved in a process and
the people you negotiate with need time to adjust as part of engaging in
this process. Typically this is when:
•
•

any new risks, obligations, conditions, or consequences are presented; and
any new proposals that you make, which materially change the value
of the agreement.
EMPOWERED, INEXPERIENCED NEGOTIATORS
REPRESENT A REAL RISK
The adoption of cloud-based technology solutions into organizations has created a fast-changing, complex environment where
it’s important not only to have technology specialists on your side,
but a negotiator who can make sense of the variables featured in
contracts.
PIC, a Paris-based consultancy business, were keen to invest
in a new HR management system to help manage the challenges
around managing their ever growing team. During their research
they identified a solution which also offered an integrated Learning
Management Systems (LMS). This is a platform for managing staff

SO YOU THINK YOU CAN NEGOTIATE?

development and also houses content for training purposes
that staff can access.
People Technologies, the potential supplier, made a compelling pitch to PIC on the basis that their LMS system might also be
used as a platform for servicing PIC’s own clients. This meant
that PIC would acquire not only a system that serviced its own
business but a solution which could extend their service offering
to their own clients.
The newly appointed technology manager sold the idea to the
board of PIC who were impressed with his creative thinking. The
annual license fee was twice the budget allocation but the clientfacing provision was sold as a real opportunity to “provide a
monetized technology solution to its clients,” won the board over.
The board bought the idea and signed a 3-year contract.
However, it soon became apparent that the venture was a first
for People Technologies. Although a large business, it had never
provided its service to a client as a resale facility. There were
issues that had not been thought through, such as chargeable
licensing and the fact that PIC would be liable for every one of its
client users. Issues around integration and maintenance had not
been fully understood or negotiated by the technology manager.
The board had assumed his understanding of the interdependencies. Within weeks, the CFO having faced questions from the
operations team investigated the implications of the contract and
realized that the opportunity lacked coherence. It subsequently
cost the company half the cost of the 3-year contract to exit and
the technology manager his job.
So, even though the board had committed to a solution for
twice the cost of their budget on the basis of it serving other
client-based services, the ill suited solution had to be abandoned
within months.

5

6

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

In business meetings, people can become frustrated, emotional, and
upset if they feel that you are simply being irrational or unfair with your
proposals. Some will even walk away before considering the consequences.
For this reason, the more experienced the negotiator you are working
with, the less chance you will have of a deadlocked conversation. They
are more likely to understand that they are involved in a process and that
nothing is agreed until everything is agreed and sometimes the process can
be frustrating. In fact, their experience can result in you attracting a better
deal than when you negotiate with an untrained negotiator. Many of my
clients insist that their suppliers attend the same training in negotiation
as they do, as part of ensuring that both parties work towards maximizing
total value rather than becoming distracted by short-term gains and/or
trying to “win”.
THE NEED FOR SATISFACTION

Everyone likes to secure a bargain; to buy something at a better price
than was available before. You only have to visit department stores on
December 27 to witness the eﬀect that securing a bargain can have on
people’s behavior. Such can be the frenzy that it is not unknown for violence to be used where one person feels another has pushed ahead of them
in the queue. Many people just can’t help themselves when there’s a good
bargain to be had. In extreme cases people will buy things they don’t want
or even need if the price is right.
In business, though, what is the right price? The answer depends on a
whole range of other issues, which, of course, need to be negotiated. So how
do you manage the other party’s need for satisfaction? That is, their natural
need to feel as though they got a better deal than was originally available.
•
•
•

Do you start out with an extreme opening on price?
Do you introduce conditions that you are ready to concede on?
Do you build in red herrings (issues that are not real, that you can
easily, and you expect to, concede)?

SO YOU THINK YOU CAN NEGOTIATE?

7

The psychological challenge here is to provide the other party with the
satisfaction of having achieved, through hard work, a great deal for themselves. In other words letting them “win,” or letting them have yourr way.
Negotiating versus selling

It is a commonly held view that a good “sale” will
silence
close itself and that negotiation follows only when Silence offers you the time to
outstanding diﬀerences remain. However, negotiation think and contemplate before
as a skill and as a process is fundamentally diﬀerent
responding. It allows you to
from selling. To sell is to promote the positives, the listen to the other party to really
match, to align the solution to the need. It requires understand. It requires discipline
explanation, justiﬁcation, and a rational case. “The gift and concentration. The unnerving
of the gab” is associated with the salesman who has an consequence of silence is that
enthusiastic answer for everything. Negotiation does the other party continues to talk
not. Although relationships can be important, as is and ultimately make unplanned
the climate for cooperation (without which you have concessions. At the very least
no discussion), the behavior of the Complete Skilled they often provide you with more
Negotiator also involves silence, where appropriate. information than they intended.
That means listening to everything the other party is
saying, understanding everything they are not saying,
and working out their true position.
Negotiation involves planning, questioning, listening, and making proposals, but it also requires you to recognize when the selling has eﬀectively
concluded and the negotiation has begun. If you ﬁnd yourself selling the
beneﬁts of your proposals during a negotiation, you are demonstrating a
weakness and probably giving away power. It suggests that you don’t feel
that your proposals are strong enough and that they require further promoting. The more you talk, the more you are likely to make a concession.
So, recognizing when the change from selling to negotiating has taken
place is critical. You are now negotiating. It is simple enough to shut up,
listen, and think, whilst exercising patience. If this silence feels uncomfortable, it is; because you are now negotiating.

8

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

PERSONAL VALUES

Values such as fairness, integrity, honesty, and trust naturally encourage
us to be open. Personal values have their place within any relationship but
business relationships can and often do exist, based on diﬀerent value sets.
Values are usually deep-rooted and many people feel very defensive
about them, as if their very integrity was being challenged. The point
here is that they are not right or wrong. I am not suggesting that eﬀective
negotiators have no values – we all do. However, in negotiation, when
you are involved in a process, what you do and what you are need not be
the same thing. This is not about challenging who you are, but it is about
helping you to change the things you do.
If you want to remain loyal to your values during negotiation there is
nothing wrong with this. However, others may not be as faithful to theirs,
which could leave you compromised. In other words, if you choose to
be open and honest by, for example, sharing information with the other
party and they decide not to reciprocate, guess who will gain the balance
of power? And how appropriate is that?
Where natural economic laws, such as supply and demand, result in
people doing business with each other, a cooperative relationship can
help to create greater opportunities but it is not always critical. Trust
and honesty are great corporate values: they are defendable and safe,
especially when you have a business involving hundreds or thousands
of people buying or selling on behalf of one business. They also help
promote sustainable business relationships. However, in a negotiation,
these values can be the root of complacency, familiarity, and even lazy attitudes that end up costing shareholders money. I remain a strong believer
in collaborative relationships but with the emphasis on optimizing value
whilst ensuring the best interests of all involved.
The case for collaboration

If you prefer collaborative negotiations it could be because:
•

you need the commitment and motivation of the other party in order
to deliver on what you have agreed;

SO YOU THINK YOU CAN NEGOTIATE?

•
•
•

9

you prefer to work within a range of variables that allow you to consider
all of the implications and the total value in play;
you regard it as a better way of managing relationships; or
you simply fear conﬂict and the potential negative consequences of the
negotiation breaking down.

Whatever your reason, you should ensure that it is because it’s more
likely to meet your objectives rather than simply a style preference that
provides for a comfortable environment. How appropriate this is depends
on how honest you are with yourself about your motives and the beneﬁts
that collaboration will bring.
HONESTY WITH YOURSELF

It is often diﬃcult to work out how good a deal you really have secured
following a negotiation. This would be far easier to work out if, when we
reviewed our performance, self-justiﬁcation was left out of the equation.
Have you ever asked yourself: “If I had performed diﬀerently or taken
diﬀerent decisions, could I have secured a better deal?” It is easier to
move on rather than reﬂect on our performance and consider the what
and the why, and of course the resulting quality of the deal we ﬁnished
up with. Learning something from each negotiation ensures that, where
unplanned compromises have taken place, you take away some value from
the experience. This requires honesty with yourself. The following four
areas provide a useful frame of reference for review, and as preparation
for your next negotiation.
The four challenges we face
Challenge 1: This is all about you

Negotiation is uncomfortable. It sometimes involves silence, threats, and
consequences that many ﬁnd diﬃcult environments to perform well in.
If you are to perform well, you will need to accept responsibility for your
actions and recognize the signiﬁcant diﬀerence your performance can
make to every agreement you are involved in.

10

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

The art of negotiation can be learned and applied, but you must have
the self-motivation for change and the ability to be ﬂexible. This is not just
about being tough or being prepared. It is ﬁrstly about being motivated
by the prospect of creating value and proﬁt from well-thought-through
agreements. You should therefore recognize that your past performance is
no indication of your future performance, especially as every negotiation
is unique, like every basketball or football game.
So, the ﬁrst challenge is you. It is people who negotiate; not machines,
or companies. We all have prejudices, values, ideologies, preferences,
pressures, objectives, and judgment, as will the other party in your negotiations. So one part of our journey will involve you understanding why
your greatest challenge in negotiation is yourself and how, by nature, you
naturally see the world from your perspective rather than that of others.
The simple process of an exploratory meeting, patience, and seeking to
work with someone rather than to assume and then impose ideas on that
person, is key to understanding how others see the world and what their
objectives are when you are both selling and negotiating. As an eﬀective
negotiator you need to be able to understand the dynamics of any situation
from “inside” the other party’s head. Without this insight, you will remain
in a state that we at The Gap Partnership call “being inside your own head,”
which is a dangerous place to be during negotiation. If you really want to
negotiate eﬀectively, you ﬁrst have to get your thinking this way round.

UNDERSTANDING THE OPPORTUNITY FROM THEIR
PERSPECTIVE
A German electronics firm, ETD, who specialized in Bluetooth technology had built a successful relationship with a number of suppliers to
the German auto industry. They had developed software that enabled
them to program their “in-car module” to operate with virtually anything
Bluetooth-enabled without interference from any other signals. It was a
real breakthrough in being able to offer a reliable high-quality solution
for those fitting electronics into vehicles. It meant that as well as radio,

SO YOU THINK YOU CAN NEGOTIATE?

mobile, and other devices, wiring in vehicles could almost become
a thing of the past. The lights on the car, fuel flap, windows, and
even ignition could be actioned via this Bluetooth device. Although
the electronic hardware was not unique, the software itself was
and ETD had set about educating the trade and selling the benefits.
ETD Sales Director Thomas Schnider held a meeting with the
procurement team at Brionary, a main components supplier to the
auto industry. He presented a carefully planned business case,
which justified the premium price point by demonstrating how savings could be made elsewhere as a result of using their software.
ETD understood that this type of change would at best be
considered for the next generation of vehicles. Their excitement
for this potential prevented them from getting inside the head of
the buyers at Brionary. The questions asked by Brionary were:
1. “Can we buy access to the software and program
ourselves?”
2. “We purchase most of the electronics through suppliers
who we are co-invested in. How can we overcome this
challenge?”
3. “How long do you think it will be before this type of software is copied?”
The answer: probably before the next generation of vehicles
comes to market.
Thomas and his team retreated to their office in Cologne to
reassess their strategy. They had approached the opportunity
and the potential to negotiate terms from inside their own head.
A month later they offered Brionary access to the software as a
concession for a longer-term contract on their existing range of
hardware components. Had they been in the heads of Brionary,
who clearly had an open mind to long-term co-investment, their
approach and the outcome may have been quite different.

11

12

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Challenge 2: There are no rules

In negotiation there are no rules. No set procedures, no cans or cannots.
Negotiation is often likened to a game of chess – the diﬀerence being that
in most negotiations you are not necessarily trying to beat an opponent,
and are not restricted to alternate moves. Although there may be no
absolute rules in negotiation, there are parameters within which we can
operate. Most negotiators are empowered by their boss to negotiate but
only to a certain level, beyond which discussions are usually escalated. Total empowerment results in exposure and risk which for obvious reasons
is usually inappropriate.
Challenge 3: Knowing when you have performed well

How will you know how well you have negotiated? You won’t, because the
other party is unlikely to tell you how you might have done better or how
well you performed relative to their other options.
So, without the beneﬁt of feedback from those we negotiate with, we
have to rely on previous precedents (the outcome last time round), or
absolute measurements (our proﬁt and loss sheet), and have the humility
to face such questions as:
•
•
•
•
•

What might I have done diﬀerently?
Might I have timed things diﬀerently?
Might I have included other issues?
Might I have tabled proposals that were better thought through?
Might I have not agreed so easily at the end?

Questions like these challenge how honest you are being with yourself. A good deal has to be defined, taking all of the circumstances
into account. Our ego can lead us to blame our circumstances when
the deal becomes challenged. By the time a deal is done, you may
just want to get on with implementation rather than reflect on your
performance.

SO YOU THINK YOU CAN NEGOTIATE?

Measuring the quality of your agreement, without
acknowledging some of the risks or concessions that
have allowed for the price to appear like a “good deal,”
is not measuring the total value, thus failing to provide
a true reﬂection of your performance. It is your honesty in self-review that needs to be encouraged if you
are to truly measure the real value of your deals and
learn from our performances.

13

the price
A single issue which offers only
one measure and is usually not
representative of the quality or
total value of the agreement.

No good, bad, right, or wrong

In negotiation there is no good or bad, right or wrong. The economies we
work in are dynamic, as are our suppliers, customers, and competitors.
What was a great deal last week may be less well celebrated this week,
because our circumstances are continually changing. Negotiation is about
doing things that are appropriate to each situation you face with the information as you see it at that moment in time.
Appropriateness

Knowing how a car was built and how it works does not make you a good
driver. When driving with so many obstacles on the road, the challenge is
to be able to maintain conﬁdence, navigate, interpret, and, where necessary, respond to situations in the most appropriate way when there is no
absolute answer that suits all situations.
The same applies to negotiation in business.
•
•
•
•
•

Should you set out to compete or to work with the other party?
Should you seek to manipulate the situation or collaborate instead?
Should you trust them or work on being trusted by them?
How will your options inﬂuence the balance of power?
Is the perception of power and dependency between you and the other
party based on reality?

14

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

In so many cases the answer is based on appropriateness; that is, the ability to
adapt and respond, depending on your circumstances. This requires an objective, rational, balanced mindset: a state that few human beings can maintain
at all times, especially when faced with degrees of perceived conﬂict, rejection,
and demands, all of which need to be accommodated within the negotiation.
Challenge 4: Nothing happens by accident

The essence of negotiation is doing what is appropriate for your circumstances.
This means being conscious of everything that happens before, during, and
after your negotiation. In negotiation, nothing happens by accident; everything happens for a reason. Being in control of yourself, your emotions, and the
relationship is a critical attribute for a negotiator. The challenge is that these
qualities do not, for most of us, come naturally. Eﬀective negotiators develop
their awareness to the point that they do not lose touch with the human sensitivities necessary to manage relationships, and that they do not compromise
for the sake of personal gratiﬁcation for their own comfort, or to remove the
stress they experience when challenged with the prospect of deadlock.
KEY TAKEAWAYS
•

•
•

•
•

The Negotiation Bookk will provide a you with a thought-provoking
insight into the reality of what it will take for you to become the Complete Skilled Negotiator.
The more you understand tactics, strategies, behaviors, processes, and
planning tools, the better prepared you can become.
Ultimately it is you, and perhaps your team, who will conduct your negotiations; you who will be accountable for your actions and the outcomes;
and you who may or may not act on the opportunities before you.
It is you who will need to manage your relationships, emotions, and the
climate that so heavily inﬂuences possibility.
Self-awareness will help you to adapt your approach and your behavior
to suit each negotiation rather than trying to make one approach ﬁt
every situation.

