CHAPTER 2

The Negotiation Clock Face

“There is no right, no wrong, no good, and no bad way to negotiate.
Only that which is appropriate to your circumstances.”
Steve Gates
To make sense of how diﬀerent approaches to negotiation could serve us,
and because each negotiation presents a unique challenges, I developed
a model called the Negotiation Clock Face. This model was born out
of a commercial project I undertook to research and explore the many
philosophies being advocated by so called gurus, academics, authors, consultancies, and, importantly, the group of organizations that I represented
for at that time, to deﬁne what is meant by “world class negotiation.”
12
1

11

10

Relationship
building

Bartering

2

Partnership
joint problem
solving

Haggling/
bidding

Win–win

Hard
bargaining

9

3

8

Concession
trading
7

5
6

Figure 2.1 The clock face.

4

Dealing

16

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

The deﬁnitions on the right-hand side of the clock face represent competitive negotiations based on those involved distributing a ﬁnite amount
of value between them. It symbolizes transactional dialogs with lower
levels of trust and fewer issues regarded as important enough to negotiate.
This means that those on the right are tougher to negotiate in nature and
are either win–lose or competitive forms of negotiation. So the process is
going to be positional and potentially confrontational. The pie is only so
big and it’s simply a case of how it gets distributed.
Those deﬁnitions on the left-hand side of the clock face provide for
more cooperation where collaborative negotiations lead to the creation of
incremental value (creating a bigger pie). They reﬂect negotiations which
are more commonly promoted in business-to-business (B2B) situations
(though not always). There is more dependency, higher levels of trust and
a broader agenda around which to negotiate value.
However, these deﬁnitions are only a guide, in that many negotiations
move from one area to another in the same meeting. The Complete
Skilled Negotiator recognizes this and will move the discussions into the
area that suits their objectives, depending on those considerations which
are important to them (relationship, sustainability, or, if they choose,
short-term value).
The “engineering of variables”

The opportunity to build value through the “engineering of variables” and
each party’s relationship with the other is more likely to take place where
there is collaboration in play, that is, on the left-hand side of the clock.
Collaboration of course requires some degree of common purpose, interest, or dependency between those involved. No matter how proactive or
committed you are to developing a joint agreement, creating more value
opportunities through negotiation requires the commitment of both
parties, or such power on one side that the other has no option but to
collaborate. Maximizing value through the engineering of variables need
not be detrimental to the other party. They remain responsible for their
actions and decisions as you remain responsible for yours. However, you

THE NEGOTIATION CLOCK FACE

17

should never allow complacency or the idea of fairness to aﬀect your drive
for improved terms as you will inevitably face resistance and challenge
along the way, however you build your agreements.
The clock face, then, is a model for helping you, to determine what is
“appropriate for each of your situations.” The clock face in simple terms
deﬁnes capitalism. One way or another it reﬂects how most deals "get
done". This model was designed to help negotiation practitioners differentiate between negotiations and consciously adopt the appropriate
approach to each of their negotiations.
The clock face model is not good or bad, right or wrong, any more than
north, south, east, or west is the right direction for any journey. It just
“is” and, wherever capitalism exists, the clock face serves to oﬀer a simple
range of deﬁnitions within which your negotiations will take place. It is
important to remember that the direction you take, decisions you make
and results you achieve still remain yourr responsibility. The clock face is
simply a compass.
WHY ARE THERE SO MANY DIFFERENT WAYS TO NEGOTIATE A DEAL?

Capitalism and market pressures motivate and manipulate people to operate in the ways that they do. For example, account managers frequently
become frustrated when trying to build relationships with buyers who
they perceive to have more power within the relationship. The buyer (and
this often works both ways) will negotiate competitively to drive every last
cent of value out of the deal. As a result the buyer can become so focused
on one issue that they are prepared to forfeit any other beneﬁts whilst in
the pursuit of the best price. Meanwhile, the account manager, desperate to build value through a range of variables (payment terms, volume,
quality, delivery, and other oﬀerings), tries to progress conversations on
a collaborative basis resulting in proposals which in this case go ignored.
So what is the answer? There is no one answer. How you negotiate will
nearly always depend on the speciﬁc circumstances you face. This is why,
to understand negotiation, you ﬁrst need a basis for diﬀerentiating the
many ways in which negotiation can and does take place (the Negotiation

18

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Clock Face). The above situation, however, is certainly manageable. Escalation to a higher authority, introducing more variables onto the agenda,
conditional movement from your position, or even introducing time
constraints could oﬀer a start.
When asked to describe their preferred negotiation style, many negotiators have openly described to me how they get the best results, the way
that best suits their industry, or the way their business does business. The
response is rarely “it depends.” The importance of relationships or dependency will often feature as the primary motive for preferring collaborative
negotiations. This view of how negotiations can best be managed usually
results in the individuals being eﬀective in only one type of negotiation
or relationship situation. The Complete Skilled Negotiator has a much
broader understanding of the options available and is able to adapt to
each situation as they ﬁnd it.

WHEN ONE APPROACH DOES NOT WORK FOR ALL
A contract team working for Collberth, an industrial space management company, were responsible for outsourcing security contracts
for over 200 commercial properties (amongst other services). The
nature of the locations, occupants, and other factors meant that
the precise nature of cover had to be spread across nine different
security firms.
Over the years, the team had developed standard practices
and systems to support the management of the contracts, which
had resulted in them working with a pre-defined set of variables. The team was even incentivized by the board of Collberth
on how effective they were at optimizing the terms of each
contract.
Nothing unusual here you might think. They were a team that
had been in place for 4 years with a deep familiarity with the

THE NEGOTIATION CLOCK FACE

19

market. So they started to adopt a growing trend of assumptions
around supplier motives. Every contract renewal commenced with
a 6-month countdown prior to any contract expiring. A preferred
way, a formulaic way, had developed: “the way” to negotiate at
Collberth.
In 2014, five of the contracts were up for renewal at different
times. Each one in turn deadlocked and not because of changing
market conditions. By early 2015 the board intervened to examine
the cause behind the change. The contract team quickly defended
their position and the contingency actions they had implemented.
The findings of the board were that the team had become so inflexible and rigid in their process and attitudes that they had left no
scope for interpretation, alternate strategies, or optimizing terms
based on the circumstances of what were still highly competitive
suppliers.
Although there is no right or wrong way to negotiate an agreement, there is an appropriate way. This will invariably depend on the
circumstances of the other party, rather than any set rigid terms that
you decide to operate by.

HOW THE NEGOTIATION CLOCK FACE WORKS

The Negotiation Clock Face oﬀers a visual representation of negotiation
styles ranging from the toughest form of market manipulation through
to high-dependency relationships. Each stage around the clock face oﬀers
more complexity, more opportunity, and more collaboration required. It
helps us to understand and determine the most appropriate approach to
negotiating, depending on your circumstances.
The clock face as a reference point, therefore, helps you to consciously
adopt the appropriate approach related to what you are trying to achieve
and the circumstances you face. It is not designed to be prescriptive nor

20

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

does it suggest that your negotiation should take place at one particular
point of the clock face. Many negotiations ﬂuctuate depending on what
stage the negotiation is at. The clock face, therefore, is not a process
suggesting that you should start at one point and move sequentially
to another, it is simply a model which highlights the diﬀerent styles of
negotiation available to us.
The negotiation environment

If we are going to control any negotiation we ﬁrst have to understand
the environment within which we operate. For example, imagine you are
responsible for managing a particular customer on an ongoing basis. You
feel that a relationship is going to serve your long-term interests, which
requires you to build some level of trust and an understanding with your
customer. However, your customer has signiﬁcant market power and
exerts pressure on you to improve your terms. This makes your relationship diﬃcult and transactional in nature as their behavior suggests their
interests are in short-term gains only.
Do you choose to spend your time at 4 o’clock hard bargaining and risk
suboptimizing longer-term opportunities (ignoring other possible variables), or do you attempt to move them around to 10 o’clock to work on
the relationship in an attempt to gain a more mutually beneﬁcial solution?
The answer to this again is “it depends.” So by understanding the diﬀerent factors that can inﬂuence your negotiations, you can build a stronger
awareness of whether you need to proactively change the nature of your
relationship with the other party and/or the climate of your meetings
during your negotiations.
Bartering: 1 o'clock

Bartering involves the art of trading one thing oﬀ against another and does
not necessarily involve money. Trade bartering has taken place around the
world for thousands of years before money even existed. Today there are
websites dedicated to bartering or “swapping.”

THE NEGOTIATION CLOCK FACE

21

Price bartering, as anyone who has ever bought that carpet at the Egyptian market stall will know, can be very quick and the ﬁnal price agreed
can be far removed from the market value. Our satisfaction is from having secured the carpet for only $XX when back home it would have cost
$YY, regardless of the implications of getting it home or even whether we
needed one at all. Both the culture and rituals employed in the Middle
East make this form of negotiation process “normal” and comfortable for
locals. There is a ritual, a process to go through where we establish the
value of something between us. Indeed it is usual for locals to insist on
getting to know each other before business can even be discussed. It’s
common for entire families to be involved in this process. It’s how business
is done: it involves trust, personality, and, yes, capitalism. It is a process
those from the Middle East are far more comfortable with than those
conditioned diﬀerently in Western cultures.
There need not be any relationship, trust, or even respect, simply a ritual
to agree on the price. When bartering, the parties try to pretend that there
is respect or trust in what each other is saying. At least when we move
around to 3 and 4 o’clock there may not be much trust but there is enough
integrity in place that the pretending has stopped. However, when it
comes down to conducting business, this is the rawest form of capitalism:
how much you want something and how much I need to trade something
within our own micro-economy. Nothing else matters. In negotiation
terms it’s raw, basic, and yet eﬀective. It’s at 1 o’clock because it represents
about as basic a form of negotiation as you can get. Until money was
invented it was the only way to negotiate of material value.
Haggling/bidding: 2–3 o'clock

Websites such as eBay have helped create new industries in the way
products and services are traded around the world. The days of the sleepy
antique auctions, although still in operation, have been taken over by a
vast online bidding industry. Today you can trade almost anything online
via designated business auction traders or business-to-consumer (B2C)
sites. Even the stock market operates using the process of bidding where

22

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

ultimately the market (supply and demand) will deﬁne the value of the
transaction.
This basic means of agreeing a price demands the greatest of all self-disciplines: being prepared to walk away. The risks of becoming too competitive
with no alternative options before entering into a bidding war are well
illustrated by the government sell-oﬀ of the 3G mobile phone licenses in
the UK during 2000. The mobile phone operators ended up paying many
times the value for the privilege of gaining one of the four licenses up for
auction. You may have thought that these multi-billion-pound businesses
would have used sales projections and proﬁt forecasts to work out the limits
beyond which they could not go. The other consideration was that there
could only be four winners and these were going to be the players who
would be around to compete in the future. The view was held that those
without the licences would not be able to compete in the future. So the
limits the competing companies were prepared to pay became greater than
the commercial reality suggested at the time. The “winners” ended up paying £22.5 billion in what became the biggest auction of its kind in modern
business. It took a further 8 years before 3G technology took hold of the
market and ﬁnancial returns could start to be realized.
Businesses that use tendering processes are eﬀectendering processes
tively using the bidding process to attract a price-based
An invitation to tender for the
best oﬀer from a range of potential suppliers. Local
contract by submitting your
best proposal against a briefing government contracts widely use this process for
subcontracting purposes as part of the procurement
document.
The organizers will then use this process, to ensure that competitive pressures are
to either form a shortlist or award maintained and that taxpayers are getting “good value.”
However, where the nature of the contract is based on
the contract.
a performance-related service, for example, the building of a road, price alone, even against a well-speciﬁed brief, can prove a
restrictive means of agreeing all terms and can lead to poor “total value”
agreements. However, without such transparent competitive procedures,
government procurement would be more susceptible to illegal forms of
bribery.

THE NEGOTIATION CLOCK FACE

23

Many businesses use this 2–3 o’clock approach and build in a posttender negotiation process with those who have eﬀectively qualiﬁed to
the ﬁnal stage of potential suppliers. This allows the negotiation to move
around the clock face to a win–win situation at 8 o’clock or beyond,
providing for greater synergies to be realized.
Hard bargaining: 4 o'clock

Hard bargaining in its purest form is not typically the preferred approach
in B2B negotiations, but even complex negotiations such as those that
involve the acquisition of companies frequently move to 4 o’clock on the
ﬁnal issues. This is typically when all the remaining issues have been
exhausted and one ﬁnal issue remains unresolved. It is under these pressured conditions when the skill, mindset, and conﬁdence to hard bargain
are both necessary and critical.
“What I get, you lose, and what you get, I lose”

For those who believe in fairness, hard bargaining provides the greatest of
tests. It is not fair, it is uncomfortable: it requires nerve and it will make
you question whether the discomfort was worth the beneﬁt that came
from it. Your opening position is likely to be rejected (if not it would have
been inappropriate) and you are likely to be facing someone who is trying
to understand how far you will go.
Of course, hard bargaining for yourself is a diﬀerent experience from
doing it on behalf of the company you work for. Although it may not be
your preferred approach to negotiation, it has to be understood in order to
avoid leaving yourself vulnerable. Where people or companies have power,
they will use it to their commercial beneﬁt and if you
are not equipped to perform under such circumstances
bargaining range
you will pay more than you need to.
Assuming there is a bargaining
The two most important disciplines in any negotiarange, this is the difference
tion consist of asking questions and making proposals. between the most you will pay
Information is power and, at 4 o’clock, power will play and the least the other party will
a part in how the bargaining range is divided. This is
accept or vice versa.

24

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

rarely transparent. If you told the other party what your break point was
(your bottom line), would they be prepared to pay a cent more?
The art of hard bargaining is of course to work out what theirr break
point is – that is, negotiate from inside their head.
Once you understand their interests, priorities, time pressures, and
options, you will be better positioned to gauge how far and hard you
can push. One assumes that the other party is responsible for their own
interests. They are unlikely to agree to anything they cannot or don’t
want to agree to. Your questions will provide you with ever more forms
of information and, as a result, help make your position more powerful.
If you are not asking questions you should be making a proposal. On the
other hand, if you are faced with a skilled hard bargainer who has adopted
a silent stance and an extreme position of their own, you must be prepared
to hold ﬁrm, be patient, and reiterate your position.
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Buyer’s
break point

Opening
position
Buyer

Can’t do

Bargaining
range

Can’t do
Seller’s
break point

Seller
Opening
position

Figure 2.2 Hard bargaining positioning.

Delivering a proposal

When stating your proposal, you should set out to create an anchor
from which the other person feels that they need to reassess their own

THE NEGOTIATION CLOCK FACE

25

expectations. It should be extreme and yet realistic. Too extreme and they
may just walk away from any further dialogue. Your opening position is
simply the start of a process during which you set out to manage their
expectations. Everything becomes relative to this position, even your own
concessions, in that you know you will have to move if a deal is to be agreed.
Yes, they are going to reject it so get used to the word “no.” Yes, they will be
emotional as they express their shock and surprise. This is to be expected
and is all part of the process. However, if you antagonize or insult the other
party, for example, by opening at too extreme a position, you risk losing the
chance of maintaining a conversation and ultimately completing the deal,
even if you have signiﬁcant power. So the art of hard bargaining is gauging
your opening position and then being tough on issues like price, whilst
remaining respectful of the people you are negotiating with. This means:
•
•
•

appropriate positioning;
holding tough; and
conceding on fewer occasions and by lesser amounts than the other party.

In the majority of cases, negotiators who make their oﬀer ﬁrst will come
out ahead.
Another characteristic of hard bargaining anchoring consists of stating
a position as a fact early in the dialogue. It can be one of the most powerful tactics available to you for gaining psychological power. In situations
where there are no clear market value indicators and there is scope for
the perception of value to be diﬀerent from market value, ﬁrst oﬀers have
an incredibly strong anchoring eﬀect. This relative positioning of what
I call “playing at home” exerts a strong pull throughout the rest of the
negotiation as counter-oﬀers and moves become relative to the opening
anchoring position (your home position). If you start playing away you
run the risk of trying to move them from their position, which means
you are more likely to ﬁnish up closer to their position than to yours. Of
course, this is much easier to control if you have a level of real transparent
power. For example, it’s pretty easy to look conﬁdent in a game of poker if
you have four aces, but less so with two 3s.

26

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Medium- or long-term positioning can be more subtle. It can occur
over weeks, months, or even years, perhaps making the same statement
in diﬀerent ways over many interactions. The statement may ﬁrm up as
the negotiation approaches, or may be delivered again and again, with
the negotiation only occurring when the negotiator deems the anchoring
positioning to have created the right conditions and timing for success to
be more likely.
Dealing: 5–6 o'clock

The timing of the contract (the sooner the contract can be completed)
may have as much beneﬁt to me as it has a downside to you: bonus payments may be as costly for you to achieve as they are for me to provide.
So although each agenda item needs agreeing and perhaps even trading,
they may not necessarily provide any incremental beneﬁt. Where you are
faced with simply agreeing on terms, which provide little by way of any
real incremental beneﬁt, a deal-like climate is likely to exist and the need
to be considered, conditional, and tough during your dealings is critical to
you in protecting your position and the value of the deal.
The process of deal-making is usually made up of trade-oﬀs and compromises rather than of low-cost, high-value trades as found in classic win–win
situations. This is because, where time pressures are in play and there is a
need to make the deal work, trades tend to be made up of “necessary” moves
to make the deal work rather than value-adding activity, although the two
are not mutually exclusive. Deal-making can involve few issues, which means
the style and dialogue can sometimes be little more than hard bargaining,
although the climate tends to be more respectful. The diﬀerence is that you
can oﬀer to move on one issue, providing them with some satisfaction subject to a reciprocal move on another allowing for the deal to be completed.
Price, as we know, is the most contentious and transparent of all variables,
which is why, when negotiated alone, it tends to lead to competitive forms
of negotiation. When dealing is in play at 5–6 o’clock there can be three or
four issues involved, each of which are transparent and, although they need
agreeing, they provide little by way of opportunity for mutual gain.

THE NEGOTIATION CLOCK FACE

27

Concession trading: 6–7 o'clock

This is the ﬁrst of the collaborative approaches where both parties recognize that some level of cooperation is required if mutual interests are
to progress. The more common interests that can be identiﬁed between
the two parties, the greater the potential for creating value. The process
can involve conditional trade-oﬀs across a broad range of issues from a
pre-agreed agenda.
The negotiation climate is usually constructive but still guarded. For
example, saying “if you place the order today, we will guarantee you your
required time slot,” would seem to be an oﬀer to move things around to
accommodate the other party. It could, however, be the case that you were
going to do this anyway, that there is no cost implication in oﬀering the
time slot or that you have very few orders so they could have had any time
slot without any implications to you. All that matters is that you were
seen to oﬀer a conditional concession (in this case, the condition that the
order is placed today) and were providing some value (convenience and
security of securing an important time slot), leaving the other party with
the satisfaction that they have agreed a ““good deal” with you.
Now that you are on the left-hand, collaborative side of the clock face,
your focus should be on working “on the deal.” Nothing is agreed until
everything is agreed, which means that you can park issues or variables
and come back to them if not agreed on. An unresolved issue does not
mean there is a deadlock, but that other issues need to be examined in
order to help resolve the current impasse.
Win–win: 8 o'clock

Win–win implies by its very deﬁnition that both sides in a negotiation win
or come out ahead. The rational process of trading low-cost, high-value
issues in such a way that the total value opportunity can be enhanced was
popularized in the 1980s in the book Getting to Yes by Ury and Fisher. The
concept of win–win assumes that both parties will make decisions based
on the fact that, if one party oﬀers you something of greater value than
that which they seek, in return leaving you with an incremental gain, then

28

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

you are more likely to accept it. If your aim is to build value, it’s diﬃcult to
argue with the theory. However, as Ury and Fisher later went on to write
in Beyond Reason, the emotional side of a relationship plays a signiﬁcant
part in how agreements actually come together. People are not always
rational in their behavior.
Them

You

Value

Cost

Cost

Value

Figure 2.3 Low-cost, high-value win–win trade-offs.

During 2015 Facebook progressed a strategy of building relationships with publishers including the BBC, Bild, NBC news, and The
New York Times, amongst others. The concept (called Instant Articles)
attracted nine publishers who committed to provide news information
to Facebook. This in turn attracted audiences to their own monetized
solutions, of which they were able to keep 100% of those revenues. It was
apparent to the publishers that Facebook were in fact competing with
Yahoo, Google, and Twitter, securing exclusive social media feeds. The
negotiations resulted in the publishers taking control over which stories
appeared and ensured that, by embracing social media, their own online
business model would not be undermined. The agreement facilitated by
Facebook sought to build on the mutual interests of those involved, focus
on the longer-term picture, and measure success through the synergy and
strengthening this would bring to their own users. The win–win agreement had only been made possible because of the collaborative approach
this engendered.

THE NEGOTIATION CLOCK FACE

29

From 8 o’clock onwards you have the option of sharing some information in order to help the other party to help you. This of course requires
a higher level of trust than when simply concession trading. Trust takes
time to earn and can be more easily nurtured when the balance of power is
more even or when the dominant party has a genuine motive for securing
your commitment to an agreement.
Partnership joint problem solving: 9–10 o'clock

When building an agenda for a 9–10 o’clock negotiation, your mindset
should be focused on forming a sustainable agreement that covers all
areas, including:
•
•
•

performance;
compliance; and
risk.

Take the concept of total value agreements that are central to win–win
negotiations and extend the possibilities through building more dependency between parties. For instance, if this beneﬁts us, it will beneﬁt you;
if it harms us, it will harm you. Focus your attention on what issues could
create problems during the lifetime of the agreement for both parties.
Take your time working through the level of risk and responsibilities
that both of you are prepared to take. Then build an agreement ensuring
that responsibility is transparent and clearly stated and that risk is clearly
compensated for.
Relationship building: 11–12 o'clock

The value of partnership in business cannot be underestimated. It often
represents the optimum position for building agreements – when trading
partners are interdependent and there is a clear need to help each other
to realize the eﬃciencies, synergies, and saving as part of how they work
continuously together. It is an “ideal” situation and in some cases works
but very often proves diﬃcult to achieve and sustain. Why? Performance

30

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

change and changes in the market result in an ever-shifting environment.
Sometimes these changes have been factored into the agreement and
sometimes they serve to expose one party or the other. At 10–12 o’clock,
risks will have been considered as part of the original agreement. However,
if one party suﬀers as a result of change that could result in the trading
relationship being aﬀected, both parties are more likely to reappraise
the trading arrangement and sometimes even renegotiate the terms. The
degree of interdependency in play means both parties are implicated if
one is aﬀected by change.
When negotiating past 10 o’clock your agenda should be designed to
encourage transparency, creativity, and possibility. In essence, the broader
the agenda the greater the scope for building robust deals with added
value. Examining longevity, intangibles (things that are not material), risk,
sustainability, information, resources, and so on allows for highly creative
agreements to be built that reﬂect all of the interests, needs for ﬂexibility,
and potential opportunities for both parties. However, this ideal requires
understanding and patience and in some cases an acceptance that the
reduced risks achieved by longer-term agreements may have to come at
the cost of short-term margin or proﬁt maximization. If that is desirable
then the partnership approach may well prove appropriate. Much will
depend on the circumstances and objectives of those involved.
Back to bartering (1 o'clock)

In his book The Undercover Economist, Tim Harford explains how the
cost and value of a cup of coﬀee can vary and why the average commuter
is prepared to pay a premium for a cup of coﬀee at the train station or
airport when time is a premium and supply and demand are in favor of
the well-positioned coﬀee kiosk. Although you may be a regular customer
of the kiosk as you rush to the oﬃce, and may have become loyal to a
particular brand of coﬀee as a result, your relationship is not a partnership. Indeed, the balance of power as a result of supply and demand is still
ﬁrmly in favor of the strategically positioned coﬀee kiosk. Your ability and
your motive to negotiate in public over a few cents is removed. Also, the

THE NEGOTIATION CLOCK FACE

31

kiosks with loyalty scheme cards eﬀectively constitute a proposal made to
their loyal customers: a retrospective discount, a loyalty incentive, more
coﬀee rather than a lower price, a trade barter, and low-cost, high-value
incentive, which takes us past 12 o’clock and back to what we started with:
bartering.
Exploring the reality of partnerships

Partnerships provide the necessary veneer enabling many agreements
to be progressed in business. Some corporations believe so strongly in
partnerships that their values and ethics heavily promote them through
and across their business.
Ethical partnerships carry a sense of righteousness about them. Few
companies would openly admit that they are out to screw every last cent
out of their customers or suppliers and yet they are required to provide
statements about maximizing shareholder value. Again this cannot always
be achieved without someone else paying and, the larger the organization,
the more leverage they have for doing so. I am not suggesting that partnerships do not exist, but in all my experience in business they are rarely
as idealistic or as reﬂective as the true deﬁnition of partnership might
suggest. Formed partnerships take the form of unions, marriages, cooperatives, societies, confederations, alliances, associations, and institutions,
and there are many more entities based on common interests, values, and
motives for investment. By their very nature, two or more businesses
working together are going to be challenged – they will have independent
interests to consider and you must always remain mindful and aware of
these considerations.
Where partnerships work eﬀectively is where the relationship is of
strategic importance, that is, where the businesses could easily be compromised if the relationship were not to “perform” and that the investment
in time and eﬀort delivers obvious mutual synergy beneﬁts. Although
partnerships perform better with trust, trust can take time to earn and
requires the glue of dependency. Once it exists it can also be harmful in
that it can serve to disarm, promoting familiarity and complacency. So a

32

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

continued balancing act needs to be “policed” through measurement and
performance reviews for the partnership to be sustainable. These considerations should feature early in the negotiation agenda as being critical to
the sustainability of any agreement that you may build.
KEY TAKEAWAYS

There are no right or wrong ways to negotiate, and no ﬁxed way of ensuring that you will always get the best agreement. The clock face helps to
diﬀerentiate and recognize those behaviors and strategies in play and
what these are likely to do to value, rather than simply suggesting a right
way of negotiating, which would be highly exposing.
•
•
•
•
•
•

The clock face simply serves as a compass to help you adopt the appropriate approach for each of your negotiations.
Many negotiations will move around the clock during the negotiation,
so never assume a constant.
Your approach and behavior can help you to move the other party
around the clock face to suit your preferred strategy.
It’s easier to build and grow value cooperatively and collaboratively
between 8 and 12 o’clock.
The right-hand side of the clock face typically represents more competitive and transactional negotiations.
Where the balance of power is strongly in favor of one party, the tendency is for the negotiation to take place or end up in the 1–6 o’clock
environment.

