CHAPTER 3

Why Power Matters

“You only have power over people so long as you don’t take everything away from them. When you’ve robbed a man of everything,
he’s no longer in your power – he’s free again.”
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn

WHAT DO WE MEAN BY POWER?

You are as powerful as others perceive you to be, which is limiting if you
do not understand how they see the situation. Power can be real or perceived, or as subjective as it is objective in that it exists in people’s heads;
even though the other party may be dependent on you or independent
of you. Power can shift, can be created from time and circumstance, and
can be used to nurture or exploit. So clearly it needs to be understood and
respected.
Why the balance of power matters

So why is power so important in negotiations? Quite simply, it provides
you with options and, if understood, will enable you to control where on
the clock face your negotiation will take place.
•

Holding the balance of power. If you hold the balance of power in
your relationship(s), you have greater scope to control the agenda, the
process, and ultimately inﬂuence the negotiation in your favor.

34

•

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Power to inﬂuence the climate, style, strategy, and possibilities.
Power provides you with the opportunity to choose between being
competitive or collaborative, depending on which suits your purpose
and objectives.

Creating the perception of power before the negotiation begins can be
achieved through demonstrating indiﬀerence, outlining your options, or
the other party’s lack of options. All are designed to manage expectations
and suggest that you are negotiating from a position of strength. Trying to
do so once discussions have begun is transparent and can prove futile. The
Complete Skilled Negotiator understands the value of clearly framing the
facts surrounding the circumstances of those involved so as to enhance
their perceived power.
Holding the balance of power

History has taught us that those with power will at some point seek
to exercise it. Therefore, it is vital to understand the balance of power,
be clear where the negotiation is likely to take place on the clock face,
and prepare accordingly. The type of relationship you have with those
you negotiate with will directly inﬂuence how and where you choose to
negotiate on the clock face.
One of the most important considerations when gauging power
will be the amount of information available relating to each party’s
circumstances. The degree to which time and circumstances are
transparent directly affects the power balance within your relationship and the style of negotiation that is most likely to follow. That
is not to suggest that those who enter a negotiation from a weak
position enter as lambs ready for the slaughter: very often the more
powerful party will use the situation to gain other forms of value such
as loyalty, exclusivity, or greater flexibility, rather than just beating
the other party into agreeing a lower price. Where you negotiate on
the clock face will impact on all these possibilities and on the total
value opportunity that will be created from your discussions. So we

WHY POWER MATTERS

35

need to treat power respectfully if we are to make the most of it. The
purpose of this is not so that you can win or beat the other party.
They are not your competition. It is to help you optimize value from
the negotiations you are preparing for.
HOW DOES POWER INFLUENCE NEGOTIATIONS?
Influencing factors

Those factors which have the greatest inﬂuence on where negotiations
take place on the clock face are made up of the following:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

The level of dependency.
The power of the brand and the relative size of both parties.
History/precedents.
Competitor activity and changing market conditions.
The party with more time.
The nature of the product, service, or contract.
Personal relationships.

1. The level of dependency

Who needs who the most, or the level of dependency between both
parties, directly inﬂuences the balance of power between you and those
you negotiate with. If you don’t need to do a deal and are not dependent
on the other party, your position of “indiﬀerence” provides you with a
greater level of power, assuming that you both know this and believe it
to be true. Any need to form an agreement is usually inﬂuenced by your
circumstances, whatever they may be.
In economic terms this is referred to as supply and demand.
•
•

If there is an abundance of supply and little demand, the buyers, assuming they have a need, will have more power available to them.
If the product or service is in short supply yet demand is high, the seller
will more likely have greater power.

36

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Quite simply, if there is a shortage or diﬃculty in acquiring something,
assuming that demand is stable or strong, then the value will increase. In
times of no demand or when there is oversupply the value or price will
generally drop. Although this is the case in most market situations it is not
always so apparent. Asking the right questions will help you to clarify this.
•
•
•

How is your supplier performing generally, and how important does
this make you to them?
How many options, other than you, do they have to achieve their
strategic objectives?
If demand for the product has slowed, how much more important has
this made your agreement?

The more demand you are able to create, the more options you have,
and the more powerful your position will be in just about any type of
negotiation.
Although not always possible, one of the most eﬀective ways of building power for yourself is by developing BATNAs (Best Alternative to a
Negotiated Agreement), because the more options you have, the stronger
you become.
The clearer your options, the more deﬁnitive your own break point will be.
Understanding and building options or BATNAs is fundamental to
establishing power. No options = no power, or at least from inside your
own head.
The supply of money on the money markets influences the best
mortgage rates available for home buying. These rates are regularly
published in the press as banks compete to lend money against the
security of property. Some take the time to talk to a mortgage broker
who will provide a range of options based on their circumstances;
some will approach the bank or mortgage company who will outline
their latest offer, or they may simply be advised of the cost of extending their current mortgage without providing any other options.
However, those who genuinely shop around, research on the internet,

WHY POWER MATTERS

37

and talk with a number of suppliers effectively get a feel for what the
best on the market is. Along with a BATNA, knowing that you can
go elsewhere ensures that the time invested in research pays off. The
best deals are not necessarily the ones advertised. In the world of
private banking there are many deals available for the right person at
below high-street prices, subject to the right relationship and broader
circumstances. With a high-street BATNA to hand it’s worth progressing such discussions.
Qualifying the other party’s options, and therefore their power,
requires us to question objectively the viability of the options they
say they have. In some industries there are substantial costs in
implementing an option. For instance, the set-up costs of switching
manufacturers may be considerable: re-tooling, resourcing materials,
new safety inspections; not to mention the disruption, ongoing training, and relationship building that needs to take place. The other party
may be able to employ their BATNA, but they may be unwilling to
actually implement it.
So creating power where you can control supply and demand can be
a highly effective way of strengthening your negotiation position. It
is important, then, to understand power and how it impacts on your
expectations and those of the other party. The way most people gauge
power is from instinctive, subjective insights formed from observations
of the other party, or more often on clear factual market evidence. If
you are the only supplier who can deliver what your customer cannot
do without, they are likely to pay as much as they need to get what
they want.
For example, the oil industry has for many years controlled its
output in terms of how many millions of barrels of oil are produced
in any given week. This has a direct impact on the price of petrol at
the pumps.
Where the balance of power is strongly in favor of one party and the
need for cooperation during the negotiation is not necessary, that party
can drive very tough negotiations. Dependency imbalance can result in

38

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

the negotiation swinging around to the right-hand (competitive) side of
the clock face.
In a business-to-business (B2B) context, absolute dependency leads
to absolute power, which can promote corruption and make for poor
business. This is why governments have competition and monopolies
acts to manage extreme cases of non-competitive market manipulation. Creating options or a best alternative before entering your
negotiation is an effective way of reducing dependency and, in doing
so, reduces the power of the other party. Creating
dependency imbalance
Where one party has a greater a BATNA is therefore an important element of
dependency on the other (real preparation (see Chapter 9). For as long as you have
or perceived), resulting in them total dependency on one supplier or buyer, and ashaving less negotiating power. suming that they know this, you will be negotiating
from a position of weakness.
Of course, few relationships are so one-sided or remain so for very long.
Power is often measured in a subjective manner, meaning that feelings,
instinct, circumstance, and behavior also contribute to the way you weigh
up any given situation.
On the many occasions I have facilitated negotiation planning sessions
across teams with various clients, I ask the question about power: “Who
has the balance of power in your business relationship, you or the buyer/
seller?” On over 70% of occasions, the initial response is: “the other party!”
Why? Because most of us live inside our own head. We ﬁnd it diﬃcult
to see, feel, or understand the pressures that the other party is experiencing, so we focus on those to which we are exposed and this of course
undermines our own position of power. Negotiating from inside your
own head is a very dangerous place to be. The balance of power between
those involved in the majority of negotiations is much closer than most
will allow themselves to believe.
As a Complete Skilled Negotiator it is important to recognize that,
even where the market power is clearly stacked against you, you can set
out to change the dependencies between you and shift the balance of
power.

WHY POWER MATTERS

CREATING OPTIONS
Launching a new product onto the market takes a lot of careful
planning. Agreeing terms and commitments comes pretty high on
the list and the way your plans are communicated can significantly
change the attitude of others. Who needs who the most here? Your
options could be who you offer what levels of investment to. Who
you offer exclusivity, marketing, extended ranges, or protections of
terms based on volumes to. You may even enjoy market power
where you have several suppliers or customer options so can create
competitive tension. Whatever the environment, you need options
or best alternatives.
One challenge for account managers who manage only one
customer is that the customer is aware of this and knows just how
important they are to the account manager sat in front of them. You
may even be part of a team dedicated to managing the one account
and the buyer knows this only too well.
So who has the balance of power in this situation? How do you
calculate power and does it really matter? As always, it depends.
However, what I have found is that in a majority of cases the balance of
power is not as fixed or as one-sided as most are prepared to believe.
Even where you can’t choose your customers, you can choose
which ones to invest in, which ones to partner with, which ones to
work more proactively with, to strategically differentiate and then
ensure they understand that your business has options to offer this
elsewhere.
Whether you sell insurance, energy, engineering parts, consultancy
services, or tins of tomatoes the same dynamics apply.
Make the time to be proactive, plan out your options, and, where
appropriate, make them known. Make the time to create alternatives and you will be able to manage the balance of power more
effectively.

39

40

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

2. The power of the brand and the relative size of both parties

Imagine you are responsible for selling an established mega-branded
soft drink. You know that any retailer will sell more of your brand than
their own brand or a lesser branded soft drink. The retailer accepts that
margins will be lower due to the high investment in the brand itself, but
this is oﬀset by being able to sell higher quantities.
The retailer will probably sell their cheaper, higher-margin own brand
as well, resulting in their overall product and margin mix being optimized.
Signiﬁcant amounts of money are invested in building brands. As part of
establishing the brands some manufacturers have even, for limited periods,
supplied products to the distributors or retailers at no margin at all, or even
at below cost. The aim here is to expose their product to the market as part
of creating demand, brand awareness, and attracting market share. In the
long term, brand power and the terms that can be negotiated with a strong
brand will more than outweigh the market entry costs.
In some cases, retail buyers need to stock certain lines in order to make
their product category credible to their customers and also to remain competitive with other retailers. In doing so, they will list branded products
despite having to operate at lower margins. So both extremes are in play
here: brands are built and represent power within a negotiation in that
the buyer needs them, but the same brands with which account managers
need exposure to maintain their market share position can carry limited
power. Who needs whom the most and why? What brands bring to the
broader business case in terms of their reliability, quality, and customer
loyalty will have some bearing on the considerations of the buyer, as they
seek to optimize their proﬁtability, starting by objectively weighing up the
balance of power within the relationship.
USING BRAND POWER
A European health and beauty retail chain listed more than 10,000
lines in its stores. With their broad proposition they stocked baby

WHY POWER MATTERS

wipes at one end of the spectrum and top-branded fragrances at
the other.
Their team of buyers dealt with over 250 suppliers and agents with
a range of relationships that directly impacted on the way negotiations
were conducted.
The hair coloring category represented 5% of their total sales,
yet attracted 31% of the total market for Europe. Their own hair
coloring was cheap, reliable, and accessible to the price conscious. The volumes were significant. The negotiations with their
main own-brand supplier were margin focused and tough. The
buyers knew that the supplier had a high level of dependency on
the trading relationship and would use this power to their own
ends.
The negotiations with the “super-brands” had more obvious
options for the supplier due to its own “brand product power.”
The negotiations were collaborative and included trade-offs such
as exclusive packaging and pack sizes, joint advertising, and
buy back where the supplier offered to uplift at cost overstocks
from previous promotional activities. The supplier regarded this
as a worthwhile investment whilst the retailer regarded it as
a “problem solved.” They both regarded negotiations as joint
business planning aimed at growing their total category. For the
buyers their interest was the average category margin – getting
the balance between high margin own brand sales and high
volume branded sales making the best use of the credibility
afforded from the presence of the super-brands in their stores.
Although most B2B negotiations benefit from collaboration,
creativity and a focus on total value opportunities, the reality is that there are many relationships that work because of
dependency.

41

42

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

anchoring position
A position which is designed
to anchor the expectations
and movement of the other

3. History/precedents

History and precedents also play a part in inﬂuencing how
people seek to rationalize and legitimize their position:
“Last time we agreed to a discount of 15% on volumes in
party.
excess of $3 million so let’s start at 15%.” Current terms
can serve as the rationale for an anchoring position.
n
Previous positions, all else remaining equal, serve to shape expectations.
Many organizations work hard to address this through the continuous
innovation of products or changing the nature of the service they oﬀer:
they seek to remove the “apples for apples” comparisons. To achieve this,
many may decide to:
•
•
•

change the people responsible for the relationship;
move historical understandings; or
change the package, service oﬀer, or product being supplied.

It is quite normal for organizations to do this as part of ensuring that
trading remains competitive.
Often where change takes place, when a new person or team is assigned
an account, or where a recent acquisition of a competitor takes place
and new personalities come into play, objectives and motives of the new
players can change quickly, bringing with them a move away from how
the business will have been conducted in the past. Many organizations
systematically move their buyers around so as to ensure that historical
dealings can be ignored more easily.
In other cases, such as in corporate banking, great value is placed on
established relationships and mutual experience that have taken years
to build, and the value that these relationships oﬀer can add to the collaborative way that the relationship is managed. In each case there is the
knowledge of how business has been conducted in the past, which is used
to inﬂuence how it should be in the future.
4. Competitor activity and market conditions

During the credit crunch in 2007/8, a period of unprecedented uncertainty was experienced by most industries in the US and across Europe.

WHY POWER MATTERS

43

Commercial property prices, business values, future earnings forecasts,
and ultimately earnings multiples were all severely hit. Companies with
high levels of debt became more vulnerable and even companies with
strong forward order books looked less secure. Market assumptions relating to risks were challenged; cash became king as commodity prices hit
record highs along with the cost of oil and the radical shift in behavior of
the banking industry. Literally within months, long-term commitments
were diﬃcult to attract as risk aversion became critical to survival. These
changes had tested just about every forecast assumption, resulting in
many contracts being negotiated or renegotiated in an entirely diﬀerent
climate and style to that of the original agreement.
The unpredictability of change aﬀects the degree to which people
are prepared to commit and the level of risk they are prepared to accommodate. In other words, stability and certainty promote a basis for
longer-term commitments. In our ever-changing and fast-paced world,
the issue of change plays an important part in any negotiation, in terms of
what is being discussed, the length of any agreement and which party is
more exposed to the inﬂuence of uncontrollable change.
Although change aﬀects risk and value it can also aﬀect power. Your
competitors’ innovation, marketing, and strategy will have some bearing
on what your customers regard as their options. The very fact that your
competitors are competing provides more power to your customers during negotiations. For example, in electronics the exclusive launch of a new
high-end, 80-inch, 3D, HD plasma TV that attracts 10% of the retail
sales in its target market will directly aﬀect the sales of its competitors’
TVs. This in turn will inﬂuence their trading performance and the power
they have with their retail and wholesale customers.
5. The party with more time

Time and circumstances oﬀer the greatest of power levers in negotiation.
If you have been eﬀective at getting inside the other party’s head and
understand their time pressures, you will have more power to exert. How
you choose to use this will depend on your objectives, the depenancy
within your relationship and the overall shape of the deal.

44

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Any company operating under pressure, whether it is to make a decision,
place an oﬀer or conclude a deal, is compromised by time pressure and will
already be placing a premium on doing whatever is necessary to meet their
deadline. Your job as a negotiator is to test and qualify the priorities and
interests of the other party all the time, as the value or perceived value of
just about anything is constantly changing. A party who is prepared to pay
more today as a result of time pressures may not be in the same position
next week. So if you leave the opportunity too long you may lose the
power you had as their circumstances change.
But what if the timing of a deal is not naturally in your favor? The other
party could have many options and can reject your ideas and proposals.
The answer is to orchestrate events in such a way that you build power by
taking control of time and circumstance. But how can this be possible?
If time and circumstances aﬀect options, then, by creating circumstances through the sequencing of events, you can eﬀectively take control
and negotiate from a greater position of power.

TAKING CONTROL OF TIME AND CIRCUMSTANCES
Sequencing events by mapping your negotiation process can be
used to create momentum and power. Sequencing allows you to
proactively manage events and communication aimed at helping
you remain in control of the overall process.
One notable example of this was where the legal team of a US
private equity firm managed to sequence the events surrounding a
business purchase, based on the pending and predictable change
in exchange rates.
During 2015 the euro exchange rate experienced significant fluctuations against the dollar as a result of the real threat of Greece defaulting
on debt and the introduction of quantitative easing in mainland Europe.
Meanwhile deflation was looming and general consumer spending
was flat. A discount grocery retailer backed by the US private equity

WHY POWER MATTERS

45

firm was continuing to expand its operations. Negotiations had been
ongoing for 12 months over the acquisition of a further small chain of
established stores (Priceline) with prime positions in Belgium.
The economic trend was no secret nor was the trading performance
of Priceline. The PE firm recognized, however, that if they sequenced
the conclusion of their timing discussions with the first release of quantitative easing in Europe, this would trigger a jump in the value of the
dollar and the deal could be closed with a 3% reduction in cost in
dollars. They made a time limited improvement on their offer of 2% for
two weeks. Circumstances had allowed them to impose a legitimate
time limited offer against the currency risk, which the board of Priceline
recognized and ultimately agreed to.

6. The nature of the product, service, or contract

Negotiating a complex construction deal or business merger is, by its very
nature, more challenging than buying a car from your local garage. Alternatively, agreeing a contract for IT services, by its very nature, requires a
diﬀerent type of process and agenda than, say, agreeing a settlement following a marriage breakdown. The diﬀerent relationships in play and the
nature of the outcomes required result in most negotiations being unique.
Example: buying a car

If you were buying a second-hand car privately, you would probably set about
agreeing a price with the current owner. Two pieces of information would
help set the parameters for discussion. First, the price that the owner is asking,
which is eﬀectively their opening position, and, second, what the model and
age of car would typically sell for in the market. Both parties will be aware
of this and usually end up negotiating around the price. The buyer may seek
to lower the seller’s aspirations by pointing to some work that the car needs
doing to bring it up to scratch. The seller may try to increase its perceived value
by promoting the reliability of the car and the fact that it has only had one

46

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

owner. Neither argument need make any diﬀerence to the negotiation unless
you choose to listen to them. There is no prospect of a relationship following
the deal, few issues to negotiate around, so a hard bargaining or deal making
negotiation is likely to follow (4–5 o’clock on the clock face).
Now imagine you were in a position to spend more money and decided
to purchase from a local dealer. Can the worn tire be replaced? Will they
tax the car? Can they provide competitive ﬁnance arrangements? Both
the possibility of a relationship beyond the immediate agreement and
a broader agenda to discuss could result in the negotiation being more
appropriately conducted in a concession trading or even a win–win environment (7–8 o’clock on the clock face).
Finally, consider the same transaction, but this time you are considering
buying a new car from a main dealer. Servicing, depreciation and future
trade-in guarantees, extras on the car, and even insurance now start to
feature in your discussions. Total value becomes a greater consideration
and the deal may well take place in a joint problem solving or even a relationship building environment (10–11 o’clock on the clock face).
What has changed over these three scenarios is the breadth of issues
which can be discussed and the possibility of a relationship that goes
beyond that of the transaction. The item, a car, remains broadly the same
but in each case the appropriate style of negotiation changes.
There is no right or wrong. Your responsibility as a negotiator is to weigh
up what you are trying to achieve and decide which process is more likely
to cover the broad range of risks and beneﬁts involved.
7. Personal relationships

In every culture, relationships and trust play a part in the climate of negotiations. Building an understanding of each other’s position and needs
through exploratory meetings is critical if broader agendas other than
price are to be entertained. Most people prefer doing business with people
they trust and respect. The degree to which trust exists will almost always
inﬂuence the climate of openness and the position on the clock face where
the negotiation takes place.

WHY POWER MATTERS

47

Respect has to be earned and is more likely to be achieved through being
consistent and reliable rather than by being over-ﬂexible or agreeing to make
unconditional concessions. In my experience, even if you feel others are
being unfair, inconsiderate, unyielding, or even arrogant in their dealings,
you need to look beyond behavior and make a rational, sober, unemotional
assessment of the balance of power. Emotional responses to the positions
and demands of the other party will only play to their advantage. Similarly,
if you are in a position of strength, use it to assert your position and gain
commitments, but not to aggravate the situation. Remember that negotiation is not about “winning” in the sense of beating the other party.
Without some degree of trust your negotiations are likely at best to feel
transactional and diﬃcult. Equally, with too much familiarity, complacency kicks in and the total value, opportunity, becomes compromised.
The challenge for you is to ﬁnd the right balance to serve your interests.

INFORMATION IS POWER
If you could read the minds of the other party you would be able
to see the options available, understand their true cost base, their
time pressures, the real implications of having no agreement, and
so on. Unfortunately, such transparency rarely exists. However, you
can still unearth some of this information by questioning, exploring,
and listening to various stakeholders in order to understand the
circumstances of the other party.
Information about the other person’s options or circumstances
certainly provides power, so for the same reasons you should seriously consider how much information and what type of information
is appropriate for you to share with them. Building power requires
you to think and operate like a barrister, but not an interrogator,
questioning appropriately to gain insights. Approach the issues
from different angles. This is not about interrogating, as we have
(Continued )

48

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
to manage the relationships involved. It is about understanding the
whole situation; using your curiosity, inquisitiveness, and desire to
clarify the issues as they see them. The more you invest in understanding their motives, dives, and objectives, the more powerful
your position becomes.
It is for this reason that questioning and listening are critical behaviors of negotiators. Negotiating in a vacuum (not understanding the
market around you) can only result in you operating inside your own
head and therefore suboptimizing your opportunities.
Quite simply, information is power.

IT’S WORTH WHATEVER THEY WILL AGREE TO
Supply and demand is one of the more straightforward economic
levers used universally through the stock exchange, auction houses,
the cost of an airline flight, or today’s bitcoin value. These are all
driven by demand and how much the other party is prepared to
pay. Of course, when negotiating, this can only be helpful if you
understand the circumstances of the other party: their options or best
alternative, their means to pay, and their specific circumstances.
Without this understanding, you risk guessing and negotiating from
a blinkered position. If you have no understanding of the level of
demand, you have little power to work with, even where there is a
real demand.
Between June 2011 and March 2015 the Liv-ex Bordeaux fine
wine index had dropped from 360 to 240 in value and private
collectors struggled to offload their “investments.” John Sturgess had
fallen on tough times. His business was struggling and he was just
managing to meet his monthly outgoings. His wife was about to turn

WHY POWER MATTERS

60 and he wanted to treat her to a holiday, but had conceded that
this would only be possible by borrowing. The one asset John had
with value was his wine cellar, which he had built up over the years.
The value of the French first growths had put him off drinking them.
“You just don’t drink a £2,000 bottle of wine with your BBQ,” he
would say.
John decided to make use of the 120 bottles of various chateaux
and sell them to fund the holiday. He had never considered disposing
of them before so researched on the internet. Auction houses, private
buyers, and specialty wine purchasing companies were all offering
their services. The auction house would take weeks, then there were
fees to consider and of course the uncertainty of what they might fetch
(although by now he had worked out what he thought was the market
value). Private buyers all seemed to be at the other end of the country.
John felt that if they were prepared to travel this far, they might try to
barter him down.
Eventually, John decided to call a specialist business and invited them
to his house to value his wine. Two well-spoken young connoisseurs arrived the next morning and immediately struck up a conversation with
John about how he had come across the wines, where they had been
stored, and why he was selling such fine wines at a time when the
market was falling in value. John was very open with then, explaining
about the holiday, that he probably would not drink them and how he
would be pleased to see the back of them at the right price.
The two young men were left in the cellar for 2 hours before reappearing. “The problem we have,” they started, “is that as good as the
wines are, they have no provenance. They have been stored in your
cellar so their value in the market is 50% less than if they had been in
a bonded warehouse.”
“OK,” said John, “so what’s the value?”
(Continued )

49

50

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
“Well, as you probably know, the market has been dropping for
2 years and although your Latour 96 cases will hold quite well, you
have other wines which are close to their drink by date.”
“OK, so how much?” said John.
“When do you need payment by?”
John repeated, “Well, as I told you, by the end of the week would
be ideal.”
The two young men looked at each other. Well versed in this charade,
they presented a written list that they had created in the cellar. “We
can arrange for a bank transfer here and now, although we know this
value will be short of what you were looking for.” John’s reaction was a
natural one: shock. The offer of £60,000 was half what he was expecting. “We’ll let you think on it,” said one of them. John considered the
prospects of the money being immediately available, and not having
to go through this process again with others and – you guessed it –
he took the deal. The two young connoisseurs had understood John’s
circumstances, were looking to optimize their margins selling back into
the market and had other enquiries to move on to. John may well have
attracted more at the auction but would have missed his wife’s 60th,
which he had allowed to serve as a key criteria.

THE POWER OF A THREE-TIERED STRATEGY
A frozen food logistics firm had successfully built a customer base
across Australian grocers based on reliability and best-in-class
information tracking. They were about to enter some challenging
negotiations with the well-versed retailers. They planned to introduce
an average 4% cost increase. They had 12 customers – two of
which were by far the largest, making up 50% of total market share.

WHY POWER MATTERS

They categorized each customer by size and location. They further
analyzed where conditions existed that would allow them to secure
early wins (agreements) and were more likely to attract a commitment
without serious implications. These smaller grocers were positioned
in phase one of discussions, which took only 2 weeks to complete.
As negotiations were concluded, the agreements were “celebrated”
via press announcements.
At the time, phase two was commencing with some of the more
challenging negotiations which included the “discount retailers.”
Some precedents were in place (early agreements from phase one),
which implied that the terms were being accepted in the market. The
toughest category of customers – the two key customers that made
up 50% market share – was saved till phase three. Since 50% had
already been agreed, this provided power to the logistics firm. They
were now in a more powerful position by virtue of market precedents
being set. If necessary, they could also introduce tiered time slots favoring their phase one and two customers, if the phase three customers
were not prepared to agree. The phasing of the negotiations had
created power against the odds and momentum, which helped make
agreements across all customers possible.

TACTICAL PLAY
Tactics can be used as a way of delivering implied threats or consequences used to manipulate a situation. This is sometimes done
through introducing false time lines or ultimatums which have been
imposed by a higher authority such as the other party’s boss. These are
used when trying to apply pressure or to create urgency. If the other
party attempts to apply these, qualify them. Ask them what will happen
(Continued )

51

52

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
next without asking the types of leading questions that could result in
you digging a hole for yourself such as “so you have no movement on
this issue then?” The idea behind qualifying such claims is to try and
establish if gamesmanship is in play. Of course they are never going
to admit to this, so it is your role to gauge the likelihood of risk, given
all the information you can gather.
Although transparency helps to wipe away some of the “mist” when
deciding the difference between real and implied threats, you need to
gain as much clarity as possible. Without clarity, you will be operating
from an unclear if not compromised position, regardless of what the
balance of power might suggest.

If power is directly aﬀected by circumstance then supply and demand
represents one of the main issues that inﬂuence it. If there is a shortage
or diﬃculty in acquiring something, assuming that demand is stable or
strong, then the market value will increase. That does not mean that it has
to increase for you. That depends on the situation. In times of no demand
or when there is oversupply, the value or price will generally drop. Again,
the market rule need not always apply. It depends.
KEY TAKEAWAYS

Power inﬂuences strategies and tactics employed, provides one party over
another with more options and therefore advantages, yet should not be
assumed. With the right strategy, those with the power stacked against
them can still negotiate very good deals.
•
•

The balance of power is not a constant and can easily move as time and
circumstances or supply and demand dynamics change.
Proactive positioning can help you create enough power to defend your
position.

WHY POWER MATTERS

•
•
•
•

53

Real and perceived power can be equally eﬀective in gaining advantage.
The common laws of capitalism do not always apply. It really does
depend on whose head you are in.
The stronger your options, the more powerful you become.
If they have power, expect them to use it.

