CHAPTER 4

The Ten Negotiation Traits

“Until you make the unconscious, conscious, it will direct your life and
you will call it fate.”
C.G. Jung
Self-awareness comes from knowing and being honest with yourself
about who you are, what you do, and how you perform.
Most people like to regard themselves as good negotiators. Yet when asked
why they think they perform well, they can usually only describe a few of
their strengths, or things they believe make a diﬀerence to their performance.
If the clock face has taught us anything, it has demonstrated that diﬀerent
types of negotiation require diﬀerent skills. In other words, hard bargaining
at 4 o’clock on the clock face requires strengths that are diﬀerent from those
required to perform eﬀectively when joint problem solving at 10 o’clock.
However, before moving on to examine how to adapt your behavior as you
move around the clock face it is worth understanding how personal traits can
inﬂuence your overall ability when trying to secure the best deal. To a sports
professional, examples of relevant traits might be stamina, agility, speed, and
ﬂexibility. These will be important to diﬀerent degrees, depending on the
sport they specialize in. They help to deﬁne a player’s potential and those
areas that require further development as part of improving their overall performance. Some traits are innate and some can be learned or improved on.
Importantly, these traits underpin the player’s ability to behave and perform
to the highest levels in competitive environments.

56

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

The ten traits
1. Nerve
2. Self-discipline
3. Tenacity
4. Assertiveness
5. Instinct
6. Caution
7. Curiosity
8. Numerical reasoning
9. Creativity
10. Humility

These traits directly inﬂuence the actions you take and can be developed
through a more conscious approach to how you negotiate. They relate to
those attributes that come more naturally to you or those you are more
likely to gravitate towards. What is important here is that you think about
how these traits inﬂuence you and your performance when you negotiate.
The ten traits underpin your behavior. For example, maintaining your
nerve supports your ability to think clearly when faced with conﬂict and to
open a negotiation with an extreme and yet realistic position. If you handle
pressure well and have the nerve to maintain self-control comfortably,
your performance in tougher negotiations where competitive behaviors
are required will come more naturally. Your traits are neither good nor
bad; they are just a reﬂection of who you are. The important point is to
understand yourself well enough to compensate for that which does not
come naturally and of course to use your strengths to your advantage.
1. NERVE
Believe in your position, never offend, and always remain calm

Nerve helps us to exercise patience and to remain calm when the pressure
is on. Anyone operating under pressure is reliant on controlling their
nerves as part of being able to perform. The pilot, golfer, police oﬃcer,

THE TEN NEGOTIATION TRAITS

57

barrister, to name but a few, rely on their nerve to be able to carry out their
duties, as will you when you negotiate.
Exercising nerve during negotiations involves handling both perceived
and real conﬂict, being able to read the sensitivities around the situation
before responding. Nothing happens by accident in the conscious negotiator
negotiation, so having a clear head that allows you In negotiation, nothing happens
to operate as a conscious negotiator is essential to
by accident. The conscious
staying in control. Nerve also enables you to introduce negotiator is aware of everything
challenging opening positions where appropriate in which happens in the room and
the knowledge that you are taking a risk that could their every action, comment or
compromise the potential of a deal. It allows you to interaction is intentional and
more easily demonstrate conviction when taking up a
considered.
position with conﬁdence.
Opening with an extreme position and remaining silent where appropriate might be described in some contexts as aggressive or even arrogant. Yet
when combined with humility, and when remaining calm, exercising nerve
can make for a very eﬀective, if not tough, negotiation stance. Without
nerve you are more likely to become a victim of your own discomfort, lose
respect, and ultimately concede more readily. With nerve comes the ability
to move position when you are ready and only when it is appropriate.
2. SELF-DISCIPLINE
To understand what to do, and to do that which is appropriate

Self-discipline: it’s an everyday term, yet in negotiation it requires you to
separate your behavior from your feelings and emotions.
It allows you to be what you need to be and what the situation demands
of you, rather than behaving in a way that satisﬁes your own emotions
and levels of comfort. Self-discipline does not require you to be a diﬀerent
person, but to fulﬁl the role requirements at the time to help you perform.
For example, remaining indiﬀerent about the potential of a proposal
that has been made may be more appropriate than showing any overt
enthusiasm or excitement. Having the self-discipline to resist showing
emotion helps you remain calm in appearance. This is not to suggest that
you should remain indiﬀerent to all proposals made in your negotiations,

58

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

but to be disciplined enough that you present the signals you want the
other party to read.
Patience and the ability to handle frustration are qualities found in
eﬀective negotiators. It is highly frustrating trying to get the other party
to agree to something they appear reluctant to do. However, this can be
achieved by the use of:
•
•
•
•
•

good timing;
summarizing;
repackaging the oﬀer;
remaining at ease with silence; and
having the self-control to avoid selling your position or talking
inappropriately.

Having achieved this within yourself you need to ensure that, where
you are negotiating in a team, the remainder of the team are equally well
disciplined.

3. TENACITY
The negotiator's equivalent to stamina

The times you hear the words “no, can’t, won’t” are the occasions where
you will have to turn to “how.” Rather than simply concede on the issue,
you should examine the rejection from diﬀerent perspectives to ﬁnd out
what other conditions or circumstances you could introduce as part of
maintaining control and managing their expectations. For instance, in
tennis if your opponent breaks your serve, you don’t give up on the set,
you work harder in the next game to regain your position.
There will be times when it is appropriate to hold ﬁrm and test the
other negotiator’s resolve. Tenacity is not only about holding ﬁrm on
your position but also being prepared to be persistent where you deem
it appropriate; perhaps even to employ the “broken record” tactic. This is

THE TEN NEGOTIATION TRAITS

59

a tactic to employ when you need to repeat your position time after time
until it registers.
It is about having the courage of your convictions when faced with challenges from the other party, which are often used tactically to make you
question your own judgment.
Tenacity helps negotiators to work on deals rather than being driven
to close on them and conclude agreements prematurely. The more time
invested in a deal the more likely you are to create or extract value from it.
Few people genuinely enjoy negotiating or can see the value in continuing
discussions when the deal is seemingly done. Attitudes such as “We have
reached agreement so let’s agree now while we’re ahead” are held by those
who miss the point. It is at this time that “How else can we ensure the
contract is delivered?” should be asked. With ever more considerations
around how the deal can be tuned, the tenacious negotiator will ﬁnd value
or risk reduction that would otherwise go untouched.
Tenacity helps you to resist capitulation: it’s the part of you that enables
you to hold your position and not be worn down by the other party. It’s
an attitude that requires stamina, helping you to seek value right up until
you ﬁnally agree to conclude the deal.

THE POWER AND VALUE OF EXCLUSIVITY
An American hardware furnishing store that has grown dramatically over the past 10 years prides itself as a destination store.
Ninety percent of products are either unique or are supplied as
exclusive.
The buying team were considering a new range of cutlery called
“The Lymington,” which was just about to be launched by William
Brown, a specialist from Sheffield, England, who had expected to
sell 10,000 sets in the first year of production through their core client
base in Europe.
(Continued )

60

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
Three meetings took place between Mark Franklyn (the account
manager for William Brown) and the New York-based buying team.
During the first meeting Mark was keen to understand the market
opportunity in the US and how this might elevate William Brown’s
reputation. He explained how the Lymington had already been
marketed to existing clients who were keen to place orders. The buying team set out a proposal, which included a 12-month exclusive
contract for the design and supply subject to 30% discount based on
10,000 sets.
During the second meeting Mark explained that the increased risk of
channeling the entire range through one new client was not in his interest – though he stated that he could provide exclusivity for distribution
in the US only. By now the buying team wanted the exclusive deal and
had already sold the idea back in to the commercial director in New
York. William Brown’s board were excited about the US opportunity
but wanted to minimize discount levels and ensure the committed
volumes would be achieved.
In the third meeting Mark outlined a tough position involving
no discounts, 50% payment for the full 10,000 units, 7 days
payment terms and the balance drawn down within 6 months.
His final point was to insist on confirmation before the end of the
week, otherwise he was going ahead with his release into the
European market. To William Brown this was an opportunity not
only to launch in year 2 into the US but to be associated with the
retailer, which would raise credibility. He also wanted to use the
attraction of exclusivity to minimize risk. The deal was done. The
Lymington sold 30,000 units at a price point that was at a 30%
premium, which meant the margin opportunity remained viable
to the retailer.

THE TEN NEGOTIATION TRAITS

61

4. ASSERTIVENESS
Tell them what you will do, not what you won't do

The best way to determine the future is to create it.
Being in control of the negotiation primarily comes from being proactive, and demonstrating conﬁdence from being prepared and having a
well-deﬁned strategy. Then it’s about how well you perform.
The Complete Skilled Negotiator comes across as being ﬁrm and in control.
Not obnoxious or disrespectful but simply able to say what is necessary in a
calm, authoritative manner. This is not about being parental or patronizing in
your communication style, but simply being conﬁdent in your assertions. This
can be a ﬁne line to tread. As an assertive negotiator you need to facilitate the
development of the agenda and set out your position. You should focus on the
deal and remain open about what is, as well as what is not, possible.
It is worth considering that the outcome of any negotiation can only
be inﬂuenced by the proposals that you make and ﬂexibility you oﬀer.
Therefore, ensure that it is you who is making the proposals. As an assertive
negotiator, you will not wait for the other party to make their proposals ﬁrst.
Yes, of course listen to what they have to say to understand where ﬂexibility
exists, but ensure that it is your proposal that they are responding to. As
an assertive negotiator you should also resist the temptation to conform.
You should regard yourself as being “in charge” but yet respect the attitudes,
feelings, and views of those you are negotiating with. Being assertive helps
you gain respect. Being ﬁrm is not to be confused with being rude.
5. INSTINCT
Trust it – you will be right more often than not

Experience and “gut feeling,” or what some refer to as a “sixth sense,” are
traits that eﬀective negotiators refer to as instinct. Instinct helps the
Complete Skilled Negotiator:
•
•

to hear not just what is being said but the meaningg behind the words; and
to gauge honesty, and sense if the deal is too good to be true or if there
is more scope to negotiate.

62

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Your ability to read any situation will allow you to judge your response and
respond with counter proposals. If it seems too good to be true, it usually is
and you should trust your instinct when you are faced with such a situation.
Most people have good instincts, yet under pressure do not always
listen to them. They choose instead to accept the case placed before them
and conform rather than challenge. As an eﬀective negotiator you should
have the courage of your convictions, challenge anything that does not
“feel” right, and always demand clarity before being prepared to progress.
Trust your instinct, otherwise too narrow a view on the bottom line could
ultimately provide you with a suboptimized agreement. Price can be incredibly seductive, and those who shut out other considerations, even when the
opportunity feels too good to be true, fall foul of listening to and acting on
their instinct. The very need to feel as though you got a great deal can be
enough to distract you from the logic you might otherwise exercise and has
lead to some negotiators agreeing to disastrous deals. Great deals are only so
if they are honored and delivered against. Instinctively, you know if you are
oﬀered a cheap Rolex watch in a bar by a stranger that the item is unlikely to
be from a reputable source. However, how sure would you be if they were in
an oﬃce dressed in a suit oﬀering a timeshare apartment in Panama? Still
suspicious? OK, how about the real-estate agent from a reputable agency who
tells you he can sell your house in under a week if you sign with him today?
Instinct usually comes from both experience and knowledge, as well
as your subconscious observations. The instant evaluation and judgment
most people make when they ﬁrst meet someone else are based on subtle
assessments of nonverbal communication and language. The Complete
Skilled Negotiator has the ability to make these assessments more consciously as they deliberately analyze the behaviors of the other party.
6. CAUTION
If it seems too good to be true, it probably is

The “action” or interaction, once a negotiation has begun, comes in
the form of proposals and counter proposals as the deal starts to take
shape.

THE TEN NEGOTIATION TRAITS

63

Picture the high levels of mental energy and the work rate taking place
inside the heads of two teams of negotiators around the table. Both parties
seeking to create or distribute value in the knowledge that if they are too
hasty they may miss an implication and, by being seduced on price, they
could be entering into an agreement that could carry more risk in the
long term. It is during these critical exchanges when reality checks should
take place. This is when patience is needed and time should be taken to
calculate what has changed.

IF IT SEEMS TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE … IT USUALLY IS
With the likes of Serena Williams, Beyoncé, and Michelle Obama
amongst hundreds of keen celebrities, the nail bar industry has
boomed, becoming a $10bn-per-year industry. California alone
employs 100,000 nail technicians. Back in 2007 Philip Montone,
a Paris-based entrepreneur, hastily set up five bars across the affluent
suburbs of Neuilly-sur-Seine. With his experience in the beauty salon
industry he was well versed in how middle-class Parisians liked to
pamper themselves. Working with a team of nail bar specialists he
set about investing. Within a long list of equipment needed were the
ultraviolet light units used for curing acrylic. By his calculations, he
needed to purchase 20 of these. Following some research he had
three suppliers visit his office. All claimed that there was a shortage
of supply and there was a 3-month waiting list, such was the surge
in growth in the industry.
That evening Philip received a cold call from a supplier direct from
Hong Kong. The supplier offered to supply units within 10 days and at
the specification Philip was asking for. He negotiated on and secured
guaranteed delivery and a 20% discount on the prices before placing
the order for $4000. The units arrived 4 days before opening day.
(Continued )

64

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
They were everything he had been offered except for one oversight.
They were wired for Taiwan at 110 volts and, although they could
work with transformers, they would not meet French health and safety
regulations.
Philip attracted a great price and delivery, but in his haste, and
because of a single oversight, he ended up writing off the total cost.
Today you can buy these units on Amazon for as little as $20 a time.

7. CURIOSITY
Asking why because you want and need to know

Gathering information both prior to and during your negotiation is the
ultimate way of creating power. Even if you think you understand your
market well or you have dealt with someone for many years it’s still possible to assume far too much. Some negotiators get caught up with what
they need to achieve and the pressures they face, rather than seeking to
understand what the other party needs or how things may have changed
for them in recent times. Eﬀective questioning used to seek information
and uncover facts, data and circumstances, which may be not be obvious
or may even be concealed, must be a precursor to making any proposal.
•
•
•
•

What are their priorities and why?
What are their time pressures and why?
What are their options and why?
How might any of these be changed?

Understanding the situation does not just come from questioning.
Researching the other party, talking to others and obtaining credit checks
are activities those who want to know and those who are naturally curious
will be involved in. It’s not an interrogation, but information is power and
without insight you will be a weaker negotiator.

THE TEN NEGOTIATION TRAITS

65

8. NUMERICAL REASONING
Know what it's really worth, know what it really costs

Numerical reasoning allows you to consider more easily the “what ifs.” Your
ability to engineer diﬀerent trade-oﬀ scenarios by performing quick calculations allows you to expose opportunities that might otherwise go unnoticed.
This involves linking the value of a risk with the beneﬁt of an opportunity by
calculating the incremental upside and then tabling it as a proposal. Although
it’s a good idea to prepare some proposals ahead of your meeting (following
initial discussions), calculating counter proposals and providing alternative
solutions during the negotiation with similar or even improved outcomes
will come more naturally to those comfortable with numerical reasoning.
Unfortunately, for many, this is not the case. Using simple “ready reckoners” to work out the ﬁnancial implications of movement is one way of
preparing yourself for this. For example, working out the implications of
each 1% discount or 1-week extension, or each increase of 500 in unit
volume requirements, and having this prepared on a spreadsheet can help
you calculate quickly and respond to proposals with a clear understanding
of the units and values involved.
Numerical reasoning helps you to calculate options or consequences
and prepare and be ready to respond with possible alternatives. It helps
discussions and ideas to ﬂow, and also minimizes the number of times the
meeting has to adjourn while one party reworks their ﬁgures. If you are
in doubt, it’s highly appropriate to adjourn. If you are ever in doubt about
how the value of the deal has or will change as a result of a proposal, you
should take whatever time is necessary to understand the implications of
entertaining the proposal before moving on.
9. CREATIVITY
Exploring and building on possibilities

Creative solutions not only help resolve deadlock situations but help us to
trade oﬀ ideas as part of creating more value. By using a creative approach
you can link and package variables (volume, timing, speciﬁcation, etc.) in
diﬀerent ways. Nothing is agreed until everything is agreed, so the creative

66

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

negotiator is comfortable with degrees of ambiguity as the shape of the
deal evolves. It provides you with the chance to introduce options and opportunities rather than trying to work through only those issues in front
of you in a disciplined, linear fashion.
Many negotiations involve a broad range of variables and the way these
are linked together and are traded against each other provides for the art of
creative deal-making. Even when it appears that there are few variables – let’s
say price, timing, and speciﬁcation – the creative negotiator will identify
other value-adding considerations and turn them into variables ready for
negotiation.
If you were buying 50 acres of land from a farmer. The price asked for
the land will be important and transparent to both parties. The timing of
the availability of the ﬁeld would allow you to plan out how you intended
to make use of the space. Other considerations may include access to the
land, fencing, and what the land has been used for in the past. However,
the creative negotiator would examine an even broader set of variables as
they consider the possible trade oﬀs. What about options in the future on
adjoining land, drainage, conditions on how the surrounding land may be
used, and contamination? What about letting the land back to the farmer,
access for local huntsmen that the farmer is involved with, and so on?
The creative negotiator examines risk, longevity, performance, and the
interests of the other party to “fully” scope the parameters of the lifetime of
an agreement. The creative negotiator also looks beyond the variables that
he or she is measured on as they realize that incremental value may come
from elsewhere and often not all components are visible at the outset.
10. HUMILITY
It is people who make agreements and humility that breeds respect

Exercising diplomacy and empathy during negotiations to help manage
the appropriate climate sounds like common sense. However, with the
tensions that can exist, it’s humility that often serves to bring discussions
to an adult-to-adult level, cutting through the tactics and gamesmanship
in play. Humility removes the need for ego to feature and helps you to

THE TEN NEGOTIATION TRAITS

67

demonstrate your intention of working with the other party, rather than
against them, to create a mutually beneﬁcial relationship. Reciprocity
ensures that if one party becomes competitive, the other party will mirror
this behavior and, as a result, both will ﬁnd themselves being drawn into
positional arguments that become counterproductive. It is your humility
that will allow the other party to “win” the argument as they concentrate
on the climate and maximizing the total value of the deal from their
perspective.
Ultimately, it is not you who is important; it is what is best for the
relationship and for the agreement. It’s not about competing or about how
you feel. Humility requires the removal of personal emotional considerations other than the need to maintain mutual respect with your focus
on the agreement. The skills associated with managing climate are well
documented under behaviors later in the next chapter. Humility is what
sits beneath the behavior. It is a trait that allows you as a negotiator to
focus on the quality of the agreement rather than being preoccupied with
personalities and personal agendas.
Although it carries risks, having the conﬁdence to admit that you
don’t know something (where your credibility would not be completely
ruined), being open to ideas without appearing inﬂuenced, and making
the other party feel important are all indicators of humility in play. It’s
alright not to know all the answers. It is knowing what questions to ask
and demonstrating integrity and gravitas that allows those with humility
to build the appropriate relationship for the more interdependent deals.
KEY TAKEAWAYS

Some traits will be more reﬂective of you and your strengths than others. No
individual trait will ensure better results, but understanding them and you
oﬀers you opportunity to become a truly outstanding negotiator.
•

There is going to be some pressure, some tension, maybe even conﬂict.
Control your nerve, stick with your plan, never oﬀend, and always
remain calm.

68

•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Everything happens for a reason and they will try to inﬂuence you and
your position. Keep your self-discipline and only act as you had planned.
Some negotiations may wear you down. Your energy levels and tenacity
will help you to get the best possible deal.
Take control of your negotiation by exercising your assertiveness and
self-assurance. Remain ﬁrm and yet engaging.
Trust your instinct. If you think it could be too good to be true or if
they are not to be trusted, don’t continue blindly. Recognize it and act
accordingly.
Before agreeing to any new terms, exercise caution by working out the
potential consequences or hidden risks.
Information is power. So, always use your curiosity and ask questions
throughout your negotiation.
Make the time to calculate options and alternatives using your numerical reasoningg before and during the negotiation.
Creativity, building on possibilities, and identifying synergies will help
you to problem solve as well as optimize value.
It is you who will make agreements and your humility that will promote
the trust needed for your agreements to get across the line.

