CHAPTER 5

The Fourteen Behaviors that
Make the Difference

“If all you have is a hammer in the toolbox, everything looks like a nail.”
Bernard Baruch
The framework for our negotiation standard now starts to unfold. It is
time to face yourself and your capability as a negotiator. Your versatility,
adaptability, and range of skills will ensure that you can optimize opportunities in all types of negotiations The clock face in Chapter 2 has provided
the basis for diﬀerentiating the many ways to negotiate. The role of power
in Chapter 3 helps us understand how situations and relationships can be
manipulated or inﬂuenced, meaning that we have to continuously reassess
our assumptions. The ten negotiation traits we examined in Chapter 4
provide a framework for self-awareness, enabling us to do that which is
appropriate. In this chapter I present the 14 behaviors that enable you
to do the appropriate thing at the right time. Together, the traits and
behaviors support the competent performance of the Complete Skilled
Negotiator.
The fourteen negotiation behaviors capture and describe what it is
that you do when negotiating. They make up the varied skills required
to perform at diﬀerent points on the clock face and when employed enable you to be versatile enough to perform in all types of situations. They
have been used as a framework for assessing, developing, and supporting

70

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

negotiations in over 500 corporate businesses around the globe employing
the clock face as their “standard” negotiation reference.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Think clearly when faced with conﬂict.
Do not allow your sense of fairness to inﬂuence behavior.
Maintain your self-control, use silence, and manage discomfort.
Open extreme yet realistically to shift their expectations.
Read their break point.
Listen and interpret the meaning behind the words.
Plan and prepare using all information available.
Question eﬀectively.
Always trade concessions eﬀectively and conditionally.
Apply analytical skills to manage the value of the deal as the negotiation
unfolds.
Create and maintain the appropriate climate for trust.
Develop and use your agenda to help control the negotiation proceedings.
Think creatively to develop proposals which help move the deal forward.
Explore options to help gain agreement.
12
1

11
Relationship
building

10

Bartering

2

Partnership
joint problem
solving

Haggling/
bidding

Win–win

Hard
bargaining

9

3

8

Concession
trading
7

5
6

Figure 5.1 The clock face.

4

Dealing

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

71

The ﬁrst ﬁve behaviors are more commonly, although not exclusively,
used on the right-hand side of the clock face (1–6 o’clock negotiations),
yet the self-control associated with them can also underpin those behaviors used further around the clock face.
The next three behaviors are based on listening, planning, and questioning, and relate to all positions on the clock face.
The ﬁnal six behaviors, which build on the former behaviors, help us
to perform in more complex agreements where relationship, dependency,
and total value are more important.
THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS
1. Think clearly when faced with conflict

Everything you do in negotiation requires you to think: if you can’t think
clearly your performance is going to be compromised. In some ways, it
is similar in its deﬁnition to the personal trait of nerve (see Chapter 4).
The extent of conﬂict, real or perceived, within a negotiation will vary
depending on the strategy being adopted by both parties. The ability to
think clearly when faced with conﬂict is one that will serve any negotiator
well at any point on the clock face.
Imagine that you receive a letter outlining a price increase of 5%. It is
unexpected and comes with a limp excuse citing market conditions. Your
ﬁrst reaction is disbelief and then anger. You reach for the phone and then
place it down as you reﬂect on your approach. You need to think clearly
and consider your approach. You need to control your emotions and commence negotiations in control of yourself, if not yet of the situation. The
risk is that your emotional reactions could confuse or cloud your ability to
perform in such circumstances which clearly is not in your best interests.
Thinking clearly involves not allowing the other party to make you feel
as though it is you who does not understand the market and who needs
to move. Never agree to anything unless you understand it. In negotiation,
nothing is agreed until everything is agreed, so make sure you have not
missed anything before agreeing. It also means standing up to anyone ex-

72

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

ercising arrogance as they attempt to manipulate your thinking – unless
you want them to think they are doing so because it serves your interests.
When there are major consequences at stake, or serious time pressures
in play and there is an obligation on you to perform, you will inevitably
experience pressure. Depending on how much pressure, your ability to
think clearly may be aﬀected. It’s your ability to hold your nerve and accommodate pressure that will diﬀerentiate your performance, especially
in hard bargaining negotiations.

MANAGING CONFLICTING POSITIONS
It was to be the third meeting and negotiations had been progressing
well. All but three issues had now been agreed and both teams were
starting to anticipate the contract start date which was within a week
and was one of the outstanding issues. There was clearly urgency
around the work needing to be done. The evening before the meeting, an email arrived with the Marketing Director’s “final position”
detailing the final three points, with a deadline of 10.30am the
following morning.
The third meeting was due to start at 9am that morning. The team
from the branding agency arrived and the climate was cool. Rather
than respond to the email, they re stated their own position and then
explained that they were not empowered to negotiate any further.
Once stated, they said nothing. They did not mention or give the
email any recognition.
The Marketing Director said: “You know we can’t afford your fees
as they stand.” The branding agency manager held his hand out and
offered a final 2.5% discount. He had been asked for 10%. The room
was quiet and remained so for 2 minutes. It felt like 20. Both nerve and
silence remained as the Marketing Director had to make his mind up.
Was he going to conclude or walk? The deal was done. Rather than
capitulate or deadlock, the agency manager had thought through the

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

73

situation and decided to provide just enough movement to demonstrate
that he wanted the business. By managing the conflicting positions and
tension in the room the branding agency were able to agree the deal.

In practice
• Gather your thoughts and remove any emotion from your thinking;
if you do not do this you will lose composure and will more likely
underperform.
• Demand clarity as a condition of continuing.
• Remain focused on your purpose at all times.
• Control the negotiation by restating your position and letting them do
the talking.
• If you are not sure about the deal or what it adds up to, then take time
out. You can always return once you have taken time to consider your
options.
2. Do not allow your sense of fairness to influence behavior

Fairness has no place in negotiation as it cannot be measured objectively.
What’s fair to you may not seem fair to the other party so it cannot be
relied on as a basis for seeking agreement.
However, the perception of fairness is important where you need balanced cooperation with the other party and where you need to work with
them on an ongoing basis. But “fair” is a subjective word and a relative
term. You oﬀer one person a price of $40 and they think that’s a fair price.
You oﬀer another person a price of $40 and they think it’s unfair. The
ﬁrst has been used to paying $45 elsewhere and thinks they have a good
deal and the price is fair. The second has never purchased before but is
expecting a price of $35, so is not happy.
Similarly, fairness is not the answer to conﬂict. Opting to split differences straight down the middle, for example, is not negotiating: it is
compromising. The need to exhibit fairness often leads inexperienced

74

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

negotiators to accept the 50:50 oﬀer. This is because it feels “fair,” when
they should make further counter proposals to provide less costly solutions. So rather than grabbing the deal with the ﬁnal 50:50 split, for
example, why not oﬀer a further conditional proposal that costs you less
than 50% of the diﬀerence?
The more you try to be fair, the more your “generosity” will be taken
advantage of. Most people will not live by the same value set as you.
They may simply be more callous or irrational about how they go
about trading. One thing is for sure: they are out to maximize profit
and, if you make it easy for them, it will be to the detriment of your
interests.
Perversely, people who do operate in a fair way during negotiations
can in fact be perceived as unfair. For example, in a hard bargaining
situation at 4 o’clock someone may decide not to ask for more than they
expect in the ﬁrst instance to avoid oﬀending the other party. Their sense
of fairness results in them feeling uncomfortable with the prospect of
rejection, which would be likely in the event of them opening with a
very high or low oﬀer. The other party, however, expecting to negotiate,
will want them to move from their opening position in order to gain
some satisfaction. The ﬁrst party is left with two options: either to
give away value that they cannot aﬀord to (because they have already
opened on their break point); or to say “no” and not move. This in itself
could lead to a perception of stubbornness, unfairness and, potentially,
deadlock.
Firm is not rude, tough is not nasty. Liked is not respected. When hard
bargaining, nice people don’t get good deals.
In practice
• Aim to look for the optimum solution rather than simply a fair one.
• Remember that the easy, fair route to splitting the diﬀerence is rarely
the optimum way to the best deal for all concerned.
• If the other party oﬀers to split down the middle, it usually means that
they would probably accept less.
• If you concede they will want more – all trade-oﬀs should be conditional.

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

75

3. Maintain your self-control, use silence, and manage discomfort

This competitive behavior might be regarded as unacceptable in many
relationships, but when you are trying to move the other person’s position,
self-control and silence are the most powerful of behaviors to conduct.
During a hard bargaining negotiation at 4 o’clock, for example, there is
inevitably a conﬂict in positions: Tension and sometimes even emotion
can run high. For most, it’s uncomfortable but for the trained negotiator
it is part of the territory. The stronger your self-control, the more power
you will attract attract as the conversation unfolds.
Negotiation has less to do with talking and more to do with listening.
You should let the other party:
•
•
•
•

sell their position;
explain their position;
promote all the beneﬁts; and
explain why they need an agreement “today.”

Negotiation is silence and to master this is to maintain self-control and
manage the resulting discomfort. Information is power and the more they
talk the more powerful you will become.
Conversely, if the other person remains silent and you feel obliged to
respond, don’t. Don’t pay the price by instantly conceding as you attempt
to remove your discomfort, because if you speak too early, that is what will
happen. If you have nothing to say, say nothingg. They are thinking. Let them
think. If you speak to ﬁll the gap, you will probably end up compromising
your position by oﬀering further information or even by implying that
there is room for movement.
What you think is important and need to say will usually work against
you. A local café always oﬀered a window display full of delicious cakes
sold by the slice. People rarely walked passed without admiring the range of
cakes presented in the window. Trade was always good due to the reputation
of the cakes. The cakes were sourced from a local cake maker who supplied
15 large cakes each day. The margin was very healthy for the café. The price
they paid for each cake averaged £20. The supply agreement was informal,
with orders placed each week and daily deliveries arriving by 8.30am.

76

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

The cake maker asked for a meeting with Mark, the café manager who
was authorized to purchase all stock requirements. The relationship was
a strong and a familiar one, which was by now in its third year. The cake
maker demanded a 15% price increase with immediate eﬀect and handed
over the new price list to the manager. Mark examined the note and said
nothing. She then started to explain why, citing ingredient cost increases.
Mark continued to say nothing. The cake maker then said that there had
not been a price increase for over a year. He agreed with her. It was a fact.“I
provide you with highest quality cakes, which keeps your café busy all year
round,” she said. Mark agreed. He ﬁnally turned to the cake maker and
said, “If you maintain your current terms and service level we will renew
our agreement with you for a further year. Please let me know what you
want to do by tomorrow morning.”
He did not argue with her case or seek to negotiate over the 15%. He
listened, remained calm, and restated his position. With no justiﬁcation
and without being rude. He remained “in charge.” And she ultimately
accepted the deal.
In practice
• Let the other party do the talking and focus your attention ﬁrst on what
they are saying, rather than thinking too much about how to respond.
• Listen to what the other party is saying in order to establish how far
they will move from their current position.
• If you are not ready to make your proposal, either ask a question or say
nothing.
4. Open extreme yet realistically to shift their expectations

To open extreme is simple enough, as you just state your proposal. The
fear of the predictable rejection, however, results in many feeling uncomfortable with stating it in the ﬁrst place. Because of the fear of the reaction
we are expecting, we risk losing our composure. Rather than saying “my
price is $50,” some will say something like, “I’m looking for around $50,”
which instantly suggests it’s negotiable. If it’s worth $100 to you, oﬀer

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

77

$50. We know they are going to reject the oﬀer but that’s part of the
process.
You can’t change or remove this feeling of being uncomfortable so you
need to get used to it or ﬁnd ways to accommodate it. To do this, think
about it as a process that you are involved in. The process will do three
things for you.
1. First, it will help you to position your oﬀer appropriately.
2. Second, it will help you to counter the position of the other party.
3. Third, it will ensure that you provide the other party with the satisfaction of having got a better deal than they believed was originally
available.
Your opening position or proposal should be extreme enough for them
not to accept it, but not so extreme that they choose to walk away, concluding the conversation there and then. If your opening position is too
extreme, the other party may conclude that you are wasting their time, are
not serious or credible and move on. Your oﬀer also has to be realistic if
they are to stay engaged.
For example, if you wanted to buy something for $200 and they are
asking $300, you might negotiate them down, depending on the circumstances. But if you were attempting to ﬁnish at $200 by opening at $25,
then they would probably walk away.
The purpose of opening extreme is to create an anchor from which to
move. If you have control over your own sense of fairness and can manage
your discomfort, then you will be able to do this. Assuming the other
party is still talking to you, you are now in a proactive position that allows
movement on your part, given that you will have taken up an opening
position outside of their break point.
You can wipe their extreme openers oﬀ the table by attaching equally
ludicrous conditions to their price. Imagine a seller said to you “the price
is $150.” You respond with: “I can agree, subject to payment installments
over 3 years and that the item is guaranteed for the duration of the payment

78

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

plan.” In negotiation you never need to say no. You can always re-engineer
the variables in such a way that you can say yes and yet with your terms
which oﬀ set or counter the oﬀer being made. Simply attach conditions
that oﬀset the implications of saying yes. Also, you never have to, nor
should you, lie in negotiations. There is no need to if you understand the
process you are involved in. The process of opening extreme is simply
that – a process – and is usually employed in the hard bargaining context.
By oﬀering $50 you are not lying, you are simply making an oﬀer by telling
them what you will agree to.
During tough one-dimensional negotiations, it is important to recognize that you can get a great price and yet a lousy deal. Never get so into
attacking their position. It will usually result in you losing sight of your
own position. An antique clock collector negotiated an amazingly low
price on a clock at an antiques fair. The seller said that it needed “some
attention” as it was not working. However, he was seduced by the price he
had been able to agree and bought it. That was 5 years ago. The clock has
now been through three diﬀerent repairs, costing the collector the asking
price over again. After each repair the clock worked for less than a week.
It now sits at the back of his workshop.
If it appears too good to be true, it usually is.
In practice
• Ensure your opening position is extreme enough for them not to accept
it – but not so extreme that they will immediately walk away.
• Make your position credible by cutting out any soft exposing statements: avoid the use of words like “around,” “in the region of,” “I was
hoping for …,” “we were expecting …”
• Use a non-verbal reaction to their opening position – tactically known
as the professional ﬂinch, this is designed to clearly demonstrate to the
other party your surprise at their position.
• Apply self-control when making your oﬀer, state your ﬁgure – then
shut up.
• Learn to be at ease with silence.

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

79

5. Read their break point

In any hard bargaining negotiation, you should deﬁne your break point
ﬁrst. That is:
•
•
•

The point at which you have other options that you could take.
The point at which the deal is not viable.
The point at which you will walk, rather than do business.

This is not your objective or a measure, just a fail-safe position. Its only
purpose is to prevent you from agreeing to a deal that, in the cold light of
day, is just not viable. Your job when hard bargaining is to ﬁnish the deal as
close to their break point as possible. Therefore, your ﬁrst task is to work
out where you think this is, and then open extreme and yet realistic on the
other side of it assuming of course you are hard bargaining.
You can read the other party’s limits through:
•
•
•
•

the types of proposals they make;
the language they use to justify their movements;
the timescales they are working to; and
the size and frequency of their concessions or counter proposals.

This can help you to identify their break point. Their opening position
and response to yours will help you plot where you think they may settle.
Under pressure people often say (without realizing) the exact opposite of
what they actually mean to say. For example, if they say “we once paid $60
an hour for this and would not do it again,” they are saying this not to you
but to themselves. Even they do not believe it. It’s their denial that drives
this behavior so listen to what they are saying. If they were not prepared
to go to $60 an hour they would not feel the need to state it.
Reading their break point is about reading the situation based on a
combination of information, questioning, and reading of their actions.
All should help you to establish how much they need the deal and how
far they will go. Time can play a role here. Where negotiations go on for

80

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

weeks and months, many will agree to oﬀers that would have been totally
unacceptable during the earlier stages of the negotiation. Sometimes the
negotiation process serves to wear them down; it could be that other options they thought they had have dissolved or that the time and energy
spent negotiating would be better spent elsewhere, so they conclude the
deal. Sometimes circumstances change over the duration of the negotiation, throwing up more options or alternatives and therefore inﬂuencing
the ﬂow of events.
Under great pressure some have even been known to capitulate and forget
their break point altogether. How many times have you heard of people
who have come out of an auction having paid far more than the limit they
had set themselves because they got caught up in the heat of the moment?
In practice
• Remember you are negotiating with a person, not a company, and each
will carry a set of circumstances that will be unique to them.
• Assess where their break point is by examining previous agreements (if
you have dealt with them before), researching the market, and speaking
to competitors.
• Identify the issues of high value to them and try to establish the issues
in which they are prepared to be more ﬂexible.
• One way of working out your own break point is to deﬁne your Best
Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement (BATNA).
• Test your own assumptions by stating them as facts and waiting for
their response.
6. Listen and interpret the meaning behind the words

There is so much to be learned through what we see and hear. The phrase
“getting into their head” has as much to do with getting out of our own
head. Rather than concentrating on our own thoughts and feelings, we
need to consciously turn our attentions to theirs.
Watch them, watch for the signals. This can include phrases such as,
“well that wasn’t as much as we were hoping for,” “I can’t go that far,” or “I

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

81

was looking for a higher ﬁgure,” all of which suggest they are in the process
of revising their expectations.
There is so much to be learned through what we see and hear. “Getting
into their head” has as much to do with getting out of our own head.
Rather than concentrating on our own thoughts and feelings, we need to
consciously turn our attentions to theirs.
Listening to what the other party says is only part of the skill involved
in reading and understanding them. Look for inconsistencies in the way
they attempt to justify their position. The more they talk, the weaker
they are feeling. If they start to sell the beneﬁts of their oﬀer during the
negotiation, they are feeling weak. Remember that the same will apply in
the way they read your behavior.
•

•

•

Establish how ﬁrm their oﬀer or proposal is. Try to observe the “soft
exposing giveaways:” “I was looking for around $500, if that sounds
OK?” This is not a ﬁrm oﬀer; it’s a very obvious example of someone
feeling uncomfortable tabling their opening oﬀer. Often we are given
less obvious hints, yet there can still be clues within how their proposal
is stated. Try to listen for what is said and how it is said.
Focus on listening to the questions asked. For example, if they ask
you if it is available today, or if you can pay cash, rather than simply
answering those questions, you should think about why they are asking
such a question, and perhaps ask in return why this is important to
them. If you are wrapped up in your own head, then you will miss the
opportunity to qualify the things that are important to them.
Once you have listened, stop and interpret what the information oﬀers.
This should be before you feel obliged to respond. For many, the time taken
feels uncomfortable, but the new information needs time to be considered.
If they are selling and are opening with $500, where might their break
point be? Think about this before you respond. The ability to actively listen
for information that may help progress the negotiation, rather than using
the time available to think about what you want to say next, leans heavily
on the negotiator’s trait of curiosity (trait 7, Chapter 4).

82

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

In practice
• As a Complete Skilled Negotiator, understanding their position,
priorities, interests, pressures, and needs is a critical part of your job.
• The value of listening is far greater than that which can be achieved by
what you have to say.
• Listen and interpret their true position. How much do they need this
deal? How many options do they really have? How dependent are they
on an early decision?
• Think about why they are asking a particular question, and ask in
return why this is important to them.
• Actively listen for information that will help you to progress the negotiation, rather than thinking about what you want to say next.
7. Plan and prepare using all information available

There is a direct correlation between successful negotiations, however measured, and the time invested in preparation. Planning can be as simple as
building an agenda, or as complex as managing many stakeholders involved
in multiple negotiations around the world requiring a detailed strategy and
tactical analysis for all concerned. It is important to emphasize just how critical planning is as a discipline and as a behavior, as so few managers I have met
take the time to plan properly, taking the attitude that they can still perform
without it. (This is explored in greater depth in the ﬁnal chapter of this book.)
Insight, options, conﬁdence, direction, knowledge, and control can all
be gained from preparation using all information available. An attitude
of familiarity with the situation or relationship can result in no or poor
preparation. You should never “wing it.” We all work under pressure and
the task of planning can often be minimized or even forgotten in favor of
“more urgent” tasks. You need to take the time to plan. It has been proven
time after time that eﬀective negotiators plan in advance.
You should plan:
•
•
•

what questions to ask;
what position or statement to open with;
what type of agenda to use;

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

•
•
•
•
•
•

83

how to present your opening position;
how to respond;
what information they will need;
when and where the meeting will be held;
who needs to be involved; and
when discussions will commence, and much more.

Some negotiations can take weeks or even months to prepare for. When
the stakes are high, each and every possibility should be considered. Even
routine negotiations should be given as long as necessary to work through
the issues, values, and possibilities. Your planning should help you develop
insight, conﬁdence, and structure. All of this will help you take more
control of your negotiation.
THE POSITIVE EFFECT OF METICULOUS PLANNING
An ice cream franchisee, Mario, had held a contract to supply hotels
and restaurants in the Milan area on behalf of a major, high-quality,
branded ice cream manufacturer. The arrangement had been in
place for 15 years and had evolved into “an interpretation” of terms
away from the original contract. Even the original contract was
“loose” and provided the manufacturer with no real protection.
Mario’s operation had gone largely unnoticed by the board of the
supplier, a global brand, leaving him free to trade as he felt fit. The
time had come to re-negotiate the contract, which presented the global
brand with a sensitive situation. They were not at liberty to cancel the
contract or change many of the terms without mutual consent. The
franchisee had built up such strong relationships that there was a real
risk of damage, both in brand reputation and in financial terms.
The senior account team took 3 days to plan a strategy, using
numerous insights about Mario’s business and importantly the interests
of those who ran the business. The changes they needed to make
included limiting the types of establishments that their branded ice
(Continued )

84

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
cream could be sold into. Mario’s operation was currently supplying
retail and leisure parks, which were undermining the premium branding
of the ice cream. The team analyzed the dependency in the relationship and then mapped out a process. They had been given 3 months
by their board to gain agreement.
The first phase involved qualifying a range of interests and assumptions
before structuring an agenda for future negotiations. The planning was
meticulous, phased, and patient. They sought to understand the true
sensitivities and how these might be addressed. They sought to understand the Mario family and other stakeholders in the business and where
their interests lay. Following the 3 days of preparation they held an
“exploration” meeting with Mario and his team. This was a continuum
of their own planning process. Having advised through this negotiation,
I observed the hundreds of hours of time and effort that went into the
preparation, which ultimately resulted in a re-drawing of the contract that
traded off improved terms for Mario in return for a narrowed definition
of territory. In turn this enabled the global brand to initiate a nationwide
branding campaign re-launching their premium brand.

In practice
• The time to start getting into their head is during your preparation.
• Focus your attention on each variable you are likely to discuss and be
precise about the information you need or questions you plan to ask.
• Keep a record to simplify future planning.
• Involve others in your preparation – it will strengthen your discipline
to plan in the ﬁrst place, as well as keeping you grounded and objective
in your assessments.
• Plan the agenda and map out the variables you can employ.
• Ensure you understand the values of the trade-oﬀs involved against
each of the variables from inside their head.

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

85

8. Question effectively

In March 2007, a senior government oﬃcial in the UK confessed that his
biggest regret was not challenging the assumptions being made about the
existence of weapons of mass destruction prior to the invasion of Iraq. He
admitted that more questions could have prompted more answers, which
may have altered the course of history.
The following approach, STROB, enables you to plan out how you can
extract more information than might otherwise be forthcoming. It helps
you to create ﬁve open-ended questions which enable you to open up or
expand your knowledge and understanding.
1. Examine broadening the SCOPE of the agreement as part of broadening or narrowing your relationship. This could include considering
the longevity of the relationship, dependency, risk, or other factors,
which create greater scope for maximizing value.
2. List the TERMS you think will feature and their relative value to
them. This could include their basic requirements, issues, or could be
related to how the individual negotiator will be measured.
3. List any issues they or you may regard as RISK
K related. This could
include time scales, third-party relationships, market assumptions, etc.
4. List any/all of the OPTIONS you believe they may have if your negotiations run into diﬃculties. In the event of deadlock what would they do?
5. List the potential BARRIERS, issues, or objections that are likely to
be presented.
The STROB technique is used by converting your questions into order
of importance, listing your top ten, and using these during the exploratory
phase of your discussions.
For example, making use of “what if ” questions to establish how the
other party might respond to diﬀerent scenarios and their attitude to
risk can help during your exploratory meetings. They can also be used
to help identify priorities and the value the other party places on certain
issues. “What if we order 50,000?”, “What if we order 100,000?”, “So what
if we order 600,000 then?” – these are questions that will help you to

86

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

understand the economies of volume. Taken a step further, you can start
to question timings, payment terms, and all other variables with “what ifs”
to help establish how their cost base is made up, what is easier for them to
agree on, and where ﬂexibility lies within their list of interests.
As the Complete Skilled Negotiator, you will have the conﬁdence to be
ﬂexible and to use a combination of questioning styles in order to extract
the most useful information (see the following box).
QUESTION TYPES
• Contact questions help you to establish rapport: “How have you
been since we last met? Did you have a good holiday? How is
business?”
• Probing questions help you to seek further information: “What do
you think about your competitor’s latest activities?”
• Interrogative questions help you to encourage them to think about
solutions for themselves: “Why is that important to you?”
• Comparative questions help you to explore in detail: “What has
business been like since the introduction of product A? How have
things changed since your new promotion began?”
• Extension questions challenge: “How do you mean? How else
could we do that? What are you thinking of specifically? What
do you mean when you say …? How can you be sure of that?”
• Opinion seeking questions test their knowledge and thinking:
“How do you feel about …? What do you think about …? What
are your views on …?”
• Hypothetical questions help you to test their knowledge and thinking: “What if we were to order 500 units? What if we included
all the costs? What if I paid you in advance?”
• Reflective/summary questions draw ideas together and test their
understanding, and summarize what has been said: “So, you think
that we need to introduce this new range? You think that the product
will achieve X? As I understand it, you reckon that you can deliver it?”

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

87

• Closing questions help you to secure agreement: “When should
we start – during May or at the beginning of June? I can deliver
on the first or second week of that month; which would suit you
best? How much?”
• Mirror questions serve to reverse the question and confirm the
point: “We think we can deliver this for you.” “You think you can
deliver this?”
• Leading questions help you to secure a desired answer. “You can’t
deny that …? Isn’t it a fact that …? You wouldn’t say that …? It’s
a great offer, isn’t it?”
• Rhetorical questions help you to prevent them from saying anything
as they do not require an answer: “Do we really want to do that?
And how did that happen?” Implying that you already know.
• Multiple questions help you to gain agreement to a package:
“You did say that you could meet the deadline? Oh, and you will
meet our specification and, ah, by the way, you can do this for
us can’t you?”
• Closed questions help you to establish specific facts/information:
“Will you do this? Have you the ability to deliver? Can you meet
our requirements? Do you need help with this offer?”

In practice
• Use the STROB technique to put your questions into order of
importance.
• Make a conscious eﬀort to work on the diﬀerent questioning types in
order to maintain control.
• If they are reluctant to answer, try asking your question in a diﬀerent
way.
• Be careful to avoid being seen as interrogating – you’re likely to attract
suspicion and resistance.
• Also be wary that you can sometimes give away your own interests
unintentionally by the way you ask questions.

88

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

9. Always trade concessions effectively and conditionally

Every trade you make should be considered and conditional.
The aim of trading is to build more value for your business as a result
of each trade. As there are no rules in negotiation, you can, in theory, oﬀer
anything that has a value to them, providing it is a reciprocated move.
Whatever they want, they can have, in return for something you want.
Each trade then should be designed to provide you with a net gain. In
practice you will of course want to weigh up any variable traded as the
implications of trading it may be broader than simply its ﬁnancial value.
Imagine an international footballer in the transfer market about to
move club. The negotiation involves the player’s agent and the chairman of
the football club. The agenda is made up of a transfer fee, a signing on fee,
length of contract, salary and bonuses, and a range of performance-related
incentives and obligations the player has to meet. Variables could also
include the phasing of payments in relation to appearances, number of
goals scored, or whether they appear for their country. Each variable will
feature as part of a set of conditional trade-oﬀs. The club, having chosen
their man, want to ensure that they get maximum value from his services.
Meanwhile the player may be looking for maximum income or ﬂexibility
within the contract, known as “personal terms.” Each of the variables can
be adjusted as part of the negotiation that follows and the process involved
is that of trading concessions.
When trading concessions you therefore need to identify through your
planning and questioning what is important to them. This will help you
to build proposals involving concessions that are the least cost to you,
but represent a greater value to them. In return, your condition is that
they provide movement that improves the value of the deal for you. This
sounds rational, fair, and transparent but usually it’s not. What they oﬀer
will be no more than they absolutely have to and usually this is something
of a minimum cost to them.
Understanding the implications of their oﬀer is critical if you are to
assess what you want in return. Your creativity can work wonders when
you move away from price only, and focus on total cost or total value.

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

89

You can only trade eﬀectively when you understand or gauge the value
of an issue in their terms. Part of this you may know from understanding
your market, and part may be from any history you may have with the
other party. Remember, low-cost and high-value trade-oﬀs should be
worked through as part of your preparations before negotiating begins.
Work out the trade-oﬀs. Work out your potential moves. Remember,
generosity engenders greed. Nothing is free in this world and if you start
providing unconditional concessions, the other party will either get suspicious or just plain greedy.
In practice
• Identify what is important to the other party through your planning
and questioning.
• Build proposals that involve concessions of least cost to you, but greater
value to them.
• Use “What if …?” questions to explore the value and measure reactions
to particular suggestions.
• Always place your condition ﬁrst, rather than the concession (i.e. “If
you … then we …”) as they will be less likely to interrupt you in order
to hear what’s in it for them.
• Be creative when identifying options for trading – change the shape of
the deal rather than focusing on what can’t be done.
10. Apply analytical skills to manage the value of the deal as the
negotiation unfolds

As a negotiation unfolds, the total value or cost of a deal often becomes
more complex as the number of issues increases. This especially includes
negotiations that involve a number of variables; each of which need to be
agreed and many of which will be interrelated. Let’s say you are agreeing
a contract that involves oﬃce furniture. There are a range of issues to be
agreed. You make a proposal that consists of the shortening of payment
terms in return for a lower up-front payment or deposit. In being able to

90

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

track the progress of your negotiation you need to understand the cost or
value of each variable to both you and the other party.
You need to calculate the saving for them if payment is settled over a
shorter period of time and how they will value a lower deposit, sometimes
literally as the negotiation is unfolding. Of course, this goes hand in hand
with understanding these values or costs from your own perspective. Using your analytical skills enables you to understand the implications of
their response and work out what your next proposal might be:
“We will accept the lower deposit subject to you reducing your payment
schedule from your proposed 12 months to 9 months.”
How would this aﬀect the total value of the agreement? Should you
now park this issue and examine how other terms can be introduced as
part of the conversation?
Understanding the implications of trades is critical to working through
possibilities and opportunities as we eﬀectively “engineer the deal.” That
is not to say that you have to be lightning quick with ﬁgures or that you
have to be highly analytical to work through more complex agreements.
You simply have to ensure that, through the time you take or the way you
delegate or automate (sometimes using spreadsheets) such activities, you
are clear about the decisions you are taking.
The less tangible an issue is, the more diﬃcult it can be to value the
trade. Some examples might be:
•
•
•
•

the changing of opt-out clauses;
agreement to a testimonial recommendation;
ﬂexibility in completion dates; and
the oﬀer of exclusivity.

Understanding how to value these types of implications within an
agreement is important if you are to trade them eﬀectively. The cost may
be little to you and yet hold a signiﬁcant value to the other party.
During your negotiations, track your and their proposals by documenting them, so you can monitor each issue’s progress and movement. Track

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

91

what their last proposal was and what the value of the deal equates to
for you. Make use of spreadsheets to analyze “what if ” scenarios and for
tracking proposals, especially when it’s an existing contract being renegotiated and the issues under review are consistent.
If, despite this, you struggle with the ﬁgures, take your time. Take time
out or take someone with you to the negotiation as your “ﬁgures person.”
If you become wrapped up in ﬁgures, you will not be in control of the
negotiation. If you don’t understand the ﬁgures, you are in danger of
agreeing to something that may prove regrettable.
In the commercial arena, you are negotiating over resources, interests,
priorities, preferences, even prejudices. There is a broad range of both tangible and intangible issues, all of which carry a perception of value. Then
of course there is money. If you are not aware of the consequences of your
proposals, then you are not in control. Make it your business to qualify
the worth of all the issues under discussion that you are responsible for
negotiating.
In practice
• Ensure that you understand the implications of the other party’s
response in order to work out what your next proposal might be.
• Track your and the other party’s proposals so that you can monitor
each issue’s progress and movement.
• If you struggle with ﬁgures, take your time, or ensure you take someone
as your “ﬁgures person”.
• Make it your business to qualify the worth of all the issues under
discussion.
11. Create and maintain the appropriate climate for trust

This is critical if the other party is to accept your ideas as being genuinely
helpful and to consider the options you bring to the table. Remember,
you are responsible for their feelings and the atmosphere during the
negotiation. If they do not feel the ideas being tabled are in the interest of
mutual progress, they simply will not entertain them.

92

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Where real or perceived conﬂict of interests exists, trust can be diﬃcult
to come by as each party gravitates towards protecting its own interests.
The other party may not be as open-minded as you or the balance of power
(being in their favor) may mean that they do not need to be so. It takes two
to tango. If they choose to hard bargain, you must be prepared to backtrack
and adjust your strategy. Drive at a broader agenda with the aim of building
a sustainable agreement rather than engaging in a bruising battle over price.
In a sustainable relationship (9–12 o’clock on the clock face) it is critical
to maintain a basis where constructive dialogue can take place without
suspicion or the need to compete. Remain cooperative, present creative
proposals, and use statements that help promote progress. Adopt a
broader perspective and an acceptance of the longer-term beneﬁts that a
relationship based on trust and respect will bring.
At 4 o’clock on the clock face you are hard bargaining and are without
relationship constraints – you can be tough. However, when there is a
high level of dependency between you, you not only need to be cooperative but should recognize what cooperation provides you with: a basis for
creating more value. Your plan to maximize proﬁts remains the same. The
way you achieve this is by working with the other party, and changes as
you move around to beyond 6 o’clock.
To gain trust, you have to earn it and this takes time and patience. One
way to help achieve this during meetings is by oﬀering information in
a controlled and considered manner. The act of sharing information is
important to both parties, as it demonstrates that you are prepared to
be open and hence, by implication, to be trusted. Therefore, you need to
organize and manage what information you are prepared to oﬀer. This is
an important part of any negotiator’s preparation.
Creating the appropriate climate for trust may require you to do something or be someone you are not. This is where the “conscious negotiator”
comes into his or her own. They recognize the egos involved, recognize
how the other party wants to be treated, and present a cooperative front.
They attack the problems and not the people by ensuring the climate in
the room remains conducive to building the agreements.

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

93

In practice
• Trust takes time to build so patience is needed; yet it can be destroyed
in a moment if you cross the other party.
• Oﬀer information in a controlled and considered manner to demonstrate that you are prepared to be open and can be trusted.
• Drive at a broader agenda with the aim of building a sustainable agreement rather than engaging in a bruising battle over price.
12. Develop and use your agenda to help control the negotiation
proceedings

The agenda is eﬀectively a working document for all parties involved,
which helps to shape and control negotiation proceedings. It is there to
provide transparency around those negotiable variables that will contribute towards the total value of the agreement.
Further, agreeing on an agenda before the meeting helps ensure that it
is “owned” by all involved. Agreeing on the agenda alone can sometimes
require a negotiation in itself. If you impose an agenda on the other party,
they are more likely to be dismissive and challenging of the issues. Ultimately, both parties agree that all items in need of consideration are listed,
and agree that all parties will work from it.
Imagine contracting with a PR ﬁrm. Having narrowed down the options
to the ﬁnal two ﬁrms, you decide to enter into negotiations to ﬁnd out where
you are most likely to attract the greatest value from. Now, PR at the best of
times is a challenging service to measure. However, the basic terms of any
agreement will need to feature as part of your agenda. This could include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

a retainer fee;
notice period;
length of contract;
range of services;
PR training provided;
contact requirements; and
payment terms.

94

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Already we have seven issues to be discussed on the agenda and from
these there will be further issues relating to performance, compliance, and
risks linked to each of these seven. The broader the agenda, the more
comprehensive your considerations, and the greater the scope for shaping
the deal and ultimately building a higher-value agreement.
Some parties choose to outline their entire oﬀer from the outset. Some
tendering processes demand your opening position across all variables.
Even though you may be in possession of this information you need not be
drawn into responding to them all at once. Try to trade oﬀ no more than
three issues at a time. Any more makes it diﬃcult for them to calculate
and, worse still, confusing to understand.
Watch out for hidden agenda points or “red herrings” introduced by
the other party with the aim of trading oﬀ against them. In doing so, they
expect to gain some leverage on issues that are important to them. Where
new issues appear on the agenda, set out to qualify their legitimacy. Conversely you may choose to let the other party win some of the lower-cost
issues and gain the leverage you need to secure those issues that are both
important and of high value to you.
Even if you list a draft agenda on a ﬂip chart in the room minutes before
your meeting, you have created the illusion that you are prepared. This
provides a basis to explore the variables that will need agreeing with the
other party in a more collaborative manner.
In practice
• The broader the agenda, the greater scope there is for shaping the deal.
• Aim to trade oﬀ no more than three issues at a time.
• Watch out for hidden agenda points or “red herrings” introduced by the
other party with the aim of trading oﬀ against them.
• Position price, fee, or cost about halfway down your agenda – too early
and it can promote unnecessary friction; too late and it could limit
room for maneuver.
• If you are going to “lose” or concede on an issue, then trade it conditionally and reluctantly – if it is truly important to the other party, they
may give ground to secure it.

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

95

13. Think creatively to develop proposals that help move the deal forward

Thinking creatively– that is to say thinking around the issues and
possibilities that might not have been considered or traded before –
can move the negotiation forwards. Picture yourself as a sculptor:
designing, forming, shaping in an artistic manner. Stand back and
examine your progress from different angles and perspectives. You are
involved in carving out something of much greater value than the sum
total of the materials involved. The creative negotiator interprets the
possibilities before them and regards the challenge in hand as one of
creating value.
In an online consumer situation, for example, you are usually presented
with pages of terms and conditions that consumers are unlikely to ever
read. They are presented as a “take it or leave it” contract oﬀering most
little real choice. However, in business, the same tactics are employed by
procurement teams who often miss the opportunity to negotiate around
terms more creatively in order to optimize value.
An English sparkling wine company were raising funds through a
crowd funding scheme, oﬀering a return on investment through a 5-year
bond, with “ﬁxed terms and conditions” attached.
As expected, I received the standard terms and conditions. It was made
up of four pages of text in font size 6. The assumption was that I would
not read it and that the terms were a given. It covered everything from liabilities, conﬁdentiality, payment terms, contract amendments, copyright
protection, and so on. From this, I identiﬁed 23 variables (apart from
price) that I decided to discuss – some oﬀering the potential for more
ﬂexibility and some for opportunity (e.g. increased investment stake at a
later stage).
The company owner agreed to a meeting. At ﬁrst the owner was
hesitant to engage. I am sure he had had easier conversations with other
investors. However, after agreeing on the ﬁrst two conditional trades, the
conversation continued. The agreement we struck through some creative
trade-oﬀs oﬀered me a deal that I was truly married to by the time I had
ﬁnished and an opportunity for the sparkling wine company to sell their
wines through another business I am involved in.

96

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Sometimes you just have to tell the other party what is important; otherwise you are not providing them with the opportunity to make things
possible. Detailed exploratory discussions can oﬀer tremendous opportunities to build agendas, which reﬂect every part of the deal including
the risks, performance, compliance, quality, opportunity, communication,
and many other important components of the relationship.
The ability to remain open-minded and use creative or lateral thinking during negotiation is diﬃcult for many people. It is competitiveness,
pride, a need to maintain face, and even ego that prevents many from
being open. This result can be a dogmatic approach aimed at minimizing
risk and sometimes “winning.”
In negotiation the lateral thinking patterns associated with creativity are
at direct odds with those emotions experienced during moments of perceived conﬂict. Where conﬂict exists, we are more inclined to batten down
the hatches and are more likely to focus on protecting our position. By
adopting a mindset driven by “under what circumstances” we become much
more able to explore and be creative rather than being bound by insecurity.
In practice
• Understand what is really important to them and why.
• Diﬀerentiate the people from the issues.
• Extend your mutual agenda to create more possible variables.
• Consider any risks involved and trade these oﬀ where possible.
• Identify low-cost, high-value trade-oﬀ opportunities.
14. Explore options to help gain agreement

Try to resist the temptation to say no. The challenges and frustrations
presented in negotiations are there to test us. Deadlock is an option but
only after every possible option has been exhausted. Where peace talks
can take years, merger and acquisition negotiations months, the work
involved in searching for common areas where agreement can be struck
comes from the persistence of those involved. There has to be a belief that
there is a solution to be found. The trait of tenacity (Chapter 4) helps the

THE FOURTEEN BEHAVIORS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE

97

Complete Skilled Negotiator to explore options continuously, keep the
agreement and relationships on track, and deliver the possible deal from
what once seemed, at best, unlikely.
Although it’s appropriate to remain on your guard, if you are able to park
your suspicion and search for alternatives and other conditional options,
you will surprise yourself just how many times a last-minute solution can
be found. By seeing the whole picture and the possible links that can be
made, you will be able to bring in possibilities exploring options that may
not have been considered before.
A merger of two software companies is under way and it’s a week before
the ﬁnal deal. Documents are due to be signed, yet conversations are continuing over the management structure of the new enlarged business. Both
CEOs believe they have the credentials to lead and could best serve the new
larger group.
This leads to a deadlock situation, placing the merger at risk. Identifying with this situation, the ﬁnance broker introduces a facilitator to “help
identify a solution,” who starts by saying “I respect what you both feel
may be at stake here and the extent to which your respective companies
will be looking for reassurances. However, if we are not able to resolve
this issue, everyone will lose. It is your responsibility to explore options
and identify a solution for the greater good. Can we agree on that to
start with?”
They did. The situation was complicated. There were careers at stake.
A list of interests were drawn up. None were ﬁnancial. With interests
revealed and both parties prepared for the better good to work on their
interests rather than against the other, a deal was struck. One took up the
role of Chairman and the other CEO.
In practice
• Convert thoughts of “no,” “can’t,” or “won’t” into “HOW,” no matter how
frustrating this might feel at ﬁrst.
• Take time to explore options and continuously consider the deal from
their perspective.

98

•
•
•

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Use “positive energy” rather than “defensive energy” to explore options.
Make use of the planning tools in Chapter 9 to help visualize possible
or diﬀerent relationships between the issues.
Ask the question: “Under what circumstances could we bridge the
diﬀerence?”

KEY TAKEAWAYS

The fourteen behaviors oﬀer a framework for The Complete Skilled
Negotiator to develop and perform across all types of negotiations eﬀectively.
The more conscious you become at using these skills, where appropriate,
the more likely you are to optimize your negotiation opportunities.
•

•
•
•

•

•
•

Understand the behaviors you need to employ to perform at your best.
Diﬀerent stages of the negotiation will require the use of diﬀerent
behaviors.
Work out what your behavioral strengths are and compensate for
those which do not come naturally.
Planning and preparation (7) is the most important activity you will
undertake so don’t “wing it.”
Behaviors help you to understand how to perform but do not help you
with the “why.” Be clear in your mind what you are trying to achieve and
the various ways of arriving there.
Disciplined behaviors alone will not make you an eﬀective negotiator.
You need to understand patience, nerve, power, and time before you
can truly excel.
Think as if you were inside their head – behave as an objective, conscious,
competent negotiator.
Comment on the link at the back of the book allowing the reader to
proﬁle themselves against the 14 behaviors and attract personal development recommendations.

