CHAPTER 6

The “E” Factor

“During a negotiation, it would be wise not to take anything personally.
If you leave personalities out of it, you will be able to see opportunities
more objectively.”
Brian Koslow

THE EFFECT OF HUMAN EMOTION ON NEGOTIATION

“How diﬃcult can negotiation be? It’s not rocket science.”No, it is not. I would
argue that it is more complex because it involves the most unpredictable of
entities: human beings. Emotion makes negotiation highly unpredictable.
The impact that this has on the dynamics found in negotiation is what I’ve
deﬁned as the “E” factor. Negotiators who are less self-aware struggle to
control their emotions and, as a result, become readable and transparent to
other negotiators. The more balanced, controlled, clearer thinkers use the
“E” factor to their advantage, like seasoned poker players. The Complete
Skilled Negotiator develops an eye for watching your every action and reaction as they gauge what is really going on inside your head.
Experienced negotiators:
•
•
•
•

are conscious of what they are looking for;
are calm in their thought process;
are aware of the sensitivities in play; and
send you the messages they want you to read.

100

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Because every action attracts a reaction, trained negotiators work as
hard at calculating how you will react to certain actions, and which signal
to send that will most likely inﬂuence you during your negotiations.
No matter how many tactics, strategies, or variables are in play, it is people
who make the decisions and it is people you need to understand; in particular, how you both behave in the heat of the moment. Unlike an engine,
which is mechanically predictable and responds each and every time to the
push of a throttle, negotiation and, importantly, people are less predictable.
Negotiation requires an attitude of mind based on self-discipline and
self-control of emotion. What makes good negotiators into Complete
Skilled Negotiators is that they not only execute negotiations using skills,
tactics, and strategies but also recognize the attitudes and emotions, hidden or otherwise, that play a part in shaping the outcomes. It is emotional
control, that allows for clear decision making. Behavioral control, mental
control and emotional detachment are all needed to get inside the other
party’s head. You can never assume the reaction you are going to attract
when tabling a proposal, especially when it’s not one they are expecting. So
the “E” in “E factor” is, you guessed it, for emotion. It is a conscious state
that allows you to manage, use, manipulate, understand, and control it.
Many negotiation decisions in business are still emotionally inﬂuenced,
even during sizeable complex deals. I’m not suggesting that deals take
place without careful diligence or clear criteria and analysis. What I am
suggesting from observation is that during negotiations, proposals and
considerations are not always dealt with in the objective manner you
might expect. Emotion and ego, as well as enterprise, have a signiﬁcant
role in inﬂuencing how decisions are taken.
The role of emotion

Emotion has its place when used in a considered and controlled manner:
•
•

when the risks have been considered (walk out, outburst, deadlock);
when its purpose is to attract a desired reaction; and

THE “E” FACTOR

•

101

when the seriousness of the issue needs conveying and you are conﬁdent that you will not ruin the chances of progress.

There is nothing wrong with a display of emotion during a negotiation, provided it is designed for eﬀect and premeditated. The outburst in
the middle of the meeting with a threat to walk away from the deal may
appear irrational and hot-headed, but if the action were premeditated
and the drama designed to attract a back-down from the other party, the
emotional display can serve a useful purpose. This level of risk needs,
however, to be a thought-through decision and one that is designed to attract a calculated response in an orchestrated manner. The real risks arise
when we allow our decision making to be dictated by our own emotions
and we start to react to their demands without thinking.
Understanding our emotions

Essentially, the emotion experienced by many in negotiation comes from
uncertainty, risk, desire, and even fear: emotions that we have lived with
for millions of years. But today we experience the types of dangers and
risks that trigger these emotions less frequently than our ancestors and,
more often than not, in a psychological context rather than in the physical form. As a result, we are less practiced and equipped to cope, meaning
that even low levels of uncertainty for some can feel quite uncomfortable.
For any emotionally driven negotiator this can lead to inappropriate decision making and sub-optimized deals, which is why an understanding
of these emotions is important as part of your make-up as a negotiator.
The emotions of fear, hope, anger, envy, and greed resonate in us as
strongly today as they ever have. Today there are ever more psychological models available to help us deﬁne what drives emotion, how people
cope with it, and the eﬀect that it will have on you. Yet, when faced with
confrontation over a price increase in a negotiation, are we any more able
to cope with what this does to our thinking and ability to perform? The
answer is: only through greater levels of self-awareness and control.

102

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Negotiation is uncomfortable and, when negotiating on behalf of
your business, you are eﬀectively being paid to be uncomfortable. If you
concede unnecessarily or capitulate on a deal, you are not delivering on
behalf of your employer.
THE TELL-TALE SIGNS OF STRESS
The pressure and stress that you experience in negotiation, however
mild, are difficult to suppress and have their way of showing themselves through your physical actions. The stress you experience when
tabling or rejecting proposals can start to exhibit itself through your
body language. The act of touching your face, scratching your nose,
brushing your hands through your hair, tapping your pen, folding your
arms, or tapping your feet when making a proposal are all behavior
changes, and will be seen by the other party who will be watching for
them. You may not even be aware of it. Most are not. However, the
other person will be watching every move you make. Whether they
mean anything or not is unimportant. For now you need to understand
that the other party are watching.
Effective negotiators learn to adapt to becoming more comfortable
with being uncomfortable. This is achieved through heightened levels
of self-awareness and becoming experienced in doing what is necessary from an objective standpoint, rather than allowing themselves to
be victims of their emotion.
If you witness negotiators exhibiting these fidgety types of behaviors it
may well mean nothing, other than an adjustment of their position. Reading body language, tends only to be relevant when change, speed, or
the timing of movement correlates with something that has happened.
If the other party responds to your proposal immediately, insisting that
they will not or cannot accept the offer, observe their physical behavior
as they respond. It is likely there will be some emotion involved. It is
possible they mean it but it is also possible that they don’t. Look for a
correlation in body language or facial expressions if there is more than

THE “E” FACTOR

103

one of them negotiating. This is usually most recognizable when they
are stating a position, rejecting a position, or making a statement.
• Listen to what they are saying, the way they are saying it, and
what they do not say.
• Listen to whether they justify what they are saying.
• Listen to whether they go on to sell what they have just said.
The Complete Skilled Negotiator will see, hear, read, and interpret
the meaning behind this as part of getting inside the other party’s head.
If you, or those who negotiate on your behalf, experience high levels
of anxiety, the resulting agreements are more likely to be compromised.
The stress and anxiety of the process can lead you to concede or
conclude agreements too early. Negotiating effectively requires nerve,
as well as a mindset, which recognizes that it is not personal, it is
business. Negotiators I have worked with who appear at least to have
high levels of emotional control will and can mentally separate the
people they negotiate with from the business of working on the deal.

WHEN THERE IS A NEED FOR A COLLABORATIVE
SOLUTION
Part way through a negotiation involving the fees, specification, and
time scales of an outsourced technology solution, the procurement team
became frustrated at a lack of certainty, clarity, and absolute commitment
to time scales. The “AGILE” system for managing the project offered
the supplier more flexibility and less accountability to finish within the
agreed specific time scales. The procurement team decided to impose
penalty clauses in the event that the solution was not operational within
6 months. The clauses highlighted the importance of the time scales,
(Continued )

104

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
transferred some of the implications of non-delivery, and promoted a
more formal relationship.
Meanwhile an internal agreement was being crafted between
the finance and IT function of the same business. This, however,
was an internal negotiation. A project involving the configuration
of an online analytical tool used to measure sales conversion rates
throughout the sales cycle was behind schedule. The program manager responsible remained evasive around the project completion
dates. The CFO, under pressure from the board to provide more
accurate forecasting, explained again the importance of the
functionality to the business. The CFO could not directly introduce
penalty clauses yet needed greater certainty. He was an internal
client. He needed a long-term collaborative relationship with his
colleagues in technology, so he engaged in a meeting to better
understand their short-term challenges. He approached the issues
from the perspective of how and under what circumstances the
deadlines might be met in a problem-solving manner. Ultimately the
CFO negotiated with marketing, asking them to agree to a 4-week
slippage on their website project (releasing the same programmers
as needed for his project) for a relaxation on their budget phasing,
which he knew was under severe pressure. He presented the new
window of opportunity to technology, who agreed to meet his
more tightly defined time scales.
In the first example, the supplier was expected to take responsibility
and be held accountable with commercial implications. In the second
example, the attitude adopted was to work with those involved to
question, listen, understand, and then propose solutions that helped to
get the collaborative result needed. He had relationships to preserve
so he adopted a collaborative, problem-solving stance.

THE “E” FACTOR

105

CONSCIOUS COMPETENT

Any negotiator must become conscious of their own incompetencies
before the developing the new skills or learning can begin. As you become
more aware of speciﬁc negotiation skills and the eﬀect they have on
output you will also grow a greater awareness of your own development
opportunities. The following model relates to four psychological states
involved in progressing from incompetence to competence in a skill. The
key to becoming more eﬀective as a negotiator is to become a “conscious
competent,” by being able to consciously and competently to perform a
skill or ability.
The advanced state of “unconscious competence” has its own handicap
in that you tend to assume too much based on previous experience. So
remaining in the conscious competent state for the purpose of negotiating is highly appropriate. Never assume anything in negotiation.

The Conscious
The Unconscious

Incompetent Negotiator

Incompetent Negotiator

When you are aware of

When you are unaware of

what you could or might

what and how you need to

be doing but have still

perform so are vulnerable.

yet to perform to your
potential.

The Unconscious

The Conscious Competent
Negotiator
When you perform in your
negotiations with absolute
focus and without taking

Competent Negotiator
When you perform in your
negotiation but can be
prone to being too familiar

anything for granted.

Figure 6.1 The four stages of competence.

resulting in allowing too
many assumptions.

106

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

BROKEN RECORD
During a negotiation for storage facilities with a port management
company in Amsterdam, we were close to agreeing on a 3-year
extension to an existing contract that had 6 months remaining to run.
It had taken as many months to reach this point and, although dialog had been constructive throughout, I concluded that their COO
was either not able or not prepared to move on the fixed monthly
payment schedule regardless of activity volume. They wanted to
charge the average monthly invoice value from the past 30 months.
Our volumes arriving at port were volatile and not represented by
averages. We tried introducing other negotiation variables, but he
would not budge and just continued to insist, like a broken record,
“you will need to agree to the monthly fixed charge.” He then
started to become emotional saying that everything was possible
(although we had learned earlier that this wasn’t the case) but we
must move to the monthly fixed cost.
We had tried quarterly adjustments, offered $100,000 on account
to cover any variance, but he wanted us to sign this monthly fixed
charge, which eventually we did. Commercially it was not an issue
and the deal had to be done. The truth is that he had worn us down
and we had not realistic options. For 3 hours it’s all we heard. The
repeated position, like a broken record, gained more credibility as a
given, the more it was stated. On reflection, there were many other
ways that he might have got my signature quicker. However, we
concluded that the prospect of extended discussions with an ever
more emotional partner was not worth any possible benefit that I might
derive from further perseverance. Like most tactics used in negotiation,
they are not right or wrong and may suit some relationships and not
others. The choice and consequences remain for you to judge.

THE “E” FACTOR

107

BECOMING A CONSCIOUSLY COMPETENT
NEGOTIATOR THROUGH UNDERSTANDING TA
Back in the 1950s, Dr Eric Berne defined the ego states known to
us today as transactional analysis (TA). In the book I’m OK, You’re
OK,
K the author Thomas Harris analyzed Berne’s work, which was
made up of definitions of ego states and how they affect the way
we communicate with each other. These are defined as the roles of:
• parent (critical and nurturing);
• adult; and
• child (free and adaptive).
These are communication styles that we all use subconsciously
whilst communicating with others. Within negotiation, these ego
states resonate in the language and behavior used, which can directly
impact on expectations, respect, irrationality, arrogance, and other
attitudes exercised during discussions.

The “parent” ego state
The “parent” ego state is made up of two ego states: the “critical
parent” and the “nurturing parent.”
The language of the critical parent’s ego state is “black and white”
or “right and wrong” with very few shades of grey, suggesting that
they are in a position to make the rules, judge, and criticize others.
However, what is important in your negotiations is that you do not
allow such communication to affect the way you read the situation.
In negotiation, some people have been known to use this stance
to take control. It can be a difficult force to reason with when they
(Continued )

108

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
remain inflexible and stubborn, especially when they are negotiating
from a position of power. They will know it and will use it, sometimes
naturally and sometimes orchestrated, but always aimed at controlling
your aspirations.
The “nurturing parent,” on the other hand, wants to advise and guide.
They want respect and want to be needed. They want to protect, so
any “child” showing respect and asking for help is likely to attract a
positive response from a nurturing parent. However, they are also at
risk of becoming manipulated by those communicating as a “child.”
The “child” ego state

The “child” ego state is also made up of two ego states: the “free
child” and the “adapted child.”
The “free child” is spontaneous, creative, and fun loving in their
attitude and communication, whereas the “adapted child” is rebellious, non-compliant and manipulative (“It’s not fair,” “See what you’ve
made me do”).
The “child” commonly shirks responsibility, is sometimes manipulative, sometimes subservient, but is always a product of those around
them. These behaviors, thoughts, and feelings are replayed from our
own childhood and, depending on our circumstances, will feature
in how we communicate throughout our lives. This can result in our
feeling victimized by the rules that others lay down, or underpin our
desire to challenge authority.

Responses to ego states
In negotiation, behaving in the “parent” ego state can result in others
adopting the behavioral response of a “child” ego state. Where
you find yourself negotiating with a “critical parent” character, you
may choose instead to appeal to their nurturing parent instinct.
Two “parents” clashing is simply two egos vying for control and

THE “E” FACTOR

109

domination, which will frequently lead to impasse, and the breakdown of the relationship and any pending negotiations.
If you adopt the “child” ego state, you are of course effectively
manipulating their ego by asking them how they might be able to help
you, given your weaker position. There are risks to this, in that they
may choose to manipulate the situation even further. However, once
the “parent” recognizes that there is no fight to be had, and that you
are asking for help, their nurturing ego is triggered and they generally
become far more accommodating.
The “adult” ego state

When in our “adult” ego state, we are more able to see people and
situations as they are, rather than being intimidated or manipulative.
We are more likely to make decisions based on a pragmatic, objective
analysis of any given situation, rather than be swayed by the emotional
ego that exists in the “child” or “parent” states. If there was a preferred
default position from which to negotiate, it would be the “adult” ego
state.
Listen and watch out for the behavior of the “black and white,” “right
and wrong” dominant “parent.”
Listen and watch out for the positioning of the “child,” who seeks to
seduce you, or make irrational demands, in that they need your help
and appeal to your sense of parenting.
The “adult,” on the other hand, is objective in thought, can accommodate many shades of grey, can recognize irrational behavior, and
sees most types of behavior and language for what they are. They
generally operate as conscious competent negotiators.
Clearly, though, this is only an ego state and even “adults” can still be
quickly influenced into moving to other ego states during negotiations.
Imagine you were challenged on your opening position by a “parent,”
who tells you how ridiculous you are being, and not to come back until
(Continued )

110

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
you are prepared to be sensible. The decision here is whether to respond
as a “critical parent” and challenge them – with the risk of intensifying the
conflict – or adopt the ego state of the “free child” and ask them for help.
If you are not sure, you may choose to maintain your composure as an
“adult,” dismiss their behavior, and wait patiently for them to calm down
before continuing. As always, it depends on the circumstances. What is
important is that we recognize these states in others as well as ourselves
and that we adapt accordingly, rather than continue, oblivious to the
emotion influencing the dynamics of the relationship and communication.
The “E” factor can make or break a deal, or the longer-term prospects
of a relationship. This makes self-awareness an important part of the
Complete Skilled Negotiator’s make-up. Those who are successful at
negotiating in the long term are more likely to have “adult-to-adult” relationships, although in the real world irrational behavior is in no short supply.

YOUR VALUES

Your personal values and your business values are often very similar.
They can be based on such qualities as integrity, honesty, reliability, and
others. They provide you with the parameters to judge what you believe
is fair, what behavior you ﬁnd acceptable and the degree to which you are
prepared to allow others to use the power they have during your dealings.
Your values may well provide you with a balance in how you lead your
life, how you make decisions, interpret right from wrong, and so on.
However, in negotiation, they can often serve to distort your thinking
(see behavior 1, Chapter 5). Whether the behavior of the other party is
ethical, “fair,” or “right” is of little consequence in negotiation. If they have
the power and decide to be irrational with it, it is your job to manage the
situation as you ﬁnd it. It is not the time to start making value judgments.
Cling to your ideals and you will become emotionally challenged and
compromised.

THE “E” FACTOR

111

EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE

If there is one critical competency central to eﬀective negotiation, I would
suggest it is emotional intelligence. It underpins the balance of communication between you and those you negotiate with, and promotes the
concept of negotiating from inside their head.
In his 1995 book, Emotional Intelligence, Daniel Goleman describes
how emotional intelligence is made up of two parts. He claims that to be
eﬀective in business, you need to have a high level of self-awareness and
self-control around your emotions and those of the other party:
•
•

ﬁrst, by understanding yourself, your intentions, your responses, and
your own behavior;
second, by understanding others and their feelings.

This is critical in negotiations because you are responsible for the feelings of those you negotiate with. Antagonize the other party and watch
any hope of cooperation dissolve. Goleman goes on to describe the ﬁve
“domains” of emotional intelligence:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Knowing our emotions.
Managing your own emotions.
Motivating yourself.
Recognizing and understanding other people’s emotions.
Managing relationships and the emotions of others.

Extroverts, who tend to be more communicative, tend to be more openly
emotional people. They are more inclined to share and articulate their
views, likes, and dislikes. However, extroverts are faced with a greater challenge because the control required during a negotiation involves a greater
level of self-discipline than it does with introverts, who are naturally more
considered in their responses.
Introverts are more inclined to reﬂect, weigh, and consider before
responding.

112

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Imagine watching a ﬁlm that involves two parties negotiating. The actors are engaged in a negotiation, and one of them is performing so poorly
that it starts to make you cringe. “Why did they say that?”, “You’ve just
given away your position by saying that,” “I would never have responded
in that way,” you might think to yourself.
During negotiation workshops at The Gap Partnership, we often
provide challenging case study exercises for individuals and groups to
negotiate with each other. The negotiations are recorded on video to
help the attendees observe and learn about the appropriateness of their
behavior given their objectives. We help them to analyze their planning,
behavior, self-control, and performance. Today we work with hundreds of
case studies from our library, which are each designed to focus on diﬀerent
learning outcomes in diﬀerent industries, working with diﬀerent groups
of negotiating variables. There are some multi-issue case studies which
so accurately lead to predictable behavior that I have used them time
after time. You could predict, minutes before an attendee negotiating did
something, what they were going to do. The coaching that follows is based
around the appropriateness of their motives, emotions, and decision making, which provides a powerful lesson in self-awareness every time.
But what was it that made their actions so predictable? Competitiveness?
Pride? The need to perform? A desire to use the skills we had already covered
to positive eﬀect? It was their ego and the competitive situation that led to a
narrowing of the mind, the capacity to think, weigh and consider. It becomes
personal, despite the considerable commercial experience and background
of those I have worked with. It has driven individuals (thousands over the
years) to justify their often short-term irrational behavior because of the
pressure they felt resulting from the circumstances they had been placed in.
They were willing, under certain circumstances, to compete, even though
their brief was to focus on the total value opportunity.
Negotiating agreements successfully in business can be very challenging
in that commercial pressures combined with an obligation to deliver will
naturally stimulate competitiveness. Business is all about “winning” and
outperforming competitors. However, your competitor is not the person

THE “E” FACTOR

113

you are negotiating with. From the many organizations where I have spent
time facilitating negotiations, I have concluded that the bigger the desire
to “win,” the greater the chance of distorted thinking during negotiations
and the less emotional intelligence used. Resist the temptation to allow
your ego to color your judgment. Winning in negotiation means building
successful agreements that the other party will deliver against. It is about
building value and enhancing the bottom line. In some cases it might be
about gaining a commitment to change that minimizes disruption, or
simply reducing the risks associated with an existing arrangement. What
it is not about is you, or whether you have won. If you allow this thought
or feeling to dominate your motivation your performance will most likely
be compromised.
THE ART OF LOSING

Negotiation is about the art of losing, or the art of letting others have
yourr way. With your ego out of the way, and your attitude ﬁrmly focused
on the outcome of the agreement, you are free to behave in any way you
believe to be appropriate to your interests. Being what you need to be and
doing what you need to do includes allowing the other party to enjoy the
“symbols of success” whilst you focus on the total value of the agreement.
This means understanding others and their needs and then trading oﬀ no
more than you need to in order to optimize your net position. It means
letting them win on items of less signiﬁcance whilst you focus on the more
signiﬁcant, value-adding variables. You could argue that you cannot aﬀord
to set precedents by allowing them to win the psychological battle even on
some issues (depending on whether there is an ongoing trading relationship or not), or that if you concede on certain issues they will expect this
in the future. However, your job as a negotiator is also to help the other
party to feel as though they have won.
In situations like this when you feel as though you are losing control
of the relationship, emotions can take over and your decision-making
capacity can become compromised. Your position and scope to negotiate
also become compromised by circumstances and the proactivity being

114

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

employed by your prospective customer. Your immediate reaction may
be, “this is not fair, not right, and I’m not even sure I want to work with
them anymore,” which runs counter to your business interests. Despite
your reactive stance, now is the time to consider your response and advise
them of your position. Develop your strategy and do not react emotionally.
There are two options for preventing this type of situation before you even
start to negotiate.
1. Always establish whether there is a buying process involved that you
should be aware of.
2. Always identify the decision maker(s) and any other stakeholders
who are involved in the sign-oﬀ of agreements.
MANAGING THE EMOTIONAL NEED FOR SATISFACTION

We touched briefly on the need for satisfaction in Chapter 1. The
need that individuals have for “satisfaction” – meaning getting a better
deal than what was originally available – can be so strong that many
negotiators use relative positioning and inflexibility at the start of a
negotiation with the aim of letting the other party achieve what they
thought at the beginning of discussions to be difficult if not impossible. Open your tough negotiations at a position you know they
will reject and it is the start of the process of “give and take,” which
will allow you to start managing the other party’s need for satisfaction.
Many inexperienced negotiators start with a figure that they know
the other party can accept because of the fear of hearing the word
“no.”
Get used to the word “no.” When you open with a position that is
extreme and yet realistic, you are going to hear it a lot. It is part of the
process and you should expect it. Keep the dialogue open and they are
less likely to walk away. If they tell you they can’t or won’t agree to your
opening oﬀer, invite them to tell you how close they can get to your oﬀer.
It keeps the dialogue going and it gets them to talk about your position.
Rather than allowing them to get emotional, ask them what they would

THE “E” FACTOR

115

agree to rather than what they will not agree to. Then stop and consider
your next move.
One of the beneﬁts of opening ﬁrst in negotiation is that you create an
anchor, a position to move from and a position for them to attack. This
should be on the right side of where you expect to ﬁnish up, rather than
reacting to their position and playing in their “ball park.” Be proactive and
open ﬁrst. Take the rejection and then move forward. You are managing
their satisfaction and at the same time you are involved in the process of
securing the best possible deal. It provides you with the opportunity to
maximize the deal whilst still allowing them to take emotional satisfaction even though they may be ﬁnishing on their own break point.

THE NEED TO MANAGE SATISFACTION
Ivan Chen is the general manager at Hong Kong-based paint company White and White, who specialize in eco-friendly lime wash
paints with an “unmatched color range.” Following an article in a
Condé Nast magazine, White and White benefited from a fourfold
surge in overseas orders, which was sustained for 6 consecutive
months. Following this unsolicited success, White and White decided
to engage in an advertising campaign via the Condé Nast group.
Six full pages, one each month for 6 months, was the plan. Their
rate card price per page advert was $35,000 for global coverage
(31 publications) plus charges for an online presence, called the dual
package.
Following several calls and emails with their VP of advertising, Ivan
offered $154,000 for the six slots. He responded with a copy of the
rate card stating that the fee was $270,000 for the dual package,
minus a 15% discount for six slots. The price at the bottom of the email
was a daunting $229,500 but Ivan ignored “the power of the written
(Continued )

116

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
word.” He agreed to meet a week later offering them time to think
about it. He was authorized to go up to $200,000 for the six slots.
In the second meeting he felt he was not making progress so he
adjourned and arranged a third meeting with the VP and also Gary
Chow, the President of Marketing, at their offices in Causeway Bay.
During this final 2-hour meeting, Gary offered additional extras including video-based advertising footage for mobiles and tablets, and
enhanced in-magazine positioning, in an attempt to close the deal.
Ivan increased his offer to £174,000, subject to artwork support for
the adverts and additional mentions in the opening address from the
Editor.
At 6.30pm and with pressure mounting, Gary introduced the idea
of an additional advertorial at no extra cost – a half-page article
presented by White & White independently and yet favorably. Ivan
made his final move. “If you agree to £188,500 per six-slot campaign, I will agree to run two campaigns over 24 months at one slot
every other month. That’s 12 slots in total subject to us maintaining
our current enquiry levels, otherwise I can execute an opt-out clause
after the first six slots.” Ivan had increased volume, managed risk, and
provided price satisfaction in his move. Gary took the deal.
Ivan might have offered the full $200,000, but understood that this
was a limit and not a target. He was satisfied that the extra concessions agreed were good value and had been authorized to increase
the scope of the offer to 12 slots. The satisfaction of both parties and
the commitment to the deal came from the many hours it took to finally
agree. It felt worth having. The harder you work on a deal, the more
challenging it is to complete, and so commitments are more likely to
be honored. Conversely, if it’s too good to be true, and the deal is
wrapped up too quickly, it shouldn’t surprise you how many of these
agreements fall apart as quickly as they come together.

THE “E” FACTOR

117

Banks and real-estate agents are known for trying to manage satisfaction, but often the individuals responsible for the negotiations simply
don’t have the nerve to carry through the transaction in a controlled manner. Take the estate agent who tells you: “Our fee is 1.75% of the selling
price, but we know it’s a competitive market … so we are prepared to do
it for 1.5%.” Did I get any satisfaction from this move? No. It was quick,
unconditional, and transparent. They didn’t even wait for a response, or
ﬁnd out whether I have already been oﬀered 1.5% elsewhere, or establish
that I wanted to work with them anyway because of their great service
levels, for example. The bank manager who states: “We are currently offering our business clients an overdraft facility of base plus 4%. However,
in your case we are prepared to oﬀer base plus 3.5%.”
Why? So that I feel better? I did not have to work for it or even meet
a condition. It wasn’t even a deciding factor at the time, so why oﬀer it?
Satisfaction comes from having to work for it. Even those in the crowds
at the sales have to hunt down the deals in the high street, investing hours
of time to get the 25% oﬀ deal. They may not have negotiated, but they
have invested their time and eﬀort. Those involved in the process will feel
satisﬁed with their bargain.
If someone agrees too easily, you have a decision and commitment that
can just as easily be reversed. Psychologically, things that are hard to attain
carry a greater value. Deals that have been hard fought for are more likely
to be honored. Regard the process of working towards agreement as an
investment in the agreement’s sustainability or the likelihood of it being
honored.
Remember that you can get a great price but a lousy deal if the other
party do not deliver on their commitments as has been agreed. For example, if it does not arrive on time, or if it doesn’t do the job you need it
for, the price makes up only one part of the overall equation.
Working within ﬁxed budgets can mean that your budget is ﬁnite.
When restricted in this way, it is important to understand the eﬀect this
may have on what you agree regarding speciﬁcation. Will the product or
service be de-speciﬁed to allow for the price? Is this clear up-front or is it

118

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

likely to come to light only once the agreement has been made? Maintaining focus and discipline throughout your negotiation means ensuring you
are thorough when it comes to covering all the issues, risks, speciﬁcation,
timing, and any other factors that could result in you receiving less than
what you believe you had agreed to. Unfortunately, those who remain in
denial use budget constraints as an excuse for poor deals that often fail
to deliver.
TRUST, TACTICS, AND EMOTIONS

The trust and respect that you build in your relationships allow for discussion and the opportunity to build agreements. Your energy can then be
spent on the deal rather than on positioning and managing the emotional
needs of those involved. Between 9 o’clock and 12 o’clock this relationship
state provides the ideal place to maximize value. Some negotiators say
they want to work in a partnership and yet behave tactically back around
at 6 o’clock. They may even start to introduce demands that they don’t
even want. Why? Because they are still attempting to provide you with the
satisfaction of negotiating the demands oﬀ the table.
Like most tactics, this can be transparent and can prove detrimental
to your interests, especially if you need to maintain trust and integrity
for the relationship to work. It can also result in the discussions being
emotionally charged and most likely result in transactional agreements
yielding less value.

TRUST IS VALUABLE AND YET FRAGILE
John Whitehouse, an Australian boxing promoter, presented the
manager for middle-weight boxer Wayne Greenwood with a contract that featured 37 clauses. Wayne’s manager as usual handed
the contract over to his lawyers.
They identified three unusual clauses that had not featured or
ever been mentioned before. They were linked to levels of indemnity

THE “E” FACTOR

119

insurance, restrictions on pre- and post-fight interviews, and the rights
to promote the fighter in his next three fights if he won.
Facing the risk of contract discussions breaking down, Wayne’s
lawyers re-wrote the contract and presented it as an agenda along
with a condition of continued discussions. Despite John Whitehouse’s
insistence that he works in partnership with managers and agents,
discussions became more formal and guarded. The new contract still
included the three original clauses, but had been adapted, along
with a further three new clauses aimed at protecting Wayne’s future
options.
The promoter soon realized that not only were the lawyers prepared,
but he was now going to have to work harder within a transactional
relationship to make headway on the remaining clauses. He had
introduced the additional clauses to effectively trade away during
discussions but in doing so had reduced any trust that may have
existed.
VISIBLE EMOTION

Visible emotion is sometimes used tactically in negotiation. One such
tactic known as the “professional ﬂinch” (see Chapters 5 and 8) involves
one party making their opening proposal and the other reacting with an
exaggerated emotional reaction, implying that the oﬀer is ridiculous. The
emotion, orchestrated, is designed to provide a far more powerful form
of rejection than a simple “no.” As a negotiator you need to read the situation and be conﬁdent of your actions. There is no place for uncontrolled
emotion in negotiation. As a Complete Skilled Negotiator, you need to be
in control of your thinking, reactions, what you say, and what you decide
not to say.
Another way of deliberately controlling visible emotions is when
negotiators make power statements during the opening exchanges of a
discussion as part of anchoring the aspirations of the other party. As they
do so, they are consciously waiting for the reactions to gauge how far they

120

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

might push a particular issue. For example: “We’re pleased we’ve been able
to get together to discuss some of the issues around our compensation
claim today,” or “Clearly you recognize that this is most unusual and that
any settlement is likely to take months if not years to conclude given the
complexity of the issue.” The anchor statement may have no substance at
all. The person making the statement is watching and listening for the
emotional signals that suggest rejection or acceptance of the statement.
The Complete Skilled Negotiator would counter with an alternative
statement. This eﬀectively reverses the power statement back to the other
party.
Emotion, pressure, and stress are commonplace in negotiation. With
the implications of deadlock, the responsibility to deliver, and the frustration that can come with working through agreements, self-control often
gives way to our subconscious. You start to do things you are not even
aware of. Most people I have worked with do not believe this until they
see it for themselves on video, but non-verbal communication becomes
exaggerated during stressful times, especially when statements or threats
are being made.
Telling the other party what you will do at any given point in your discussions (even if it’s not the best oﬀer you could make) is a useful discipline
for getting them to focus on your position. You have to accommodate
patience and frustration whilst options are considered. Sometimes the
other party themselves may start to show signs of emotion or stress. Usually this is most evident when responding to or making a proposal.
Imagine you know that you can agree at $1000, but have opened your
position at $600. They ask you: “Is that your best price?”, to which you
reply, “That’s the price I am prepared to pay.” They then make you an oﬀer
of $1100. You say: “I can move to $725 but that will need to include the
service agreement and delivery by Monday.” All the time you are seeking
to trade price against other value items but, in the back of your mind,
you know that you can go further and would be prepared to do so if the
alternative was to lose the deal, which even at $1000 is as good as your
best alternative. They pause, having heard you say $725, and there is a

THE “E” FACTOR

121

moment of silence. Are they thinking about it, preparing to walk away or
considering their next move? The 20 seconds that have passed feel like 5
minutes.
Their silence may be suggesting to you that your oﬀer is ridiculous and
that they have no interest in further conversations. The fact that they
are still in discussions is a non-verbal suggestion that there is some level
of interest. The Complete Skilled Negotiator understands that nothing
happens by accident in negotiation. Everything, every movement, statement, response, and moment of silence happens for a reason, so you will
maintain composure, will watch, and will listen.
Your job as a negotiator is to read and interpret the correlation between
what is being said and how the other party is behaving.
g
During the experiential negotiation workshops I have provided the
opportunity to negotiate agreements whilst being recorded on video,
allowing for detailed analysis of everything that takes place. It allows
negotiators to see for themselves the degree to which their actions and
emotions are visible. Most people completely deny that they would give
any type of signal away until they see themselves on camera. Once they
have and accept this, it results in a signiﬁcant leap in consciously controlled performances. Listen to what they say, watch what they do and
then calculate your response.
Conscious negotiators are capable of active listening. This involves
intentionally demonstrating to others that you are listening, engaged, and
open-minded, if that’s what you want them to think. In other words, they
are skilled at providing the signals through their own body language that
they want the other party to receive. Part of getting into the other party’s
head is getting them to think what you want them to think.
Emotional ego

How many times have you seen emotion or ego-fueled behavior at charity
auctions, let alone business auctions? The entire event is geared to provide
maximum personal exposure in the room. The compère walks around
calling the bidders by their name: “now that’s $5000 for the football shirt,

122

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

has Mr John Smith the nerve to increase his bid?” As he turns to Mr
Smith, so does the attention of the audience. Of course Mr Smith has the
nerve, and he doesn’t want to lose face. These businessmen at the auctions
who are clearly successful, and who have probably worked very hard for
such sums, regard this as a fun process. They are seduced by the immediate public recognition for their generosity and dismiss the very judgment
they usually exercise that probably helped them make the money in the
ﬁrst place. It’s for charity. It is their money (although not always), so I can
understand their “fun.” However, on many occasions similar actions have
been witnessed in the business world where the egos of those involved use
“company money,” fueled by the need to win, and exercise disregard for the
very shareholders they are working on behalf of.
Emotion distorts objectivity. If your spouse was being held captive and a
ransom was being demanded for their release, the last person who should
negotiate the agreement is you. You are emotionally involved and therefore
immediately compromised. You would probably give everything you own
for their release, probably in your ﬁrst oﬀer, assuming the kidnappers had
not already stated their demand. You should of course delegate the role of
negotiating to another person. They may be no more competent than you
at negotiating, but they will be without the emotional attachment that
you have to the outcome.
KEY TAKEAWAYS

Careful planning ahead of your negotiation may help your conﬁdence
and provide you with considered options. However, emotional behavior
and the actions of the other party, together with circumstantial changes,
require nerve, self-awareness, and self-control, otherwise your composure
and performance may be compromised.
•
•

Understand yourself, your intentions, your responses, your emotions,
and your own behavior.
Try to understand the deal from inside the other party’s head and the
priorities, interests, pressures, and emotions they will be feeling.

THE “E” FACTOR

•
•
•
•

•
•
•

123

Listen, understand, calculate, think, and slow down. It will increase your
mental capacity and will make a real diﬀerence to your performance.
Even where strong dependent relationships exist, with pressure and
tension, emotion is never far away.
Planning and preparation, starting with an agenda, will help you promote order, options, and more collaborative dialog.
When unclear, feeling under pressure, or without the clarity you feel
you need, take time out – otherwise you may ﬁnd yourself facing the
unintended consequences of your rash actions.
Don’t be seduced by large concessions. Their extreme opening position
may well have been designed to shock and then satisfy you.
Keep your ego in check. Only then are you free to behave in any way
you believe to be appropriate to your interests.
Never take for granted how others may behave. Human beings under
pressure can become irrational in thinking and in their behavior.

