CHAPTER 7

Authority and Empowerment

“No one should be without accountability. It is a dangerous and lonely
place to be.”
Unknown

UNDERSTANDING EMPOWERMENT

Your negotiations can only progress if communication ﬂows and those
who are directly or indirectly involved are allowed to take decisions.
Therefore, understanding the role of empowerment in your negotiation
is fundamental to managing the relationships and communications that
stand between you and progress.
However, with empowerment comes exposure and this brings with it
risk. It is this risk that organizations seek to control by empowering individuals with limits, or caps, beyond which they must escalate to higher
authority. Too much empowerment and any individual can become dangerous or vulnerable and therefore so can the organization they work for.
The Complete Skilled Negotiator will understand empowerment in
terms of:
•
•
•
•

how it can be used to protect you;
how it aﬀects your ability to be creative;
how it aﬀects your ability to build value; and
how it aﬀects the other party’s thinking and behavior.

126

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Essentially, it is the degree to which you can negotiate and take decisions
without having to refer or escalate them to a higher authority. In other words,
empowerment relates to the scope and range of variables and the authority
within which you have to negotiate or operate. If you regard empowerment
as simply a gauge to broaden or narrow your trading opportunities, or to
provide “stop limits” up to which you can negotiate, you can start to get a feel
for how empowerment can work for you, as well as against you.
To negotiate collaboratively on the left-hand side of the clock face (6–12
o’clock) requires the scope or empowerment to work with many variables
and possibilities. Limiting this, as many organizations do, can help protect
you from the escalation and disempowerment tactics sometimes used by
others. So getting this right is fundamental to where you will ﬁnish up on
the clock face.
Great negotiators tend to be unsung heroes. Great deals become so over
time as the contract delivers the value it was intended to oﬀer, rather than
necessarily at the time when the deal was completed. Negotiators often work
as part of a team, which can involve specialist lawyers, ﬁnance directors, and
others. Because the last person to become involved in the negotiation dealings is the boss, the act of negotiation is usually and appropriately delegated
further down the line, further diluting the transparency of who is actually
controlling events. And when the deal is done, the need for conﬁdentiality as
well as the need to protect the operations of those companies involved means
that the true facts and ﬁgures agreed are rarely publicized to the degree to
which you can measure the relative performance of the negotiators involved.
Most high-proﬁle negotiators tend to be political ﬁgures or union leaders,
because they use PR as part of posturing during or leading up to discussions.
However, these individuals neither work by themselves nor are they fully
empowered to negotiate on all issues. Using the press and media is part of
how they frame, anchor, and publicize their position and progress to those
they represent, the parties they are negotiating with, and any other third
parties.
One of my personal experiences as a negotiator involved facilitating a
highly-charged negotiation between a Japanese electronics company and

AUTHORITY AND EMPOWERMENT

127

a trade union in the UK. The level of trust between the parties involved,
together with the climate of the meeting and the relationship, was poor,
hence the need to bring in a neutral to facilitate events. On my advice to
my client, I was provided with no scope with which to negotiate, which
allowed me to focus on the process and not be drawn on speciﬁc proposals.
My role included helping the parties with establishing solutions, starting
with why they thought they could not agree to the terms that had already
been tabled.
How empowered are they?

Rushing into negotiations without qualifying whether the other party is
empowered to negotiate is a mistake many eager and ultimately frustrated
account managers have made. The need to question, qualify, and explore
requires patience. It is during this phase of initial discussions that the
issue of empowerment should be qualiﬁed by simply asking: “Are you in
a position to sign oﬀ the agreement?” or “Who else would you need to
consult with as part of signing oﬀ this agreement?” or even “What limits
are there that might prevent you from signing oﬀ the agreement?” All of
these questions will help you to decide whether you are dealing with the
right person or people.
Being disempowered

We are socially conditioned to conform and most of us lead our lives
respecting the laws of where we live and others around us. Laws provide
in some instances freedom of movement, for example, eﬀectively empowering us to travel and choose how and where we travel. Laws can also
disempower us, in that we may not travel faster than a given speed or,
when driving, having drunk alcohol, and so on.
The written word carries an assumed authority in that it has been
published. It is designed to be legitimate. In your negotiation the other
party may present you with, say, a price list. Rather than accepting this as
it is, you should regard it as their opening position. Diﬀerent situations
require diﬀerent considerations, yet many will wrongly assume that not

128

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

only is the printed price ﬁxed but the person issuing it is disempowered
to negotiate.
The more empowered you are, however, the more exposed you become.
You may carry more risk to your business and therefore be accountable for
the total impact of your actions. Organizations have a tough challenge in providing a level of empowerment to their employees which helps the business
conduct“good business” but not with such risks that the “good business” could
be concluded with unintended consequences or unforeseen costs.
Many organizations actively promote business values such as creativity,
entrepreneurship, and even empowerment. Yet when negotiating with
suppliers and customers they recognize that there have to be limits within
which individuals are empowered to operate, otherwise the business will
lose total control of its operation. They operate a disempowered structure
to protect their own business operation.
For example, they might use a price list, which serves to disempower the
salesperson, as does the accompanying printed discount structure. Under
these circumstances, the salesperson is disempowered to the point where
they are little more than an order taker.
If the customer demands better terms they have to speak to the boss.
The boss, a supervisor, is also disempowered. They have a boss and if you
can get to them, because they are usually “out of town,” you may just be
able to negotiate a better deal.
al

nti

Risk

Hi

l

tia

w

Lo

n
ote

p

Empowerment

Figure 7.1 Empowerment.

gh

te
po

AUTHORITY AND EMPOWERMENT

129

Tactically, empowerment allows you to use a third party, citing your lack
of authority to move further, which serves to deﬂect the pressure away
from you. If not used carefully though, it can backﬁre.
Fully empowered individuals can become very dangerous

Rogue traders acting beyond their company’s agreed levels of empowerment provide us with ample evidence of just how badly things can go
wrong if scope, when provided, goes unchecked.

HISTORY’S LESSONS FROM THOSE WHO WERE
“EMPOWERED”
Navinda Singh Sarao from the UK was charged in 2015 with
ten counts of commodities fraud after manipulating the S&P 500
futures contracts, which resulted in it plunging by 600 points
($500bn) in a matter of minutes. The flash crash, which was
said to have caused chaos across US equities, was a result of an
automated trading program he used, placing multiple simultaneous large sell orders at different price points, a technique known
as spoofing. He was said to have personally made $27m over
4 years.
The biggest fraud in history was carried out by Jerome Kerviel of
Société Générale, who had taken up hedging positions that cost his
business €4.9bn. At one point, he ran up about €38bn in unauthorized trades, which when discovered had to be carefully unwound.
The bank almost collapsed as a result of the losses discovered in
2008.
Another notable example involving empowered City traders is that
of Kweku Adoboli, who in 2011 lost UBS £1.4bn. He was described
as being “a gamble or two away from destroying Switzerland’s largest bank.” He was jailed for 7 years after being found guilty of fraud.
(Continued )

130

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
At the center of the subprime mortgage scandal at Credit Suisse in
London, David Higgs was found guilty of falsifying accounts in a New
York court. As Managing Director of Credit Suisse in London in 2007
and 2008 he had inflated the value of mortgage securities in the
bank’s portfolio. The overstatement forced Credit Suisse to announce
a $2.85bn (£1.8bn) write down.

These are just a few of the more well-publicized examples of what can
happen when those who have been partially empowered operate outside
the limits set, and without the necessary transparency and checks to
protect everyone concerned.
Being partially empowered

Every industry uses empowerment limits to protect their business. Call
centers use this to make it almost impossible for customers to negotiate
with their representatives, who stick rigidly to their scripts. Any demand
proposal made by the customer that sits outside the script has to be escalated
to their supervisor – a classic avoidance strategy where the customer has to
escalate or, if not, give up and concede. However where the discussion does
deadlock and the customer cancels the order, supply or subscription you
have to ask is it not better to provide the call center operator with some tools
and skills to work with. Other examples include: the insurance industry
with the salesperson who can only refer to the underwriter for a decision;
the shop assistant who has to refer to their manager when challenged by a
customer; and the hotel receptionist who has to check with their manager
before agreeing to that special rate. Even the empowered negotiator may
sometimes use the tactic of suggesting that their boss would not agree and
therefore cannot agree to the oﬀer on the table.
In life we are surrounded by limits and rules, for the most part set in
place to protect us from ourselves. For instance, a police oﬃcer can stop you,
arrest you, or take you into custody, but is not empowered to sentence you.

AUTHORITY AND EMPOWERMENT

131

That is the role of a judge, who in turn is governed by the rule of law, the jury,
and the evidence. This process serves to prevent corruption and protects the
system, whichever side of it you may be on. Within the context of a job, in
the case of the police, they have the authority, responsibility, and ultimately
have been empowered to go so far in the apprehension process. What they
can and can’t do as part of apprehending a suspect has been clearly deﬁned
in their training. It provides them with the conﬁdence to escalate issues that
are outside of their remit in the same way that you should operate with
pre-agreed parameters within which you have been authorized.
YOUR BOSS CAN BE YOUR WORST ENEMY

The most dangerous person in any organization is the person with the most
authority – usually the boss. The person who can say “yes” and knows that
they are able to do so is more likely to do so, and under pressure they often
do. If you have ever attended a meeting alongside your boss you may well
have experienced the following typical and yet frustrating scenario. It is your
client relationship but your boss wants to sit in for whatever reason. The
meeting starts and you set out to discuss some of the challenging issues with
your client, and then your boss starts to take over the conversation. In no
time at all, your client and boss are fully engaged in the discussion; they start
exploring solutions and ultimately start trading concessions that you would
not have been empowered to oﬀer yourself. Your boss still thinks that they
are doing the right thing and a great job at that.
What has happened, though, is that your boss is as keen as you are to
resolve the issue. They are, however, more empowered (which, as we know,
makes them more dangerous). Before long, your boss has concluded the
meeting having built an agreement. Your boss has probably involved you
along the way, yet may still have undermined your relationship and credibility with your client. Guess who the client asks to see at the next meeting?
Your boss may be highly skilled, have tremendous nerve and be very
capable of managing relationships. However, they have a greater responsibility and accountability than you and therefore will be more exposed and
will have more to lose if the deal deadlocks. As they are most empowered,

132

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

hold the weakest negotiating position of anyone in your organization.
Imagine your king in a game of chess. The king is not as mobile as the other
pieces. If your king is in check, you will always be vulnerable no matter
how many pieces you have on the board. Therefore, your job is to protect
your king, to ensure that the other party does not gain access to them. In
negotiation, your king is your boss and it is not in your interest to expose
your boss directly to the other party, otherwise you could ﬁnd yourself in
a compromised position. There is a famous mantra preached by buyers:
“another level, another percent.” The buyer will negotiate hard with their
counterpart and then try to escalate to the next level to get that extra percent
concession, and then escalate again for another percent and so on.
Who is in the background?

So if you are ultimately accountable it is in your interests to disempower
yourself as this will protect you. Better to manage in the background
and let the discussions unfold, than to be the focus of attention. Make
it known that others will be taking the decisions and that you will back
whatever decisions are taken.
In any negotiation, never assume that you are dealing with the ultimate
decision maker. You may ﬁnd yourself being enlightened at the end of
your discussions, that is, they have to refer the ﬁnal decision to somebody
else. The person you thought you were negotiating with was in fact not
empowered to make the ﬁnal decision. They may have also made oﬀers
that their business will not carry out. You may have even oﬀered concessions in return for discount levels that the other person is ultimately not
authorized to agree. Therefore, it’s imperative always to qualify the degree
to which the other person is empowered:
•
•

establish who the decision maker is; and
establish who else will need to agree.

Do this before the negotiation begins. If not, you will leave yourself
wide open to tactics, stalling, escalation, or, worse still, agree to a contract
that will not be delivered on, because the terms agreed were not viable.

AUTHORITY AND EMPOWERMENT

133

Escalation
Accountability
Board member

Objectives
Narrow
Broad

Director
Senior manager

Risk

Manager
Associate
Empowerment

Figure 7.2 Escalation.

Gaining “in principle” agreements

Another way of using the boss to help negotiations ﬂow where there is likely
to be a high level of resistance is in arranging top-to-top meetings between
senior management. These meetings are used to outline ideas and for gaining
“in-principle” agreements, allowing for negotiations on the detail to follow
up. This is used in both political and business environments as a means of
protecting the boss from speciﬁc exposure, whilst allowing for trust and an
understanding to be built between the two parties at a senior level.

MAKING USE OF HIGHER AUTHORITY
A local restauranteur Rob had secured a wealthy celebrity backer who
was attracted by the opportunity to lease 15,000 square feet of space
for a licensed restaurant opportunity at an established Tuscan Marina.
Over the previous 4 years, the Marina, which was in an excellent
town location, had attracted strong competition. Pressure had built
up on mooring rates and waiting lists had evaporated. The investment in the quality of services expected by wealthy yacht owners
(Continued )

134

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

was simply being better met elsewhere. The Marina was privately
owned by a group of local businessmen whose borrowing capacity
had been exhausted, so was not in a position to borrow in order to
invest further.
Having terminated the contract with the existing team running
the Marina Café, they engaged in conversations with Rob, who
maintained from the outset that he was only acting on behalf of his
investor. The Marina management team’s idea was to attract an
investment to build and operate a “destination restaurant” that would
attract not only boat owners but local residents.
As the final terms were due to be agreed, Rob disempowered
himself by stating that his backer had set limits that he could
not pass. He also stated that his backer was only interested in
a deal if it was completed by the end of March, which barely
offered enough time for any legal work to be completed. He
managed to maintain a collaborative relationship by separating
himself from the terms set out by his backer without ever exposing
his backer. Rob calculated that the value that the restaurant and
facilities would bring to the Marina in enhanced facilities and
appeal would be considerable, so demanded a 5-year rent-free
deal in return for a £500,000 investment in the infrastructure
of the building and facilities. He sold 50% of his business for
£550,000 to his backer, who continues to this day to serve as
Rob’s “higher authority.” The £50,000 balance was used for
operating expenses.

STARTING WITH TOP-TO-TOP AGREEMENTS
Top-to-top meetings serve to set the tone, promote and reinforce trust,
as well as setting parameters of pending negotiations. They also

AUTHORITY AND EMPOWERMENT

135

provide the opportunity to pre-condition the other party by setting out
expectations without getting drawn into finite detail.
Ligo, a sports clothing brand, decided to renegotiate a new set of
terms with their 18 main distributors across Europe. The changes that
required renegotiation included volumes, discount structures, advertising, information sharing, payment terms, and order lead times.
Ultimately, their distributors would be facing a price increase via an
“updated discount structure,” which Ligo needed to implement to fund
their significant marketing campaign. The benefit to the distributors
would be increased volume orders. They knew the negotiations were
going to be tough. Eighty percent of their business was with their
five largest distributors so the size and importance of these were the
primary focus for the leaders of Ligo.
The strategy adopted by Ligo involved top-to-top meetings to
discuss new product lines, reliability of delivery lead times, and
a uniform transparent discount structure. These messages were
sold without mention of specific details. The directors insisted that
both parties had teams who could work through “the detail.” They
focused on the new lines and the need to provide fair, transparent
discounting for all their distributors, which would help their customers’
businesses grow.
Essentially, they had paved the way for negotiations by disempowering themselves and not becoming drawn on details. Had
they not done so, they would have compromised their strategy and
potentially faced demands, because their distributors would have
known that it was ultimately the directors that set the terms in the first
place.
EMPOWERMENT WITHIN TEAM ROLES

When negotiating in teams it is important to be organized in such a way
that you perform well as a unit. Understanding who is empowered to
do what and who will take the ﬁnal decisions is also key to the workings

136

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

of any team in pressured situations. Negotiating in teams can only be
eﬀective when everyone understands and keeps to their role, and is able
to contribute towards the team’s eﬀorts. There are four distinct team roles
that are typically adopted:
•
•
•
•

the spokesperson;
the ﬁgures person;
the observer; and
the leader.

Each is designed to help your team perform to the best of its varied
abilities.
The spokesperson

The spokesperson is empowered. Their role is to:
•
•
•

conduct most of the dialogue;
table proposals within agreed parameters with the leader in the negotiation team; and
trade variables on behalf of the team, while still needing to refer to their
leader to get ﬁnal agreement.

That is not to say that others should not or cannot talk, but they should
do so through invitation from the spokesperson. The team is there to
support the spokesperson.
The figures person

The ﬁgures person should not typically be involved in the dialog unless
invited to do so. They:
•
•
•
•

understand the implications of movement on each of the variables;
advise on possibilities, calculate movements, possibilities, and proposals;
understand the total value of the agreement at any given point in time; and
advise the leader as the negotiation proceeds.

AUTHORITY AND EMPOWERMENT

137

The observer

The observer is also disempowered. Their role is to:
•
•
•
•

watch and monitor the other party;
hear the things that others may be too preoccupied to hear;
understand the motives, interests, and priorities of the other party; and
read the size, timing, and nature of the moves that are taking place.

The purpose of the role is to help you to understand what is driving the
other party. The observer is your eyes and ears in the room. They generally
workout what’s happening in the room when others are too preoccupied.
The leader

The leader is usually the person with the greatest level of authority. They
are the person who speaks least, but speaks loudest. Their role is to:
•
•
•

set out the agenda and form the climate for the meeting;
allow the spokesperson to manage the trading on behalf of the team; and
summarize from time to time where clarity is required and make the
ﬁnal decision.

However, the leader is not the negotiator. This task is delegated to the
spokesperson, who is the voice of the team.
More than four

Often the team is larger than four members. More frequently, you will
have to play all four roles yourself, at the same time. This makes your
task of negotiating more demanding because there are many things to
think about, consider, and respond to. This is one of the reasons why
preparation is so important to negotiators. You should never think on
your feet, never seek to rush the deal, and always understand the pace at
which you can operate and manage your meetings accordingly.
For some, disempowerment feels like a straitjacket – for others, a suit of
armor. It works both ways and is used by companies to expand or narrow

138

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

the scope and risk. It is used as a tactic to protect or deﬂect conﬂict, as well
as a negotiating lever.
Even a pilot landing their aircraft will take instructions from air traﬃc
control regarding ﬂight path, timings, and other relevant instructions
during descent. They are part of a team and diﬀerent members of the
team will carry diﬀerent forms of responsibility and will be empowered to
make certain decisions. Fortunately, everything the pilot does can be seen
by everyone who has an interest in their activity.
GETTING EMPOWERED BEFORE YOU START

Often before negotiations start, you may ﬁnd yourself involved in internal
negotiations to agree your parameters and how far you are authorized
to go, or whether you will entertain discussions on particular variables
as part of concluding an agreement. This is an important part of the
planning process. Without these parameters, you could in theory become
dangerous because you could agree to anything. So, degrees of empowerment are usually put in place to protect you (providing you with a basis
for trading), and to protect your businesses.
Equally, the other party will have parameters within which they can
operate. It is quite common for some people to open a negotiation discussion
outlining the areas that are non-negotiable “deal breakers” and the areas
that are available for discussion. The likelihood is that they are either not
empowered to negotiate over certain areas because of the parameters that
have been set, or they have decided for now to introduce such parameters,
allowing them to broaden the agenda during later discussions.

DEFENSE IN DEPTH
The seller says: “If you can agree to a price of $19 a unit on 30 days
delivery, we will agree to payment terms of 30 days.” The buyer says “I
am able to agree to that, but I just need to run that past my boss as it is
above my authorization level, I’ll call you this afternoon.” That afternoon,

AUTHORITY AND EMPOWERMENT

139

the buyer calls the salesman: “Good news, my boss says that if you can
agree to $18 a unit he will sign it off.” The salesman sees this as a tactic
they have come across before, called “defense in depth.” However, he
needs the deal, so yields to the offer: “OK, but I need a confirmation in
writing back by the morning.” “That’s great,” says the buyer, “We can
now put the agreement before the head of buying for the final sign-off
and I’ll have it back to you by the morning.” The following morning
arrives and the buyer calls the seller. “The head of buying says that if
the deal meets our standard payment terms of 45 days, he will sign the
agreement. Of course I would have signed it off, but it’s out of my hands
now.” The seller is so close and because he is empowered to authorize
the 45 days, he agrees, “Just sign it and get it back to me.”

The pressure the salesman is under to get the agreement signed, and the
fact that he works for an “empowering” sales organization, has resulted in
the salesman’s position being compromised. Had he been disempowered
to move beyond certain predeﬁned limits, the buyer may well have had
to review his approach or renegotiated on other variables. This higher
authority tactic is used frequently where one party does not qualify the
decision-making process beyond the person they are dealing with, leaving
themselves exposed to further negotiations.
DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY
Linking empowerment to accountability

ENSURING THE NEGOTIATOR IS ACCOUNTABLE FOR
THE “TOTAL VALUE”
A manufacturer was involved in a negotiation to supply safety helmets for a new construction site. Their contact was a procurement
(Continued )

140

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

manager who needed to place an order for two sizes of helmet,
which had to meet specific health and safety standards.
• The safety helmets were to be used at a new construction site due
to accommodate over 700 contractors.
• The helmets needed to be delivered on site within 4 weeks, when
the contractors were due to arrive and the next health and safety
inspection was due.
• The owners of the site managed a number of other sites, some of
which were due to be started in the next few months.
The procurement manager had narrowed down the potential suppliers to two known manufacturers and then commenced his negotiations.
The first supplier offered a very keen price, subject to preferred supplier
status and a guaranteed order to supply the remaining four other sites
to be launched, at the same price per unit. The second supplier did
not ask for the longer-term order, was 5% more expensive, and could
not deliver for 5 weeks.
The procurement manager’s instincts were to go with the first offer.
However, he then considered what risks this might entail. The first
supplier was cheaper but what were the implications if they were to
deliver late? The costs could be hundreds of times the price of the
order. He double-checked the specification, trying to work out why
they were so cheap. What would the implications be if the hats did
not meet the required specifications? The risks of failing to meet the
health and safety requirements meant this deal was not just about
the hats. It was about the total site being ready to operate, which
meant having them ready and available to wear. The procurement
manager referred to his boss to discuss the merits of the options.
Ultimately they requested written guarantees from both suppliers and
recognition of the consequences of late delivery. Not surprisingly,
only the second supplier responded and so secured the order.

AUTHORITY AND EMPOWERMENT

141

Any individual who is empowered to negotiate the best deal must also
be made accountable for the broader implications of their agreements;
otherwise what looks like a great deal could turn out to be a disaster for
the organization. The challenge for the empowered negotiator is therefore
to understand and negotiate/mitigate for the risks and, when in doubt,
escalate.
EMPOWERMENT AND SCOPE TO CREATE VALUE

So, responsibility and accountability go hand in hand. Some businesses
want their managers to be entrepreneurial. They want to empower them
to take decisions, to be creative, to build agreements, and to maximize
value within the agreements they are involved in.
In fact, high-potential deals come from creative thinking (trait 9,
Chapter 4). Creative thinking comes from those who are empowered and
therefore encouraged to think more broadly. If you disempower someone
by providing them with limited scope to operate, it will limit their thinking and attract responses such as: “I didn’t even consider the prospect of a
joint venture; it’s not part of my remit.”
If you want to negotiate incremental value in your agreements you need
to be empowered with as much scope as possible.
The importance of defining value

Having greater scope with moderate forms of empowerment oﬀers a
balance which many organizations adopt. However, scope and creativity
must also be linked to accountability. You might ask someone to build
creative deals that maximize value. However, unless you deﬁne how value
will be measured, they may overlook the risks they have accepted in their
quest to extract value. If the personal beneﬁts associated with highly profitable agreements are very high, limits of authority may be worth building
into the negotiator’s brief. As we have witnessed in the global banking
industry in the lead-up to the credit crunch during 2008/9, individuals
will entertain risk in the quest for personal gain, especially when they are
authorized to do so.

142

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

KEY TAKEAWAYS

Empowerment works just like authority. The more empowered you are,
the more scope you have to negotiate. The positives are that with greater
scope you can be more creative by working with a broader agenda and
more variables. The negatives are that you can become exposed to pressure because you are empowered to say yes. In other words it is often
those with the authority who need protecting, which is why the act of
negotiation is often delegated to others.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Seek a higher authority as a way of disempowering yourself when
necessary.
Agree to whom and when you should escalate discussions or decision
making before you start.
Agree (and negotiate if necessary) the scope and parameters of your
empowerment before you start.
Always qualify the level of empowerment of those you are dealing with.
When they say they are unable to agree, seek to escalate the matter to
someone who can.
Agreed team roles and discipline provides greater protection from
tactics others may use.
If you are empowered to negotiate around a broad range of variables,
understand the value of each issue from inside the other party’s head.

