CHAPTER 9

Planning and Preparation that
Helps You to Build Value

“There is only one good, knowledge and one evil, ignorance.”
Socrates
Planning and preparation is the most fundamental element of negotiating
and it is only when the deal is done that the value of this can be fully
appreciated. In all my experience I have concluded that there is a direct
correlation between how well you have planned the outcome of your
negotiations.
To start with it is important not to get confused between knowledge and
ability. What you understand will help you to perform but this knowledge
counts for nothing if you don’t possess the motivation to do, and that
requires making time to plan and prepare. Ignore or avoid this reality at
your peril. There will be many reasons, excuses, and time distractions
that may impact on your performance as a negotiator. However, if you are
disciplined enough to plan and prepare, you will create value and achieve
results that would otherwise be beyond your reach.

PLANNING CREATIVE TRADE-OFFS WHICH REALIZE ADDITIONAL VALUE

If you have ever played the game Tetris you will know there is a skill involved in getting the right shapes in the right places and in the right order
to maximize your score. If you do not adjust the pieces or move the shapes

170

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

as they become visible they will simply stack up on each other, leaving you
with lots of gaps and a low score.
Similarly, in negotiation and working with variables, there is a skill in
agreeing to the way and order in which you position the variables. Your
motivation, mindset, and ﬂexibility in moving variables around, driven
by your planning, provide endless possibilities to maximize value. In
the negotiation, the value you create can come from packaging variables
together to help realize, protect, or grow the total value available.
As a Complete Skilled Negotiator your planning and preparation will
be inﬂuenced by the number of variables and possibilities you make use
of. This proactive and open-minded approach can provide you with a
fundamental advantage in working out what variables might be worth and
what each aspect of the deal means to the other party. You would not try
to build a house without having completed the drawings, worked through
your calculations, and estimated your costs. You would know instinctively
that the project would most likely fail without a plan. Negotiation is no
diﬀerent because, once you have started, you should seek to maintain a
proactive position and remain in control. Without a plan, you are more
likely to be in a reactive position, exposing yourself to circumstances and
a position that can easily spiral out of your control.
EACH AND EVERY DEAL IS UNIQUE

Every negotiation you enter will have a set of circumstances surrounding
it that eﬀectively make it unique, even those that exist in familiar relationships. Your relationship, timings, market changes, the options you may
have, how important the agreement is, and the issues to be agreed will
all contribute to the dynamics that create a unique set of circumstances.
Working out exactly what it is that is unique to each negotiation you
face will also enable you to be creative in your planning. Recognizing this
also helps you to get “inside the other person’s head,” work with a more
complex mix of variables with clear ﬁnancial values, and tackle the more
ambiguous or intangible variables, which can often hold the key to additional value.

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

171

Even when you have invested in time preparing it’s important to realize
that, once discussions get under way, you should expect the unexpected.
New ideas, consequences, and issues will surface during meetings. These
may come in the form of a proposal or a demand you may not have considered before. You will then need to make time to think through the possible
implications and, of course, your response. However, because an idea is
new, don’t reject it because you have yet to consider the implications or
cannot calculate the risks immediately. Often there’s a signal within the
proposal that relates to what’s important to the other party. New ideas
can also help you to work out what is going on in the other party’s head.
UNDERSTANDING VALUE

There are ﬁve things that can happen to value in negotiation. You can:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

give it;
create it;
share it;
protect it; and
take it.

As part of your tactical planning you will have considered the clock face and
decided on your strategy. If you are planning to increase prices and there are
no trade-oﬀs involved, they may regard the negotiation as you simply looking
to“take” value. However, before you can impose such a price increase you need
to consider the balance of power. For example, the fact that you can tell your
kids what to do doesn’t mean that it will always be the best thing to do, as you
consider the longer-term implications for your relationship. In other words,
the more powerful you are, the more options you have, but you need to remain
mindful of the longer-term dependency in play.
The three dynamics of value

In negotiation, as in business, the general oﬀer is that you can have “it”
quick, good, or cheap. Now pick any two.

172

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

In other words, if you are oﬀered all three, you are likely to be getting
something that is too good to be true. “Quick” usually means now, but for
most suppliers it means additional cost. “Good” can mean high quality,
but will usually come at greater cost. “Cheap” may be possible, but the
quality may suﬀer and the speed may not be as quick as you need.
There are many things in life you can obtain quick and cheap. Take the
hamburger: the quality is not going to be that of a prime steak, despite
what the marketing might suggest. You can get a great ﬁrst-class airline
seat immediately (good and quick) but it will cost you more. You can get a
beautiful garden if you plant and tend it yourself at a reasonable price, but
it might take a year or two for the beneﬁts to arrive. These three dynamics
of value ﬁt together in the same way as risk and beneﬁt go hand in hand in
that one will nearly always aﬀect the other. For instance, if you want low risk
you expect the cost to rise because low risk comes at a price. Similarly, if you
are prepared to take greater risk you will probably be oﬀered better returns.
What do we mean by total value?

In most negotiations there is a central issue. This might relate to the price
of an oﬃce lease, a trade union challenging changes to working practices,
or an internal negotiation over who gets what percentage of the marketing
budget, for example. Whatever the issue, this provides you with an opportunity to better negotiate around it by introducing and trading it against
other related variables, considerations, and implications, all of which will
have some bearing on the total value.
A GREAT PRICE CAN OFTEN LEAD TO A LOUSY DEAL
Anyone who drives price as the only consideration is likely to end
up with regrets if they accept the mantra “you get what you pay for.”
Effective negotiators will use power derived from time and circumstance, the power resulting from supply and demand and from the
available options that one party or the other has. How much you

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

173

understand about these and how much you decide you use them will
be down to your judgment. Where there is some level of dependency
in play once the deal is done (as in most B2B situations), then total
value carries a greater consequence than simply price. If you feel
comfortable booking laser eye surgery or a vasectomy at the lowest
price then you have to come to terms with the risk you take at a very
personal level. Would you hire the cheapest lawyer to manage your
divorce or send your kids to the cheapest dentist because of price?
Probably not. There will be many other variables in play and you will
probably place a value on each of them.

Try to remove price as the main issue of contention. It is the most
transparent and contentious of issues (“what you get, I lose and what I
get, you lose”), especially when dealt with in isolation. Indeed, even if you
negotiate creatively around a range of variables but leave price until the
end, you are likely to ﬁnish up back at 4 o’clock – hard bargaining. With
nowhere to go you are just as likely to deadlock over price at the end as if
this had been the only issue under consideration. By introducing it early
instead, you can always revisit it as part of changing other terms during
the negotiation. Keep it in the mix, and conditional.
Total value comes not only from the basic terms agreed, but also from
certainty or whether the deal will actually deliver the value intended over
the lifetime of the agreement.
Where you are reliant on the other party’s motivation to deliver over
the lifetime of the agreement, to perform or comply, and in the event that
their performance falters, you or your business will be exposed to the
implications of such shortfalls. So part of your consideration needs to
focus on the period of time known as “follow through.” This means setting
out terms to protect and ensure adequate compensation in the case of
lack of compliance or performance. These terms should also ensure that
the consequences to you are addressed and compensated for, removing

174

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

the need for further negotiations. Essentially you are “future prooﬁng” the
agreement.
THE SIX PRIMARY VARIABLES

There are six primary variables that tend to feature across any type of
deal from business to politics. This helps to capture all the issues that are
likely to aﬀect the total value of your agreements. Once deﬁned, you can
use them to broaden out the scope of the agreement and to consider the
consequences of performance around each of these variables. During your
planning this also provides you with the opportunity to introduce a range
of conditions linked to each variable.
Price, fee, or margin (how much will be paid).
Volume (how many, how much, or what types).
Deliveryy (when, where, response times).
Contract period (when it will start, how long it will run for, under
what circumstances it will or can be terminated, when it will be
reviewed, etc).
5. Payment terms (when, how, currency, etc).
6. Speciﬁcation (what the product, service, or agreement will include,
the quality, or how it will be supported).
1.
2.
3.
4.

1. Price, fee, or margin

You can build agreements that feature diﬀering pricing structures. These
can be linked to issues such as:
•
•
•

the purpose for which the product or service is to be used;
geography (regional pricing to be used and by whom); and
relationship loyalty.

They should also be linked directly to the other ﬁve primary variables. If
this is not done, then the transparency involving “what I get, you lose and

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

175

what you get, I lose” will usually result in tough positional bargaining. So
try wherever possible to link price with other issues.
2. Volume

There are few cases where volume does not feature in negotiations and in
most cases there is a direct relationship between price and volume, unless
you are buying a one-oﬀ event or speciﬁc tangible item. The economies
of scale usually provide for this, so much so that some businesses will
reﬂect such a relationship on a published discount tariﬀ. As an extension
to the price list, this is also designed in an attempt to preempt further
negotiation. Volume thresholds can sometimes be linked to retrospective
discounts (a discount you receive on the whole order, but only when a certain volume order has been achieved) or can provide increased discount
levels, depending on volume levels to promote loyalty and volume orders.
3. Delivery

This refers to where, by when, and how the physical product or services
are to be delivered or completed.
Where delivery is stipulated to be by the end of the month, for example,
further variables can be introduced to stipulate the consequences of not
meeting these delivery commitments. This can take the form of a penalty
clause, or other forms of compensation linked to protecting against implications in the event that commitments are not met.
The construction industry uses this approach where contractors have
to ﬁnish within certain timelines to enable others to start work. If they
do not, there are ﬁnancial implications for both the main contractor and
other sub-contractors. So the risk and consequences are negotiated into
the agreement so that responsibility and implications around timescales
sit with the sub-contractor. They in turn may choose to negotiate terms
that accommodate shared risk, recognizing circumstances beyond their
control like weather:
“If it rains for more than 50% of the days we have to complete the job,
we will be allowed a further 10 days to complete without penalty.”

176

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

4. Contract period

Think of the contract duration. The start, stop, pause, cancel, re-commence
terms, each with diﬀerent circumstances attached, and you can start to
imagine just how many variables could be included when you consider
contract period. For those involved in negotiating lease contracts, this is one
of the most valuable variables, in that to attract a 5-year agreement rather
than a 1-year agreement buys so much more security and certainty.
Even if it is a rolling contract (ongoing) there will still be circumstances
upon which an opt-out clause can be contractually exercised. Another variable
designed to protect contract period commitments is termination, where you
stipulate where one party can terminate the contract with or without reason or
consequence as well as deﬁning when the option to renew becomes available.
5. Payment terms

There are so many ways of constructing payment terms to reﬂect the risk
to those involved, the commitment to see the work through, or simply to
increase the value of the deal. They can be broken down to include:
•
•
•
•
•

when and how payment will be made;
advanced deposits;
phased payments;
even circumstances where delayed payment may be acceptable; and
late payment penalties.

Proposals that include payment terms can be triggered based on performance, can be held on account, paid retrospectively, be refundable, or with
a deﬁned number of days credit.
Sometimes payment terms are a reﬂection of cash ﬂow requirements,
the risks associated with the creditworthiness or history of the other party,
or simply a reﬂection of the standard terms of the dominant party in the
negotiation.
Whichever one of these features, payment terms have a ﬁnancial implication for both parties and will feature as a primary variable.

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

177

6. Specification

Speciﬁcation relates to almost anything that aﬀects the quality of the product
or service being oﬀered. As a simple illustration, the materials speciﬁcation of
a garment in addition to design can relate to size, fabric, wash type, buttons,
zips, lining, ﬁnishing, presentation, and packaging; and each of these will have
a multitude of options each impacting on the cost or value of the ﬁnished
product. Imagine the number of variables involved for a company sourcing
aircraft from one of the main manufacturers with literally thousands of
speciﬁcations, which all aﬀect the total outcome of the agreement. The complexity of the product or service, where it is being sourced from, the ﬁnancing
arrangements, and the relationships involved will all have some impact on
the level of detail and the number of variables that will relate to speciﬁcation.
WORKING WITH VARIABLES

Whenever the focus and pressure is on price, there is a tendency to renegotiate other variables as part of oﬀsetting any implications on price
movement. This usually involves introducing other variables as part of
compensation for or adjusting the price point. This enables the Complete
Skilled Negotiator to maintain the total value on oﬀer despite price pressures. In other words, this is about moving the package around to reduce
risk and to grow the total value. Everything is conditional – which allows
you to protect the value – so if one variable needs adjusting down others
can be moved to oﬀset the implications.
NEGOTIATING FOR WHAT IS IMPORTANT TO YOU
A leading recruitment consultancy specializing in senior appointments
offered as standard to its clients to replace appointees if they were
to leave their employment within 3 months. In the interest of good
relations, they had been known to extend this period as they were
prepared to take some responsibility, having shortlisted the candidate.
(Continued )

178

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

(Continued )
Six months into his employment the Creative Director of media company M1G was “let go” on the basis of cultural fit. The senior nature
of the role meant that he had spent his first 3 months in the business in
induction. It took 3 more months before the board understood that his
disruptive nature was not healthy for the business and took the decision
to terminate his contract. At this time they called their contact at the
recruitment consultancy to discuss next steps.
HR Director of M1G Mary Donaldson held a meeting with the
representative of the recruitment consultancy to explain the considerable cost incurred. This included salary, expenses, recruitment fees,
and notice period, which altogether topped £250,000 in what had
turned out to be a poor fit.
The recruitment partner explained his terms and said he was keen
to help M1G to find the right creative director. Mary went on to
highlight the fact that they had used their services three times a year
each year for the past 2 years to attract top talent in various posts.
The partner said that he would re-examine volume discount structure
for the following year.
Mary adjourned the meeting and considered her agenda and the
planning that she had done to date. Risk had become an important
issue, as was the value that the eventual successful quality candidate
might bring. She returned a week later and tabled a proposal that included a “12-month, replace for free” clause in return for the standard
placement rate, plus a further 20% if the candidate achieved all of
their performance objectives in year 1. It was a model she had seen
work well in the sports world where team players’ fees are often based
on number of performances, goals, or country representations. By repacking the variables to reflect the priorities of her company, she was
also able to negotiate a 50% discount on the original replacement.

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

179

KNOWING WHAT VARIABLES YOU HAVE TO WORK WITH

Your planning and preparation should help you to create more value
from your agreements starting with expanding the issues and variables
available.
It’s easier to visualize the need to plan when creating something with
a physical form, such as an aircraft, compared with planning simply to
build an agreement. You can more easily imagine the design and planning
needed when creating a new aircraft, critical to it ever coming together, let
alone ﬂying, in the ﬁrst place. The creativity employed by an artist, starting
with a blank canvas and with all the work to do ahead of them, requires
ﬂexibility and a mental picture for what will be. In both cases, options and
creativity play a signiﬁcant part in ensuring a successful outcome, as well
as necessity for some visionary thought.
During the planning phase, scoping and taking the opportunity to create value starts with understanding the options and bringing together
component parts or variables that will make the deal both possible and
ultimately more valuable.
Price

Volume

1

You

Them

1

Payment

2

Delivery

2

Support

1

3

1

3

1

2

4

2

4

2

3

5

3

5

3

4

6

4

6

4

5

7

5

7

5

8

6

9

7

19

15

6

Figure 9.1 Trading off variables.

Moving conditional proposals or variables around, changing who
takes responsibility for what, and shifting performance triggers, discount thresholds, performance conditions, and contract terms in your

180

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

negotiations is essentially about you establishing the point where both
parties will and can agree.
Attaching triggers to variables

Most variables can be used on a sliding scale. For example, if you are discussing volume, the order could be anything from 1 to 1 million, which
would in turn aﬀect other variables.
However, volume can be linked to a trigger that sets oﬀ other terms
you agree. For example, once you have ordered 1000 the 5% discount
commences, or if you are able to place an order for 10,000 in any given
month the delivery becomes free, or by agreeing to the total order now
we will allow you to draw oﬀ stock as you require it over the next 6
months. Each condition serves as a trigger that, if met, provides for the
beneﬁt oﬀered.
Triggers can be applied to any variable and serve to motivate the behaviors of the other party as well as to protect your interests. Variables can
also have triggers attached to them that relate to a particular performance,
beyond or up to which another condition is met. For example, a discount
that kicks in after the order for the ﬁrst 200 has been received. The 200th
order represents the trigger for the discount to become applicable. The
payment terms can only be oﬀered following receipt of the 20% deposit.
Receipt of the full deposit is the trigger for the payment terms to be applicable. Terms are linked to a performance threshold (an order of 200),
where further commitments then become applicable.
Once you have commenced your negotiation, you can trade oﬀ variables
gradually, use absolute triggers, and adapt trigger thresholds (performance
levels) depending on what you want to achieve. With any variable, you
can:
•
•
•
•

adjust it;
link it;
place a trigger on it; or
even move it bit by bit.

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

181

the “salami” tactic
This is commonly known as the “salami” tactic.
As an example of trading oﬀ a variable gradually, you Negotiating each variable slice by
could link a quicker guaranteed response on the service slice and each time attracting a
benefit in return.
provided conditional of a reduction in payment terms
from 45 days to 40 days. You may trade a commitment
to ﬂexible delivery timings in return for a further move of payment terms
to 36 days. Perhaps you have the knowledge that they are really keen to get
their 30 days payment agreed, which is their “symbol of success.” So you go
back and ﬁnally oﬀer them the 30 days in return for a shorter termination
notice period. Each time, you are attracting more value (or less risk by
your calculation) than the very 15 days payment terms that you expected
to move to in the ﬁrst place. By this time you may have calculated that,
although the 15 days have cost you the equivalent of 0.5% on the deal, the
concessions you have attracted are worth 1.1%.
RISK AS A NEGOTIABLE

Even if a partnership relationship existed, based on an aligned strategy,
how do you reasonably ensure that you remain continuously aligned as
both your companies continue to reassess their strategies?
In other words, when considering the future and the contract you are
about to sign, never assume a constant state. Things will always change
over time. Performance, reliability, the market, and demand can and
usually do change, and should challenge your assumptions about how
proﬁtable the deal is, will be, or has been. It is these very issues driven by
change that you need to factor into your planning. The value to you of a
guarantee that protects you against change, and the value of accountability
and responsibility are often not the same as the cost of accepting them.
For example, the price or value of a ﬂexible airline ticket will mean different things to you and the airline in the transaction; for example, the
convenience of being able to switch and change can provide tremendous
value to you. Imagine if you are having diﬃculty getting home from a
business meeting late on a Friday night following a ﬂight cancellation. Yet
the absolute cost to the airline of oﬀering a ﬂexible service in many cases is

182

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

negligible. So how much is this protection against change or the cost of inconvenience following change worth to you? Again, that depends on your
circumstances. Creative negotiators understand how to use convenience
and ﬂexibility, and choose to build even greater levels of “total value” into
their agreements starting from inside the head of the other party.
Where it is diﬃcult to estimate or agree on risk, insurance also plays its
part as a variable in negotiation. By insuring yourself or the other party
against certain risks or insisting that they take out policies to protect
against risks you can overcome some of the more challenging aspects of
uncertainty.
You may not think twice about insuring your own contents in your
house because of the known risks, or insuring your house from damage
as for many it is their greatest asset. Equally, many people insure their
health, their car (because the law says they have to), even their washing
machine, just in case it stops working. Insuring against the possible and
in some cases probable is a further variable that can be used for accounting for risks. This same thought process is used as part of a negotiator’s
thinking as they identify ways of agreeing to terms whilst balancing the
risks involved.
“In the event that you fail to meet the payment schedule, we reserve the
right to reclaim the stock, or we will insure you against non-payment.”
The premium will be built into the overall pricing structure. Either way
you mitigate against the risk, which is agreed as part of the negotiation
based on the level of risk you see in play.
Protecting the value

This involves protecting the value you think you have created in your
agreement. What if delivery, speciﬁcation, or payment terms are not
adhered to? What are the implications to you and how do you protect
against them within the terms agreed? Negotiating risk ﬁrst involves
identifying the risks which could prevent the contract delivering what it’s
supposed to, and ensuring that the terms of the agreement reﬂect those
risks to both parties.

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

183

Risks come in many forms and are often overlooked, as they do not
necessarily reﬂect immediately on the proﬁt and loss sheet. Ask any bank
selling mortgages between 2004 and 2009. Ignore risk at your peril. Better still, trade it creatively against each of the primary variables. Insurance
companies treat risk as a deﬁned tangible issue and so should those of us
buying or selling tangible products or services.
Accountability

Once risks are identiﬁed, you can focus on who will take, insure, mitigate
against, or accept liability for the risks. Your next step involves building
into your proposals a basis upon which the risks will be accommodated
or compensated for. One challenge or opportunity – depending on how
you see it – comes from understanding both parties’ attitude to risk. If
you have had a particularly bad experience in the past and the cost of
putting it right still resonates, your attitude towards protecting against it
and the value you associate with such cover may be greater than the cost
implications for the other party providing it.
The guarantees provided with a second-hand car bought from a main
dealer will have some value for which we accept that there will be a
premium built into the price compared with buying privately. Many will
regard this premium as a price worth paying. They are buying out the
risk, buying conﬁdence in that what they are paying is the maximum total
price following any issues they may have with the car over the guaranteed
period. They are buying certainty and for that they are prepared to pay.
The way each party interprets the level of risk, or even the severity of that
risk, often varies based on their own circumstances and those individuals
involved in the decision making on their behalf.
Risk is different for different people

In the same way that supply and demand, and time and circumstances
serve to set the balance of power in negotiations, risk and reward provide
us with the basis for weighing up investment opportunities. Diﬀerent
industries have diﬀerent tools for assessing risk and placing a premium

184

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

on it, to hedge against it or to insure against it. In some cases where the
deal is of strategic importance they may even be prepared to accept some
degree of uncertainty. Dealing with uncertainty over the long term may
represent a good bet given the potential value at stake. Risk as a variable is
not bad or to be avoided, it just needs to be recognized, understood, and
managed. Whether you are a private equity ﬁrm buying into a business,
negotiating for mining rights, or buying computer chips from Korea, risk
will feature in your considerations and the terms you agree.
In the ﬁeld of litigation, for example, how do you place a cost or value
on the risk or beneﬁt of negotiating an out-of-court settlement? How
does a PR company view the implications of risk associated with bad PR
exposure and the degree to which this could aﬀect their reputation, versus
the legal costs of defending one’s reputation? It is probably too late to
insure against such risks so you need to remain as objective as possible, set
your break points and get inside the other party’s head. Each case will be
unique and can only be assessed by those facing the consequences.
Managing compliance and performance?

If you missed your mortgage payment this month, your lender would
want the outstanding payment at the earliest moment. They would also
insist on charging further interest on the late payment. This same philosophy or consideration should exist with any agreement where risks are
to be addressed. Without this consideration you may well ﬁnd yourself
involved with relationship issues through a lack of clarity around obligations where commitments are not met.
A useful way of exploring risk is to ask the question: “What would
happen if …?”
•
•
•
•
•

T hey do not meet their deadlines?
T he speciﬁcation falls short?
T hey want to terminate early?
T heir circumstances change?
Our circumstances change and we need more ﬂexibility?

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

•
•

185

Exchange rates ﬂuctuate wildly?
T heir key personnel leave?

And so on. There are so many possibilities relating to the potential
for change, which many businesses are renowned for building into their
“standard terms” in the small print. The reality is that these risks are
two-way and wherever possible you should include them as part of your
negotiation agenda.
PREPARING TO MANAGE COMPLEXITY

The shape of most deals, where a range of issues are involved, changes
each time a new proposal is tabled. Changes in terms of total value happen throughout the negotiation until both parties agree to settle with a
particular set of terms and conditions. The process provides a ﬂuid situation, like watching shifting sands. The shape may get bigger or smaller,
longer or shorter, fatter or thinner. This can make tracking the deal and
the implications of changes diﬃcult.
Building an agreement that entails a process involving many proposals
is challenging because of the need to trade around speciﬁc variables whilst
remaining mindful of the overall picture and total value implications.
For example, whilst negotiating an agreement that involves agreeing to
guarantee that a job will be ﬁnished by the end of the month you may want
to consider the things that you cannot control, such as circumstances that
might make the commitment diﬃcult to meet. These could be categorized
by both parties as valid reasons for the job being delayed.
Exploring all possibilities

Other issues that will need resolving during your negotiations could also
come at a price, so the concept of “nothing is agreed until everything is agreed”
allows you to carefully explore all possibilities and agree in principle to ideas
subject to all other conditions being agreeable. If necessary you can take
proposals back oﬀ the table in the event that conditions discussed latterly are

186

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

not agreed or the overall deal becomes unacceptable. One danger to watch for
as you explore possibilities is sending the other party signals regarding which
issues you are prepared to agree to, or those that are of particular importance
to you. It’s OK to say yes to proposals in principle providing the other party is
aware that any one proposal is subject to all other conditions being acceptable.
With some trust, and the appropriate climate, the shape of the deal should be
allowed to change and evolve. Most of the issues will be in some way interrelated because most will impact on the total cost or value.
I have heard of more challenging negotiations being compared with
the building of a 10,000-piece jigsaw. First you group pieces together,
perhaps edges, then you gather the pieces into color zones. Then you
start to piece together sections of the picture, leaving some pieces not
ﬁtting, so you go oﬀ in search of the right piece so that you can continue.
You need patience, persistence, and an eye for how the picture is coming together. You know you have enough pieces, it’s just a matter of the
sequence and matching that’s needed. With a jigsaw you have a picture
forming, providing instant feedback on your progress. In negotiation
you only have the response of the other party to rely on, but the way
you approach the task has many similarities. With a jigsaw, however,
the next piece may or may not ﬁt. In negotiation a proposal that was
rejected earlier may be accepted later under diﬀerent circumstances.
With a jigsaw you know it’s possible from the outset as you have the
right number of pieces at the start to ﬁnish the task. In negotiation there
is no such certainty, whereas with a jigsaw there is one outcome that is as
predictable as the picture is on the box. In negotiation, the shape of the
deal can and usually does vary depending on how the negotiators have
responded to each other’s ideas and positions.
Taking your time and being patient

Working on the deal does not mean that each proposal should be met
with approval, rejection, or even a counter proposal. Some ideas need
more work and time to consider before you can even respond to them. Be
prepared to park issues that you can come back to later.

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

187

Where the number of variables makes the negotiation complex, you
should (subject to time constraints) take the time to adjourn and consider the possibilities. When you are in need of further authorization or
stakeholder buy-in, take the time to consult before responding. This is
especially the case if your ideas are new or include less tangible issues such
as ﬂexibility, convenience, or risk.
Being open to new ideas

Flexibility not only increases the chances of your performance being more
productive, but will also throw up new ideas for consideration that you
might otherwise have ﬁltered out very early on through being too singleminded or focused.
•
•

•

If sustainable proﬁt growth is the endgame, then allow yourself to
explore how this can come about and make the time to do this.
If you are involved in a conﬂict resolution negotiation, there may be a
range of options available to you that achieve the same end, each with
its own merits.
If agreement to a “change in working practices” with the trade unions is
what you are faced with, there will be a range of options available, each
of which may facilitate an acceptance of change.

There is often more than one way to achieve your end result so try to remain
focused on building solutions even where there is ambiguity or irrational
behavior in play. The next time you feel the need for a quick resolution and
ﬁnd yourself considering compromises, ask yourself: “Am I buying myself
certainty in obtaining an early commitment and eﬀectively buying myself
some ‘comfort,’ or should I make more time and be patient with the process?”
Agreeing in principle

Throughout your discussions you’ve agreed to nothing until the end. Of
course, this could result in you sending the wrong messages and signals if
you appear too open to ideas that are clearly not acceptable. Your attitude

188

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

and response should remain balanced and, where necessary, point out
how challenging some areas will be to entertain. Slow down and provide
yourself time to think things through. Examine the “what ifs” and adopt
a mindset of “how” and“ under what circumstances,” rather than “no,”
“can’t,” or “won’t,” which are so easy to adopt when you can’t see the total
picture.
Changing the shape of the deal – repackaging

Creative negotiators avoid deadlock by identifying ways of changing the
shape of the deal, which allows the other party to move. They do this whilst
at the same time moving the value of the deal forward for themselves.
The more you understand about the other party’s position and points of
interest, the more obvious this becomes.
Try to focus on what you can do, move your instinctive attitude from
“blame” or “defend” to “qualify,” and then build solution-based proposals.
Problem solving is far more rewarding and sustainable than seeking
simply to drive down their terms.

FOCUS ON THE PROBLEM, NOT ON THE PEOPLE
Marketing events coordinator Cuprinord specializes in marketing
business forums on cruise ships. This involves hundreds of company
executives who pay premium prices to attend the forum, which
involves about 30 prescreened meetings with potential vendors.
Cuprinord charter the ships out of New York, Houston, Southampton, and Sydney for an annual 3-day, all-inclusive event from the
cruise company Banasik. Each event accommodates 250 potential
purchasers and 400 paying guests who get to meet for 45 minutes
with the best business match for their services over the 3 days. For
each event Cuprinord pays a $2m advance deposit with a further
$4m payable within 6 weeks of the event. It was the second year

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

189

of trading between them, with the first four events having been a
success.
Typically the ship would arrive 2 days before the event in order for
a full clean and service to take place. Banasik knew this was tight but
had adopted it as part of their business model.
Five days before the event was due to run on October 3, the
CEO of Cuprinord received a call from the COO of Banasik.
He was advised of the extreme weather conditions in the Gulf of
Mexico and that their ship, the Beauty would not arrive in Houston
until two days later than scheduled. This placed the entire event in
jeopardy.
Following a heated conversation, Cuprinord considered handing
the event over to their legal team and implementing a cancellation
communication to all concerned. Banasik recognized that, despite
weather being an “act of God,” the loss of earnings, reputation, and
future earnings lawsuit that could follow required swift action. If it was
proven that their allowance for such events was not reasonable for
the time of year, there would be potential consequences given their
contractual responsibilities.
The situation was destined to be a lose–lose outcome. The COO
of Banasik pulled together with his team a proposal that started
a 3-hour problem-solving negotiation. It involved commencing the
event from Miami where the Beauty could dock on September 30.
To offer flight travel, accommodation, and if necessary charter flights
from Houston to Miami, return, and finally a call center provision
for handling the 24-hour communication exercise that would follow.
Needless to say, there were 27 other variables that came into play,
but after 3 hours an agreement was forged, which not only enabled
the event to run, but preserved the working relationship between the
companies involved.

190

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

PLANNING FROM A PRACTICAL PERSPECTIVE

I have saved what is probably the most important element of negotiation
until the end. It is then both easy to ﬁnd as a reference and to share with
others. If preparation is critical to negotiation then preparing in a team,
as a team, using the same thinking, language, and approach is just as
important as the act itself (see Chapter 7, under “Empowerment within
team roles”).
This approach, consisting of a number of tools, provides a standard for
preparation that is easy to utilize and delivers consistency, conﬁdence, and
certainty. It also ensures that you are thinking from inside the head of
the other party in the way that you evaluate the importance and value of
variables, and build an agenda aimed at maximizing value. The beauty of the
planning process is that you can start with your primary variables, of price,
volume, timescales and contract length, speciﬁcation, and payment terms.
Your planning can then move on to examining the hidden costs.
Your ﬁrst challenge is the discipline required to make the time and use
it productively to plan through your negotiation. Some lack the belief that
preparation will really pay oﬀ. Another challenge could be that in the past
there has been a lack of a clear or respected process that has proved to
deliver results, which can also dampen motivation. There are always other
things you could be doing with your time but rarely one that will provide
you with such certainty, alignment, and conﬁdence for your negotiation
as a well-thought-through plan.
Planning is by its nature proactive and where you make the time to
work through the possibilities you have already gained an advantage
before entering the negotiating room.
The process

To help simplify the scoping and planning process we have created
a number of basic pro formas, which fit logically together and have
been used by hundreds of businesses globally for their negotiation
planning.

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

191

The aim of the negotiation planning tools is to help you scope the
potential of your deal, work out the relative values, plan out your initial
proposals, and then monitor the value of your agreement as discussions
unfold.

Tool

Purpose

Trade-storming
(honeycomb)

Helps you to brainstorm potential issues

Trade surveyor

Helps you to prioritize low-cost/high-value trades

Issue map

Helps you to link and group relationships
between tradable issues

Agenda*

Helps you to structure and gain clarity
before and during the negotiation

Move planner*
Record of offers*

Helps you to define initial specific conditional details
Helps you to record and track proposals
throughout the negotiation process

*Operational tools used during the negotiation

Figure 9.2 Planning tools.

Trade-storming

The ﬁrst step in the planning process is commonly known as brain-storming;
we call it trade-storming. It is the starting point from which you may want
to involve other stakeholders to pool ideas or to challenge any assumptions.
This tool is represented by a simple honeycomb model. It invites you to
list each of the issues that you believe will feature as part of your pending
negotiation, and then start to identify potential connections or relationships between them. These are not always obvious to start with, which is
why this tool is useful in helping you to visualize as you think through and

192

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

expand on the more obvious variables. The Complete Skilled Negotiator will develop several variables using the trade-storming tool as they
consider how each variable can become linked or grouped by association
with other variables. Delivery may be one variable but, when you start to
consider the issues that sit around delivery and are worthy of negotiation,
you could list timing, venues, response times, accuracy, regularity, and so
on. All will have some bearing on the value or cost associated with this
element of the agreement.

P.O.S.
Product
guarantee

Marketing
Retro

Spec

Service
levels

Total
value

Volume

Packaging

Payment
terms

Price
After
sales

Distribution
Timing

Range
allowance

Figure 9.3 Trade-storming.

Trade surveyor

Ultimately you will need to form some initial conditional proposals for
your meeting. Having worked through the variables most likely to feature
on your agenda, your next job is then to work out the relative values
involved for you and the other party.
This means categorizing each variable according to the interests, priorities, and values the other party places on them. It is an opportunity to
compare the relative cost and beneﬁt values involved from both parties’
perspectives. For this we use a pro forma known as a trade surveyor. It’s

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

193

useful to use this as part of your exploration meetings with the other
party. During the discussions, you can qualify any assumptions that you
may have on the value that they place on each issue.

Take

Issues

Price

Give

Value to us

Cost to them

High

High

Cost to us Value to them
High

High

Medium

High

Promotion fees

Low

High

Payment terms

Low

High

Low

High

Volume discount

Distribution

High

Low

Volumes

High

Low

Promotions

High

Low

Exclusivity
Rate: High/Medium/Low

For the purpose of examining possibilities

Figure 9.4 Trade surveyor.

Building value in negotiation relies partly on trading low-cost variables
in return for high-value variables. The trade surveyor helps you identify
the variables that provide you (or both parties) with an incremental gain.
This approach provides a useful way of understanding the most likely value
relationships in play and should help inform you when developing conditional proposals prior to your meeting. Because of a lack of transparency,
win–win usually means that one party wins (gains more value), but that
the other party wins more. In other words, it’s not about the fair, equitable
50–50 sharing of value as the term win–win might suggest. It is simply a
process that attracts the interests of both parties because of the potential
beneﬁts available, however this might be split; and conditional trading is
central to this.

194

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

Issue map

We use the issue map to visually work through the relative low-cost, highvalue relationships and examine the diﬀerent ways in which any one variable
can be coupled with others, as part of building initial, conditional proposals.
Depending on the relative values you place on each variable, you can use
the issue map to explore possible linkages. You may link price to volume
or payment terms to delivery scheduling, and so on. This is only a basic
way of playing with possibilities, but it allows you to consider diﬀerent
options before constructing speciﬁc proposals.

P.O.S.
Product
guarantee

Marketing
Retro

Spec

Service
levels

Total
value

Volume

Packaging

Payment
terms

Price
After
sales

Distribution
Timing

Range
allowance

Figure 9.5 Issue map.

On your issue map you may, for example:
•
•

draw a line for your own reference to indicate a potential coupling
between price and volume; and
draw a line to couple price and speciﬁcation as you weigh up the best
way of linking issues.

Using your trade surveyor, you can start to draw potential links between
each of the variables. You can start to visualize how they may be coupled
for the purpose of constructing proposals.

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

195

Agenda

Having qualiﬁed the variables, it’s time to pull together and communicate
an agenda – preferably one that you can both agree on and that will provide the basis and parameters for discussions.
The one beneﬁt of a qualiﬁed agenda is that you know what has been
tabled and what is outstanding. Say you have worked through the timescales, costings, and quality but know from the agenda that contract
length and payment terms are outstanding issues. You would still have
plenty of scope to negotiate even if that means bringing timescales back
on to the table by linking them to contract length. You can address unacceptable terms by linking them to proposals that are yet to be tabled. It
can feel very open-ended at ﬁrst, but by leaving ﬂexibility around some
of the issues as discussions evolve, you can discuss more openly and,
depending on the level of trust, explore diﬀerent options. Of course,
there will be tension and positions in play that you will need to manage,
so just remember to ensure that your position at any point in time is
conditional and clearly linked.

AGENDA
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Service and quality specification
Information and data sharing
Volume ordering
Fee structure
Discount levels
Commencement date
Contract period
Payment terms
Confidentiality

Figure 9.6 Sample agenda.

196

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

A mutually agreed agenda to work from can help you to manage some
initial ambiguity and will help build trust. A comprehensive agenda provides a list of those issues that need to be agreed, giving everyone involved
transparency. The idea of agreeing to one issue without everything else
being lined up can feel exposing, and is the one area of ambiguity that you
will have to accommodate.
The move planner

The move planner is used to detail the speciﬁc conditional terms against
each of the trade-oﬀs you plan to make, providing you with a list of wellthought-through proposals.
Each proposal needs to be speciﬁc, allowing the other party the chance
to calculate, weigh, consider, and respond. It is no help to simply ask for
improved payment terms in return for a higher-volume order. You have
to be more speciﬁc. If not, you can’t reasonably expect them to take the
oﬀer seriously or be able to respond to it. If it’s 60 days for a 10% increase,
say so. Detail it on your move planner. It is the one place to record your
proposals in advance of discussions. They are the conditions that you have
thought through, calculated, and considered objectively in the cold light
of day.
Move Planner
If you…

Then we…

Distribution 500

Price £14.90

Volume 1m

Volume discount 1.5%

Volume 1.3m
Promotions 6

Marketing investment £80k

Figure 9.7
7 Move planner.

Before you start to make any proposals, qualify their priorities one last time.
It is amazing how these can change over relatively short periods of time.

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

197

“Last week you told me that delivery by week 12 would work for you,
now you are saying week 8. Just how important is week 8?”
Understanding how they value things right now is critical. I have seen
people in negotiations trying to negotiate for what they think they want,
rather than for what they actually need. Your questioning should be aimed
at qualifying what they need.
Imagine a construction manager who insists on the scaﬀolding being
removed from the construction site with 1 day’s notice. He regards it as
critical. The hire company is able to accommodate the request but will
charge a premium for a quick response. When the builder is questioned,
it comes to light that his construction contract states that he has 7 days to
clear the site. Seven days’ notice will save him a 5% premium on the scaﬀold
rental. It’s not dissimilar to price. Most people think they want a better price
but often it’s a better deal or enhanced value that they really seek.
When tabling a conditional proposal, at ﬁrst try to avoid introducing
more than three items at once. It can prove diﬃcult for the other party to
calculate or respond to the proposal in any meaningful way. It also slows
down any momentum created. If you table every conditional proposal you
have prepared all at once, you are more likely to draw a blank or a delayed
response from the other party for three reasons.
1. They will ﬁnd it incredibly diﬃcult under pressure to calculate what
it all means. Therefore, they are likely to only pick oﬀ the terms they
do like, whilst ignoring the conditions attached to them.
2. They are left with the task of working out links or connections between each conditional proposal, which will potentially confuse them
further still.
3. They will have some ideas that you might want to weigh up before
tabling your entire position.
This approach of gradually tabling your proposals and allowing the
deal to build requires patience and a certain degree of comfort with early
ambiguity.

198

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK

To start with, neither party will be able to see the whole deal and yet
may be asked to respond to part of it. Remember, where there is complexity, you may need to park elements and come back to them later, having
examined some of the other agenda points ﬁrst.
The record of offers

This is especially important when you are dealing with many variables
and you need to maintain a clear record of progress. Negotiators are often
found scribbling notes in no particular order as the deal unfolds. Before
long, you can barely make sense of the notes, or what the other party has
suggested, let alone the last full position tabled. The “record of oﬀers” table
allows you to record all positions and movement, enabling you to keep
track of where you are up to and how you got there.
Issue

Yours

Theirs

Yours

Theirs

Price/case

£14.90

£12.20

£14.50

£13.00

1.5%

2.0%

1.75%

2.0%

£80,000

£150,000

Payment
terms

30

60

Distribution

500

400

Volume
discount
Marketing
investment

Volumes/pa
Promotions
Exclusivity

Yours

Theirs
£13.60

£100,000
60
500

1,000,000 1,000,000 1,300,000 1,500,000
6

8

10

10

12 months 12 months

Figure 9.8 Record of offers.

As you move across the page tracking your position with theirs, it allows
you to summarize accurately and ensure that your facts are clear when
you come to write up the agreement. Over time the record of oﬀers allows
you to:

PLANNING AND PREPARATION THAT HELPS YOU TO BUILD VALUE

•
•

199

monitor the size of the moves they have made and on which variables; and
summarize across the variables with your running total of your last
position.

If you don’t conﬁrm what you have agreed to, how do you know what
decisions were actually made? In many cases, this can lead to yet another
negotiation later on.
Now you are ready to negotiate. The planning is done, the tactics understood, the behaviors tuned, and the thinking from inside their head in motion
allowing you to see the deal opportunities as the other party sees them.
The Complete Skilled Negotiator is only as complete as their planning,
and never so complete that they can take anything for granted. Never
assuming, always enquiring. Never rushed, always considered and respectful. It’s a tough balance requiring nerve, conﬁdence, and tenacity, and
it is for this reason that you can never aﬀord to be complacent.

KEY TAKEAWAYS
•
•
•
•

•

•

Without preparation before you enter the “negotiation arena,” all the
theory in the world (and indeed in this book!) will add up to nothing.
Map out all the possible variables and value each from inside the other
party’s head.
Focus on the potential total value of your agreement.
Identify ways you can change the shape of the deal, which allows the
other party to move, in order to build solution-based proposals rather
than seeking to simply drive down their terms.
There are six primary variables that feature across most deals (price,
payment, timing, speciﬁcation, volume, delivery), which, once deﬁned,
can be used to introduce a range of risk-based conditions that you can
link to each variable.
Use the six negotiation planning tools to help scope the potential of your
deal, work out the relative values, plan out your initial proposals, and
then monitor the value of your agreement as your discussions unfold.

Final Thoughts

Your ability to build agreements, dissolve deadlock situations, precondition expectations, and close sustainable deals requires all of the
skills, attributes, knowledge, and self-awareness we have covered in The
Negotiation Book.
k
For many, the challenges presented by negotiation do not come naturally and, as with any performance coupled with your own motivation
to continuously improve, you have one of the most rewarding personal
development opportunities available to you.
Negotiating eﬀectively is ﬁrstly about accepting that it is only you
who can inﬂuence the situations you are faced with. You can blame the
market, personalities, timing, your options, the power balance, or any
circumstance that you may think happens to be working against you, but
ultimately it is you who can turn around situations (including deadlock
situations) into workable and proﬁtable deals.
It is time to stay calm, see the tactics for what they are, be proactive,
and exercise nerve and patience. Power, real or perceived, however generated, will play its part in your negotiations. No matter how good you
are as a negotiator, where the balance of power is against you or your
circumstances, you will no doubt experience the frustration of feeling
compromised. Trust your instinct, exercise composure. It will make the
diﬀerence between the agreements where you create value and the ones
where you simply distribute it.

202

FINAL THOUGHTS

If you have to take a time-out, adjourn the meeting, or go back and
revisit the options, the fact that you recognize this and are prepared to
take the time necessary is an indication that you are now behaving in an
appropriate and conscious manner.
Know what you are trying to achieve and always try to work out what
they are trying to achieve. This requires clarity in purpose and an acceptance, for those who are competitive in nature, that negotiation is not
about winning, it is about optimizing value, and to do this you must see
the deal as they do.
Taking control of any situation requires planning and never is this as
true as in negotiation. Negotiators who ﬁnd themselves reacting to their
environment and situation tend to place themselves in weaker positions
than necessary. Always try to be as proactive and prepared as possible. It
is the one thing you can do to enhance your prospects.
Self-awareness is another dimension that diﬀerentiates the performance of the Complete Skilled Negotiator from others. They are not
driven by fairness or consumed by their own ego. They and you should
do that which is appropriate having weighed and considered each set of
circumstances you are faced with.
To listen, think and reﬂect, and to understand those around you and
then consciously apply those skills we have learned is what hopefully I
have been able to promote and explain in The Negotiation Book.
k
Negotiation is like no other skill. I know from my experience, as well
as that of my team, my clients, and my family, that it can oﬀer huge and
well-earned rewards for anyone ready to become the Complete Skilled
Negotiator.